### Accession
PXD008436

### Title
Predicting response to chemotherapy in rectal cancer

### Description
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) is used in locally advanced rectal cancer when tumours threaten the circumferential resection margin.  A variable response to treatment remains, notwithstanding potentially significant morbidity, and no clinically routinely used predictive biomarkers guide decision making.  This experimental study aimed to identify significantly differentially expressed proteins between patients responding or not to CRT, using novel temporal proteomic profiling, and to validate any proteins of interest.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from sampled tissue by mechanical dissolution and sonication in 0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate/0.1% SDS.  After centrifugation at 4°C and 20000g for 15 minutes, the supernatant was removed recovered and protein concentration determined by Bradford assay. 100μg of protein from each sample was reduced with TCEP and capped with MMTS, before overnight digestion with trypsin.  Peptides were then labelled with iTRAQ 8plex reagents, pooled and diluted 10mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate/25% acetonitrile prior to strong cation exchange chromatography. Fractions were reconstituted in 1mL of 0.1% TFA and were desalted using a reversed phase cartridge. Desalted fractions were reconstituted in 40µL 0.1% formic acid and 5µL aliquots were delivered into a Triple TOF 5600 via an Eksigent NanoUltra cHiPLC System mounted with a microfluidic trap and analytical column (15cm × 75μm) packed with ChromXP C18−CL 3μm.  A NanoSpray III source was fitted with a 10μm inner diameter PicoTip emitter.  The trap column was washed with 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid for 10 minutes at 2μL/min before switching in-line with the analytical column.  A gradient of 2−50% ACN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) over 90 minutes was applied to the column at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Spectra were acquired automatically in positive ion mode using information-dependent acquisition powered by Analyst TF 1.5.1. software.  Up to 25 MS/MS spectra were acquired per cycle (approximately 10Hz) using a threshold of 100 counts per second and with dynamic exclusion for 12 seconds.  The rolling collision energy was increased automatically by selecting the isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) check box in Analyst, and manually by increasing the collision energy intercepts by 5.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using ProteinPilot 4.2 and the Paragon algorithm (Sciex) against the latest version of the SwissProt database (release 2013_08: 20,266 human entries), with MMTS as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and biological modifications allowed.  Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 10ppm.  No missed cleavages or variable modifications were allowed for peptides used for quantification.  The data were also searched against a reversed decoy database and only proteins lying within a 1% global false discovery rate were taken forward for analysis.  Quantification of proteins was relative to a common pooled sample present in all experiments.  iTRAQ data for proteins identified by 2 or more peptides with at least 90% confidence of correct sequence assignment, or by a single peptide with at least 99% confidence were log2 transformed, batch corrected and included in subsequent analyses. A number of direct two group comparisons were made using Partek® (St Louis, USA) to identify proteins significantly different between the groups.  A two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was employed to identify the differential proteins whilst accounting for batch effect.  In the case of paired samples, a 3-way ANOVA was performed with additional inclusion of the patient factor.  With the aim of reducing the false discovery rate, the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test correction was used.  Those proteins identified as statistically significantly different were subjected to analysis with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Response, Biomarker, Rectal, Proteomics, Chemoradiotherapy, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Proteomics Facility, Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Rosalind Elspeth Jenkins
Proteomics Facility, Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool


