### Accession
PXD025077

### Title
proteomics characterization of the dynamics of ischemic stroke in mice

### Description
TMT-coupled proteomic analysis was conducted on mouse brain cortex tissue from five time-points up to four weeks post-stroke in the DH-MCAO mouse model. Nearly-half of the detected proteome was altered following stroke, with <10% of changes at relatively large scales. Clustering on the changed proteome defined four distinct expression patterns characterized by temporal and quantitative changes in innate and adaptive immune response pathways, and cytoskeletal and neuronal remodeling. Further analysis on a subset of top-hits, which temporally responded to stroke with relatively large and sustained changes, revealed that they were highly correlated to different cortical cytokines, and thereby potential pharmacodynamic biomarker candidates for inflammation-targeting therapies. Closer examination of the top enriched neurophysiologic pathways identified 57 proteins potentially associated with post-stroke recovery. Altogether, our study generated a rich dataset with candidate proteins worthy of further validation as biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets for stroke.

### Sample Protocol
Brain cortical tissue was homogenized with metal beads in cold Tris Buffer with cOmpleteTM Mini protease inhibitor tablets, followed by centrifuged to remove debris. The homogenized samples were further lysed in ice-cold urea lysis buffer with protease inhibitor cocktails by sonication. The lysates were next clarified by centrifugation and protein concentrations were measured using Bradford assay. The protein extracts were subsequently reduced, alkylated, and tryptic-digested.  The digests were desalted, speed-vac dried and resuspend prior to TMT-labeling according vendor’s instruction. TMT tags were randomized within each of TMT-10 set. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled into seven TMT-10 sets and vacuum to near dryness. The resulting peptide mixtures were each high-pH fractionated and concatenated into twelve fractions of similar complexities, and subsequently desalted, speed-vac dried, and kept in –20 °C until nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The dry peptide extracts were reconstituted and analyzed on a nanoLC-MS/MS platform composed of an EASY nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer at DDA mode. Peptides were separated on a Thermo 50 cm EASY-Spray C18 column over 120-min effective gradient at a flow rate of 275 nL/min. A 60,000 resolution with 3e6 AGC and 20 ms Maximum IT was set for MS1, and 60,000 resolution with 1e6 AGC, 120 ms Maximum IT for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectral data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) against Swiss-Prot mouse database (UniProtKB Release 2016_04) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, and TMT labels as variable modifications.  Mass error of 20 ppm and up to two mis-cleavages were allowed. Minimum of two peptides were required for protein quantitation. False discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide levels were both set at 1%. Protein lists exported from MaxQuant were used for statistical analysis. The data normalization, principal component analysis (PCA) of proteomes, K-means clustering analysis on significantly changed proteins, Pearson correlation and hierarchical clustering between proteomics and biochemical readouts of cytokines and albumin, and statistical analysis of proteomics data were performed using R (version 3.6.1, www.r-project.org).

### Publication Abstract
Novel therapies and biomarkers are needed for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke (AIS). This study aimed to provide comprehensive insights into the dynamic proteome changes and underlying molecular mechanisms post-ischemic stroke. TMT-coupled proteomic analysis was conducted on mouse brain cortex tissue from five time points up to 4 weeks poststroke in the distal hypoxic-middle cerebral artery occlusion (DH-MCAO) model. We found that nearly half of the detected proteome was altered following stroke, but only &#x223c;8.6% of the changes were at relatively large scales. Clustering on the changed proteome defined four distinct expression patterns characterized by temporal and quantitative changes in innate and adaptive immune response pathways and cytoskeletal and neuronal remodeling. Further analysis on a subset of 309 "top hits", which temporally responded to stroke with relatively large and sustained changes, revealed that they were mostly secreted proteins, highly correlated to different cortical cytokines, and thereby potential pharmacodynamic biomarker candidates for inflammation-targeting therapies. Closer examination of the top enriched neurophysiologic pathways identified 57 proteins potentially associated with poststroke recovery. Altogether, our study generated a rich dataset with candidate proteins worthy of further validation as biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets for stroke. The proteomics data are available in the PRIDE Archive with identifier PXD025077.

### Keywords
Mcao, Dh-mcao, Stroke, Acute ischemic stroke (ais), Stroke biomarkers, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
Biogen
Chemical Biology and Proteomics, Biogen 225 Binney Street, Cambridge, MA 02142 United States of America

### Submitter
Ru Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ru Wei
Chemical Biology and Proteomics, Biogen 225 Binney Street, Cambridge, MA 02142 United States of America


