### Accession
PXD030390

### Title
Proteomic Signature for Detection of High Grade Ovarian Cancer in germline BRCA mutation carriers

### Description
There are currently no screening methods for high grade ovarian cancer (HGOC) that guarantee effective early detection for high risk women such as germline BRCA mutation carriers. Therefore, the standard-of-care remains risk reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) around age 40. Proximal liquid biopsy has been shown to be a promising source of biomarkers, but sensitivity has not yet qualified for clinical implementation. We report the discriminant performance of a novel proteomic classifier for detection of HGOC in high-risk population, and the safety and feasibility of simplified utero-tubal lavage (UtL) as a method for sampling proximal liquid biopsy.The training set included 93 women with high-risk for HGOC (BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers), including: 16 HGOC patients and 77 asymptomatic women, who donated UtL liquid biopsies, in 3 Israeli medical centers (Biomarkers for Early Detection of Ovarian Cancer Using Uterine Lavage (BEDOCA); ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03150121). The proteome of the microvesicle fraction of the samples was profiled by mass spectrometry and a classifier was developed using logistic regression. An independent cohort of 104 BRCA mutation carriers was used as validation. Safety information was collected for all women who opted to UtL in a clinic setting.

### Sample Protocol
The UtL samples were processed and analyzed as previously described (Barnabas MCP 2019) with PBS and then solubilized, and the proteins were digested overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (MS grade Promega, 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio). The peptides were analyzed by liquid-chromatography using the EASY-nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive (QE) Plus or Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on 75µm i.d. x 50cm long EASY-spray PepMap columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2µm, C18 material with 100Å pore size. Raw MS files were analyzed in the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.18) and the Andromeda search engine. Separate analyses were performed for the training cohort and the validation cohort, using the same parameters. The label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ) in MaxQuant was used for relative quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed in the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.18) and the Andromeda search engine. Separate analyses were performed for the training cohort and the validation cohort, using the same parameters. The label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ) in MaxQuant was used for relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brca, Uterine lavage, Liquid biopsies, Biomarkers, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tami Geiger
Weizmann Institute of Science


