### Accession
PXD034115

### Title
Analysis of myosin light chain migration pattern in 2D gels of human left ventricular proteins - proximity labeling

### Description
NIMA-related kinase 9 (NEK9) was identified to interact with the essential myosin light chain (ELC). To validate these findings ascorbate peroxidase (APEX) catalyzed proximity labeling (Hung et al. Nat Protoc. 2016) was performed. To do so, human ELC fused to APEX was overexpressed in HEK293 cells. Empty pcDNA3-APEX2-NES vector serves as negative control. Half of each sample was treated with H2O2, which catalyzes protein labeling in close proximity of ELC. After streptavidin pull down of labeled proteins, the samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The eluat from the streptavidin column was separated by SDS PAGE for 1cm. After SDS-PAGE coomassie stained lanes were cut into two pieces. Gel slices were transferred to a 96-well plate and reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1). Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, concentrated nearly to dryness in a speedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted to a total volume of 30ul with 0.1% TFA. 25ul of the sample was analysed by a nanoHPLC system (Eksigent, Axel Semrau) coupled to an ESI LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Sample was loaded on a C18 trapping column (Inertsil, LC Packings) with a flow rate of 10ul/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (75um x 150mm) packed with Inertsil 3um C18 material (LC Packings) with a flow rate of 200nl/min in a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile): 0-6min: 3% B; 6-60min: 3-40% B; 60-65min: 60-90% B. One survey scan (res: 60000) was followed by 6 information dependent product ion scans in the Orbitrap (res: 7500). 2+, 3+ and 4+ charged ions were selected for fragmentation. 1. The centriolar satellite protein SSX2IP promotes centrosome maturation. Bärenz F, Inoue D, Yokoyama H, Tegha-Dunghu J, Freiss S, Draeger S, Mayilo D, Cado I, Merker S, Klinger M, Hoeckendorf B, Pilz S, Hupfeld K, Steinbeisser H, Lorenz H, Ruppert T, Wittbrodt J, Gruss OJ. J Cell Biol. 2013 Jul 8;202(1):81-95. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201302122. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the NCBInr_2014_11_12 database (selected for Danio rerio, unknown version, 55203 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 100 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90,0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90,0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Nek9, Elc

### Affiliations
ZMBH, University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelbe4rg Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
ZMBH, University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelbe4rg Germany


