### Accession
PXD014954

### Title
Aneuploidy tolerance caused by BRG1 loss allows gain of chromosome 18 and improved fitness

### Description
Aneuploidy results in decreased cellular fitness in many different species and model systems. However, aneuploidy is commonly found in cancer cells and often correlates with aggressive growth and poor prognosis, suggesting that the impact of aneuploidy on cellular fitness is context dependent.  The BRG1 (SMARCA4) subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex is a tumour suppressor that is frequently lost in cancer cells.  Here, we used a chromosomally stable cell line to test the effect of BRG1 loss on the evolution of aneuploidy.  We find that BRG1 deletion leads to an initial loss of fitness in this cell line that improves over time.  The improved fitness correlates with a gain of extra copies of chromosome 18.  Notably, changes in pathways that are known to promote tolerance to aneuploidy are evident immediately upon loss of BRG1, providing an environment where karyotype changes associated with a fitness advantage can be explored.  At least in some genetic backgrounds, therefore, loss of the SWI/SNF complex can contribute to tumourigenesis through tolerance of aneuploidy.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation and TMT Labelling  Cell pellets were dissolved in 150 μL lysis buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) with pulsed probe sonication for 15 sec. Samples were boiled at 90 °C for 5 min and were re-sonicated for 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Coomassie Plus Bradford Protein Assay (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots of 100 μg of total protein were taken for trypsin digestion and the concentrations were equalized. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark. Proteins were then digested overnight by trypsin (Pierce) at 75 ng/μL. The peptides were labelled with the TMT-10plex multiplex reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions and were combined in equal amounts to a single tube. The combined sample was then dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  Basic Reverse-Phase Peptide Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis Offline high pH Reversed-Phase (RP) peptide fractionation was performed with the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was fractionated using a multi-step gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min as follows: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec and vacuum dried.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and 7 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a gradient elution on the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 90 min gradient from 5% to 38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. The precursor ions between 375-1,500 m/z were selected with mass resolution of 120k, AGC 4×105 and IT 50 ms for CID fragmentation with isolation width 0.7 Th in the top speed mode (3sec). Collision energy was set at 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 50 ms. MS3 quantification was obtained with HCD fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65% and the AGC setting was 1×105 with 105 ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100-500 with 50k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification The SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) was used to search the raw mass spectra against reviewed UniProt human protein entries for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT10plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise >3 were used for protein quantification.   Set02 - TMT labeling WT_2m_R1 = 126 WT_4m_R1 = 127N WT_8m_R1 = 127C KO_2m_R1 = 128N KO_4m_R1 = 128C KO_8m_R1 = 129N   Set03 - TMT labeling WT_2m_R2 = 126 WT_4m_R2 = 127N WT_8m_R2 = 127C KO_2m_R2 = 128N KO_4m_R2 = 128C KO_8m_R2 = 129N

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms. tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


