### Accession
PXD011470

### Title
Global comparative analysis on proteomes of chicken ovarian follicles before and after follicle selection

### Description
Ovarian follicle selection plays an important role in the reproduction of sexually mature hens, and this process can directly affect the growth and development of follicles until the final ovulation, thus affecting laying performance and fecundity of hens. In the laying hen ovary, one follicle from a cohort of 8-13 follicles of 6-8 mm in diameter is selected daily to enter the preovulatory hierarchy. In this study, we globally compared the proteomes of chicken ovarian follicles before and after follicle selection. A total of 5883 proteins were identified in the proteomes of chicken 6-8 mm prehierarchical follicles and 12-15 mm hierarchical follicles. 259 proteins are differentially expressed in 12-15 mm hierarchical follicle compared with prehierarchical follicle, of which 175 proteins are up-regulated and 84 proteins are down-regulated. The Gene Ontology enrichment of differentially expressed proteins revealed enriched GO terms for peptidase activity, acrosin binding for their molecular function and in the process of negative regulation of peptidase activity, and regulation of fertilization. The KEGG pathway analysis indicated that differentially expressed proteins were enriched for ribosome, lysine degradation, and endocytosis pathways. Nine differentially expressed proteins including vitellogenin-1 were validated with Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) analysis, and their functions were discussed. This study provided a global proteomic view of the development of chicken ovarian follicles, which will serve as a foundation for understanding the molecular signatures and pathways of follicle selection in hens.

### Sample Protocol
Fifteen Hy-line brown hens laying regularly for at least one month were used in this study. Hens were housed under standard conditions with free access to food and water. All sampled hens were killed by cervical dislocation immediately after oviposition. 6-8 mm small yellow follicles (SY, hereinafter referred to as S) and 12-15 mm hierarchical follicles (generally refers to F6, hereinafter referred to as F) were collected and yolk was carefully removed, then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Ethics Committee of Shandong Agricultural University reviewed and approved all procedures described in this study. This study was performed in accordance with the “Guidelines for Experimental Animals” of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Gallus gallus database (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000539) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. Wolfpsort, an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences, was used as a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/)  domain database was used. In addition, for the identification of all proteins and the screening of differentially expressed proteins, we carried out the enrichment analysis of GO, KEGG and protein structure domain. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins, p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Protein-protein Interaction Network All identified protein name identifiers were searched against the STRING database version 9.1 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.4 (Medium confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in Cytoscape. A graph the oretical clustering algorithm, molecular complex detection (MCODE) was utilized to analyze densely connected regions. MCODE is part of the plug-in toolkit of the network analysis and visualization software Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Follicle development, Follicle selection, Proteomics, Chicken

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control and Prevention, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Yunliang Jiang
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control and Prevention, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, China


