### Accession
PXD001075

### Title
Identification of biomarkers for PKD1 using urinary exosomes

### Description
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common cause of ESRD. Affected individuals inherit a defective copy of either the PKD1 or PKD2 gene, encoding the proteins polycystin?1 (PC1) or polycystin?2 (PC2) respectively. PC1 and PC2 are secreted on urinary exosome?like vesicles (ELVs) (100nm diameter vesicles), where PC1 is present in a cleaved form and may be complexed with PC2. Label free quantitative proteomic studies of urine ELVs in an initial discovery cohort (13 PKD1 and 18 Normals), revealed that of 2008 ELV proteins, nine (0.32%) showed a statistically significant difference between PKD1 and normals at a p<0.025. PC1 was reduced to 54% of the normal level (p<0.02) and PC2 reduced to 53% (p<0.001). TMEM2, a protein with homology to fibrocystin, the product of the polycystic hepatic and kidney disease (PKHD1) gene, is increased 2.1 fold (p<0.025). The PC1/TMEM2 ratio correlated inversely with height adjusted total kidney volume (HtTKV) in the discovery cohort and the ratio of PC1/TMEM2 or PC2/TMEM2 could be used to distinguish PKD1 from normals in a confirmation cohort. In summary, this study suggests that a test based on the urine exosomal PC1/TMEM2 or PC2/TMEM2 ratio may have utility in the diagnosis and perhaps monitoring of PKD1.

### Sample Protocol
PKD?ELV biomarker discovery by label free mass spectrometry: Exosome-like vesicles were prepared from 13 individuals with PKD1 mutations and 18 normal individuals using a 5-30% sucrose heavy water ultracentriguation protocol described in detail by Hogan and Chen [1,2]. 10 microgram samples were run on a 4?12% SDS PAGE. Coomassie-stained gel sections, in 1 mm cubes, were de-stained with 45% isopropanol in 150 mM Tris, pH 8.2, reduced with DTT for 30 min at 60?C, and alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min. at room temperature in the dark. Dehydrated gel pieces were digested with 25?l of 4 ng/?l porcine trypsin (Promega, Sequencing grade), overnight at 37?C. Peptides were first extracted with 50% acetonitrile in 2% TFA for 30 min., then with acetonitrile for 30 min. The two extracts were combined, dried, and stored at -80?C until LC-MS/MS analysis. nLC-MS/MS analysis for label-free differential MS were run on a LTQ-Orbitrap Classic (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with an Eksigent nanoLC-2D liquid chromatograph (Redwood City, CA). Nano-scale liquid chromatography (nLC) used a 25cm by 75 m i.d. packed spray tip (PicoFrit, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, 3?m, 200 °A (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). A 75 minute LC method (3-40%B in 50 min.) was used in conjunction with data-dependent acquisition of MS2 spectra. Survey scans at 60,000 resolving power (AGC=1E6), using lock masses at m/z 445.12002 and 371.10123, were followed by LTQ-CID spectra of the top 3 doubly or triply charged ions using gas phase fractionation where the precursor m/z range was divided into six regions to increase MS/MS depth of coverage. 1.    Hogan, MC, Manganelli, L, Woollard, JR, Masyuk, AI, Masyuk, TV, Tammachote, R, Huang, BQ, Leontovich, AA, Beito, TG, Madden, BJ, Charlesworth, MC, Torres, VE, Larusso, NF, Harris, PC, Ward, CJ: Characterization of PKD Protein-Positive Exosome-Like Vesicles. J Am Soc Nephrol, 2009. 2.    Chen, CY, Hogan, MC, Ward, CJ: Purification of exosome-like vesicles from urine. Methods Enzymol, 524: 225-241, 2013.

### Data Protocol
Six Xcalibur instrument methods, varying only in the precursor range used for selecting MS2 experiments, were used for collecting data across 46 gel lanes, so that each of the six precursor m/z ranges were used at least seven times within each gel section. Validated peptide identities from each precursor m/z range were mapped to MS1 data across all samples via m/z and LC retention time (RT) parameters using the Rosetta Elucidator  software package (ver. 3.3, Ceiba Solutions, Boston, MA). Elucidator software was used to extract LC/MS peaks from MS1 data, align chromatograms of data files within each gel section, and perform MASCOT searches against the Swiss-Prot 2011 ver11 database with isoforms, filtered for human and E. coli proteins plus an appended decoy database of the reversed entries for each protein. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were validated using the Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet algorithms implemented in Elucidator that used PSMs against the decoy database entries to model the distributions of correct and incorrect PSMs. Data tables with protein abundance for each sample, for each gel section, were exported for evaluation of differences. Where proteins were detected in multiple gel sections, the gel section with highest abundance was used as representative for that protein.

### Publication Abstract
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common cause of ESRD. Affected individuals inherit a defective copy of either PKD1 or PKD2, which encode polycystin-1 (PC1) or polycystin-2 (PC2), respectively. PC1 and PC2 are secreted on urinary exosome-like vesicles (ELVs) (100-nm diameter vesicles), in which PC1 is present in a cleaved form and may be complexed with PC2. Here, label-free quantitative proteomic studies of urine ELVs in an initial discovery cohort (13 individuals with PKD1 mutations and 18 normal controls) revealed that of 2008 ELV proteins, 9 (0.32%) were expressed at significantly different levels in samples from individuals with PKD1 mutations compared to controls (P&lt;0.03). In samples from individuals with PKD1 mutations, levels of PC1 and PC2 were reduced to 54% (P&lt;0.02) and 53% (P&lt;0.001), respectively. Transmembrane protein 2 (TMEM2), a protein with homology to fibrocystin, was 2.1-fold higher in individuals with PKD1 mutations (P&lt;0.03). The PC1/TMEM2 ratio correlated inversely with height-adjusted total kidney volume in the discovery cohort, and the ratio of PC1/TMEM2 or PC2/TMEM2 could be used to distinguish individuals with PKD1 mutations from controls in a confirmation cohort. In summary, results of this study suggest that a test measuring the urine exosomal PC1/TMEM2 or PC2/TMEM2 ratio may have utility in diagnosis and monitoring of polycystic kidney disease. Future studies will focus on increasing sample size and confirming these studies. The data were deposited in the ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD001075).

### Keywords
Urine, Adpkd, Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, Pkd, Exosomes, Exosome-like vesicles

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic
Mayo Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Roman Zenka

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel McCormick
Mayo Proteomics Core


