### Accession
PXD016305

### Title
ADAP promotes effector cytokine release, degranulation and migration 1  of NK cells primed during in vivo Listeria monocytogenes infection in 2  mice

### Description
is involved in the formation of immune signaling complexes. To date only limited and moreover 35  conflicting data exist regarding the role of ADAP in NK cells. To extend existing knowledge we 36  investigated ADAP-dependency of NK cells in the context of in vivo infection with the intracellular 37  pathogen Listeria monocytogenes (Lm). Ex vivo analysis of infection-primed NK cells revealed 38  impaired expression of IFN-γ and chemokines as well as impaired cytotoxic capacity in NK cells 39  lacking ADAP as indicated by reduced CD107a surface expression and inefficient perforin 40  production. However, ADAP-deficiency had no global effect on NK cell morphology or intracellular 41  distribution of CD107a-containing vesicles. Proteomic definition of ADAPko and wild type NK cells 42  did not uncover obvious differences in protein composition during the steady state and moreover, 43  similar early response patterns were induced in NK cells upon infection independent of the genotype. 44  In line with protein network analyses that suggested an altered migration phenotype in naïve 45  ADAPko NK cells, in vitro migration assays uncovered significantly reduced migration of both naïve 46  as well as infection-primed ADAPko NK cells compared to wild type NK cells. We propose that this 47  migration defect might account at least in part for the fact that during in vivo infection significantly 48  lower numbers of ADAPko NK cells accumulate in the spleen i.e. the site of infection. In conclusion, 49  we show here that during systemic Lm infection in mice ADAP is essential for efficient cytokine and 50  chemokine production, cytotoxic capacity and migration of NK cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analyzes. FACS-sorted NK cells (NKp46pos) were lysed in 1% SDS, 1x Complete 180  protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 50 mM Hepes pH8.5, 10 mM DTT for 5 min at 95°C, and rested 181  for 5 min on ice. Benzonase was added and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min. After 182  incubation, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added for 30 min, and 10 mM methyl 183  methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 5 min, to reduce and protect cysteine residues, respectively. 184  Protein purification, protein digestion and peptide purification was performed according to a slightly 185  adapted Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol (40, 41). Sequencing 186  grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) was added at a ratio of 1:20 weight per weight in 50 187  mM HEPES pH 8. After < 14 h incubation at 37°C, samples were slightly acidified using formic acid 188  (FA) shaken and incubated overnight at RT after raising the acetonitrile concentration to at least 189  95%. Beads containing the adsorbed peptides were washed once with pure acetonitrile and were dried 190  by air. Peptides were eluted in a first step with 20 µl 2% DMSO for 30 min, and in a second step with 191  20 µl 0.065% FA, 500 mM KCl in 30% acetonitrile (ACN) for 30 min. Peptides were vacuum dried 192  and dissolved in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid / 3% ACN for subsequent ultracentrifugation (50000×g, 30 193  min, RT). LC-MS/MS analyses of purified and desalted peptides were performed on a Dionex 194  UltiMate 3000 n-RSLC system connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer 195  (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides of each sample were loaded onto a C18 196  precolumn (3 μm RP18 beads, Acclaim, 0.075 mm × 20 mm), washed for 3 min at a flow rate of 6 197  µl/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (3 mm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 mm × 50 198  cm, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min via a linear 120 min gradient from 199  97% MS buffer A (0.1% FA) to 25% MS buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN), followed by a 30 min 200  gradient from 25% MS buffer B to 62% MS buffer B. The LC system was operated with the 201  Chromeleon software (version 6.8, Dionex) embedded in the Xcalibur software suite (version 3.0.63, 202  Thermo Scientific). The effluent was electro-sprayed by a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific). 203  Using the Xcalibur software, the mass spectrometer was controlled and operated in the “top speed” 204  mode, allowing the automatic selection of as many doubly and triply charged peptides in a 3 sec time 205  window as possible, and the subsequent fragmentation of these peptides. Peptide fragmentation was 206  carried out using the higher energy collisional dissociation mode and peptides were measured in the 207  ion trap (HCD/IT). MS/MS raw data files were processed via the Proteome Discoverer program 208  (version 2.3, Thermo Scientific) using Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) as search machine and 209   ADAP promotes NK cell function during infection    8  fasta files from the Swiss-Prot/UniProt database from January 2018. Used Mascot search parameters 210  were: maximum missed cleavage site: 1, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 211  0.05 Da. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification and modification of cysteine by 212  MMTS was set as fixed modification. Filters used in Proteome Discoverer were peptide confidence: 213  high, search engine rank: 1 and false discovery rate: 1%.

### Data Protocol
Statistics. All statistical analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism Software v5 (GraphPad 297  Software, Inc, La Jolla, USA) and p < 0.05 was considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
The adhesion and degranulation-promoting adaptor protein (ADAP) serves as a multifunctional scaffold and is involved in the formation of immune signaling complexes. To date only limited and moreover conflicting data exist regarding the role of ADAP in NK cells. To extend existing knowledge we investigated ADAP-dependency of NK cells in the context of <i>in vivo</i> infection with the intracellular pathogen <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> (<i>Lm</i>). <i>Ex vivo</i> analysis of infection-primed NK cells revealed impaired cytotoxic capacity in NK cells lacking ADAP as indicated by reduced CD107a surface expression and inefficient perforin production. However, ADAP-deficiency had no global effect on NK cell morphology or intracellular distribution of CD107a-containing vesicles. Proteomic definition of ADAPko and wild type NK cells did not uncover obvious differences in protein composition during the steady state and moreover, similar early response patterns were induced in NK cells upon infection independent of the genotype. In line with protein network analyses that suggested an altered migration phenotype in na&#xef;ve ADAPko NK cells, <i>in vitro</i> migration assays uncovered significantly reduced migration of both na&#xef;ve as well as infection-primed ADAPko NK cells compared to wild type NK cells. Notably, this migration defect was associated with a significantly reduced expression of the integrin CD11a on the surface of splenic ADAP-deficient NK cells 1 day post-<i>Lm</i> infection. We propose that ADAP-dependent alterations in integrin expression might account at least in part for the fact that during <i>in vivo</i> infection significantly lower numbers of ADAPko NK cells accumulate in the spleen i.e., the site of infection. In conclusion, we show here that during systemic <i>Lm</i> infection in mice ADAP is essential for efficient cytotoxic capacity and migration of NK cells.

### Keywords
Listeria 28  monocytogenes, In vivo infection, Migration, Effector cytokines, Adapter protein, Cytotoxicity, Natural killer cells, Adap

### Affiliations
HZI

### Submitter
Lothar Jaensch

### Lab Head
Dr Lothar Jaensch
HZI


