### Accession
PXD015561

### Title
The Paired Orphan Immune Receptors LILRA6 and LILRB3 Modulate Fc Receptor Mediated Functions of Neutrophils

### Description
to characterise expression of LILRA6/LILRB3 receptors during neutrophil differentiation and activation, and to characterise their roles in modulating Fc receptor mediated effector functions.

### Sample Protocol
3 x 107 neutrophil cells were washed in ice-cold PBS, pelleted and lysed for 30 mins at 4oC using 500 µl of ice-cold 0.3% saponine containing protease inhibitors 1:1000 AEBSF and Leupeptin. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 4oC, 100 l of supernatants were incubated for 2 hours at 4oC with 25 µl of  Dynabeads Protein A (DB) for Immunoprecipitation (ThermoFisher Scientific). DB had previously been coated with anti-LILRA6, anti-LILRB3 or isotype controls following standard protocol. DB were washed 3 times in ice-cold lysis buffer,and washed 3 times in ice-cold ultrapure water, resuspended in 50 l reduction buffer containing 2% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 200mM Tris,  10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and heated in 95oC for 10 mins. Alkylation was done by adding 50l of 60mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature. 1g of Chymotrypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added and digestion was performed at 37°C for 16 hours. The supernatant was kept after centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 minutes at room temperature. SDC was removed by acidic precipitation with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were cleaned by Oasis PRiME HLB 96 well plates, following manufacturer’s instructions, dried by SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until MS analysis. Peptides were separated and analyzed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Reversed-phase separation was accomplished using a 100 µm inner diameter 2 cm trap column (in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm) (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) coupled to a 50 µm inner diameter 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm) (Agilent Technologies, Amstelveen, The Netherlands). Mobile-phase solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O, and mobile-phase solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile (ACN). Trapping was performed at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 5 min with 0% B and peptides were eluted using a passive split flow of 300 nl/min for 80 min with 13% to 44% B over 65 min, 44% to 100% B over 3 min, 100% B for 1 min, 100% to 0% B over 1 min, and finally held at 0% B for 10 min. Mass spectra were collected in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full scans (from m/z 375 to 1,600) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 and a target of 3e6 ions or a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Fragmentation was induced for the Top 15 peaks. Target peaks were isolated in a 1.4 Da isolation window and subjected to high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy value of 27%. MS/MS spectra (from m/z 200 to 2,000) were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 using an AGC setting of 1e5 ions or a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >6 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw shotgun LC-MS/MS data were searched with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.1). Processing nodes included spectrum file reader, Minora feature detector (for LFQ), spectrum selector, Mascot and Percolator. Mascot searches were performed against a combined database of UniProt Swiss-Prot database: Homo sapiens (canonical and isoform) (September 2019, 20,417 entries) and manually checked variants of LILRA6/B3 (September 2019, 29 entries). Searches were performed with fixed Cys carbamidomethylation and variable Met oxidation and Ser/Thr phosphorylation of peptides. Chymotrypsin was chosen for cleavage specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05Da (HCD), followed by data filtering using Percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Mascot scores >20 were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils are critical to the generation of effective immune responses and for killing invading microbes. Paired immune receptors provide important mechanisms to modulate neutrophil activation thresholds and effector functions. Expression of the leukocyte Ig-like receptor (LILR)A6 (ILT8/CD85b) and LILRB3 (ILT5/CD85a) paired-receptor system on human neutrophils has remained unclear because of the lack of specific molecular tools. Additionally, there is little known of their possible functions in neutrophil biology. The objective of this study was to characterize expression of LILRA6/LILRB3 receptors during human neutrophil differentiation and activation, and to assess their roles in modulating Fc receptor-mediated effector functions. LILRB3, but not LILRA6, was detected in human neutrophil lysates following immunoprecipitation by mass spectrometry. We demonstrate high LILRB3 expression on the surface of resting neutrophils and release from the surface following neutrophil activation. Surface expression was recapitulated in a human PLB-985 cell model of neutrophil-like differentiation. Continuous ligation of LILRB3 inhibited key IgA-mediated effector functions, including production of reactive oxygen species, phagocytic uptake, and microbial killing. This suggests that LILRB3 provides an important checkpoint to control human neutrophil activation and their antimicrobial effector functions during resting and early-activation stages of the neutrophil life cycle.

### Keywords
Paired orphan immune receptors; neutrophils

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Jing Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht University


