### Accession
PXD030825

### Title
Analysis of oncogenic Kras-induced changes in the RNA-bound proteome of PDAC cells

### Description
In order to reveal the impact of oncogenic KRAS signaling on the RNA-bound proteome of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC), we carried out quantitative whole Transcriptome RNA Interactome Capture (RIC) analysis in tumour cells from an inducible mouse model of PDAC (iKras PDAC) (Ying et al., 2012). In this model, oncogenic Kras (G12D) expression can be controlled by administration of doxycycline (Dox). For RIC, we employed Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation (OOPS)(Queiroz et al., 2019). In this method, UV-C crosslinking coupled with phenol-chloroform based phase separation is used to isolate RNA-crosslinked proteins, which concentrate in the interface fraction, whilst free proteins concentrate in the organic fraction. SILAC was employed for quantitative analysis of Dox induced (24hrs) changes in the RNA-bound proteome. To assess the impact of ERK signalling, an independent experiment was carried out in which Trametinib (10nM) was added to the cells at the same time as Dox (both with or without Dox cells). A total of 6 biological replicates without Trametinib, and 4 biological replicates with Trametinib, were conducted, with switching the Heavy and Light SILAC labels for +Dox and -Dox conditions. Both the Interface as well as the organic phase fractions were analysed by mass spectrometry. In a separate experiment, the total proteome changes in response to dox (24hrs) were quantified from two reciprocally SILAC labelled mixes of heavy and light iKras PDAC whole cell lysates (See the READ ME.XLS for details of the experimental conditions).

### Sample Protocol
For OOPS Interface and Organic fractions, proteins were acetone percipitated before being subjected to in-solution Trypsin digestion. Briefly, percipitated proteins were recovered in 200 μl 2M Urea, 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) and reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM. After 30 minutes of incubation at RT, samples were alkylated by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide and Incubation for another 30 minutes at RT in the dark. Trypsin digestion was then performed using 2 µg of trypsin / sample at 37C overnight. The next day, samples were desalted using the Stage Tip procedure (Rappsilber et al., 2003)and recovered in 0.1% TFA, 0.5% Acetic Acid, 2% Acetonitrile (A* buffer) for MS analysis. For total proteome analysis, cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5,  sonicated with a sonicator bath (Bioruptor Pico - Rm 343) for 10 cycles, balanced after BCA protein concentration analysis, and reduced with addition of 100 mM DTT and boiling at 95°C for 10 min. 50ug of heavy and light SILAC labelled lysates were then mixed and subjected to Trypsin digestion using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP)(Wisniewski et al., 2009). Digested samples were then fractionated into 7 fractions using Pierce™ High pH reverse-phase fractionation kit, according to manufacturer’s instructions. Fractions were dried with vacuum centrifugation before being resuspended in A* buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive-plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher). For OOPS fractions, ~90% of the total peptide mixture per sample was injected. For total proteomics analysis, equivalent of ~ 1 µg of total protein was injected. Samples were resolved at flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50cm X 75 µm RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher). Each run consisted of a 123 min gradient of 3% to 35 % of Buffer B (0.1% FA in Acetonitrile) against Buffer A (0.1% FA in LC-MS gradient water), and separated samples were infused into the MS by electrospray ionization (ESI). Spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV, and capillary temperature was set to 255°C. MS was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS2 scans (top 15 method). Full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500)were acquired with a 70,000 resolution for MS scans and 17,500 for the MS2 scans. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion was applied.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) was used for all mass spectrometry search and quantifications(Tyanova et al., 2016a). Raw data files were searched against a FASTA file of the Mus musculus proteome, extracted from Uniprot (2016). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin”, allowing up to two missed cleavages. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using a reverse database search approach, and was set at 1%. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with some adjustments (see Xpar.xml files for detailed parameters used). All downstream data analyses, such as data filtering, Log transformation, ratio calculation, data normalization, one-sample t-test analysis, category annotation, 1D & 2D annotation enrichment analysis, Fisher’s exact test analysis, and data visualizations, were performed in Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016b) (version 1.6.2.3). For all annotation enrichments, GO and KEGG annotations were used, with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of < 0.02 applied as the cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna interactome capture; ric; oops; kras; rna-binding; rbp; silac

### Affiliations
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ U.K.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz K. Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ U.K.


