### Accession
PXD016177

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the second-generation merozoites of Eimeria tenella under Nitromezuril and Ethanamizuril stress

### Description
Eimeria tenella is a high pathogenic coccidian that causes avain coccidiosis. Both Nitromezuril(NZL) and Ethanamizuril(EZL) are novel triazine compounds with high anticoccidial activity, but the mechanisms of their action are still unclear. This study explored the response of E.tenella to NZL and EZL by the study of changes in protein composition of the second-generation merozoites using label free quantification proteomics.After drug treatment, the merozoites were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The identified proteins were annotated and analyzed by Gene ontology, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway and Protein-protein interaction networks analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The experimental groups were divided into three groups，including the NZL treatment group(N),the EZL treatment group (S) and the non-mediated control group (D).The second-generation merozoites were extracted and purificated by filtration, centrifugation, erythrocytes disruption and percoll density gradient centrifugation. Then protein extration and digestion were performed  according to a slight modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The pepteides were analyzed by LCMS-/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data processing ,protein identification and quantitative analysis of samples were all performed using Maxquant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Nitromezuril, Eimeria tenella, The second-generation merozoites, Ethanamizuril

### Affiliations
上海兽医研究所
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute

### Submitter
李 雪雁

### Lab Head
Dr Fei-qun Xue
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute


