### Accession
PXD029136

### Title
Role of the E3 Ubiquitin-ligase Hakai in intestinal inflammation and cancer bowel disease

### Description
E3 ubiquitin-ligases are important for the cellular protein homeostasis and their deregulation is implicated in cancer. The E3 ubiquitin-ligase Hakai is involved in tumour progression and metastasis, through the regulation of the tumour suppressor E-cadherin. Hakai is overexpressed in colon cancer, however, the implication in colitis-associated cancer is unknown. Here, we investigated the potential role of Hakai in intestinal inflammation and cancer bowel disease.Several mouse models of colitis and associated cancer were used including AOM-DSS, acute colitis, and genetically modified mice deficient for the IL-10 gene, to analyse Hakai expression by immunohistochemistry. Interactome analysis of Hakai was performed and effect on selected protein was determined by plasmid and siRNA transfection, western-blotting, immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence and ubiquitination assays. Lipid accumulation was assayed by oil red staining. Immunohistochemistry was also performed in inflamed colon biopsies from ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease and colorectal cancer patients. Our results show that Hakai was downregulated in inflammatory tissues in different mouse models. Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN) protein was identified as a novel Hakai-interacting protein. Hakai induces FASN ubiquitination and degradation via lysosome, thus regulating FASN-mediated lipid accumulation. An inverse expression of FASN with Hakai expression was detected in inflammatory AOM/DSS mouse model. In conclusion, Hakai regulates FASN ubiquitination and degradation, resulting in the regulation of FASN-mediated lipid accumulation, which is associated to the development of inflammatory bowel disease. The interaction between Hakai and FASN may be an important mechanism for the homeostasis of intestinal barrier function and in the pathogenesis of this disease.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were used for interactome analysis. Cell pellets were incubated with lysis buffer (20 mMTris-HCl pH 7,5, 150 mMNaCl and 1 % Triton X-100, 125 mg/mL N-ethylmaleimide) in rotation at 4 °C for 30 min. Pre-clearing was performed to eliminate unspecific interactions. For this, protein extracts were incubated with 60 μL of beads for 1h at 4 °C. For large scale immunoprecipitation, four 150 mm culture dishes were used per point of the experiment (IgG and IP). 40 μL of Dynabeads protein A (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were resuspended in filtered PBS-T 0,1 % and incubated with 5 μg of Hakai Bethyl antibody or control IgG 2 h at 4 °C on rotation for beads-antibody coupling. Once finished antibody-beads incubation, beads and protein sample were incubated overnight at 4 °C on rotation. Samples were loaded into SDS-PAGE gel and band was stained with Sypro-Ruby (Lonza) fluorescent and processed to in gel digestion as previously described. 33 Samples were reduced in 10 mMdithiothreitol and dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) (Sigma-Aldrich). Then samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide 55 mM dissolved in AMBIC 50 mM (Sigma-Aldrich). The gel pieces were rinsed with AMBIC 50 mM in 50% methanol (HPLC grade, Scharlau) and acetonitrile (HPLC grade, Scharlau) was added for dehydration. Finally, they were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and digested with porcine trypsin (Promega) to a final concentration of 20 ng / µL in AMBIC 20 mM for a final overnight incubation at 37ºC. For mass spectrometric analysis, samples were processed by the Proteomics Platform of Biomedical Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS). The separation of peptides was done by Reverse phase chromatography. The 400 micro nanoLC liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies, ABSciex) combined with a Triple Time-of-flight (TOF) 6600 high speed mass spectrometer (ABSciex) were used for creating a gradient. Analysis of peptides was performed on the C18CL reverse phase column (150 x 0.30 mm, 3 µm, 120 Å) (Eksigent, ABSciex). The peptides were separated using a 90-minute gradient ranging from 2% to 90% of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile). Acquisition of data was performed on a Triple TOF 6600 system (ABSciex). The TF 1.7.1 analyst software was used for instrument operation (ABSciex). A switching criterion was used for ions greater than the mass/charge ratio (m/z) 350 and less than m/z 1400, with a mass tolerance of 250 ppm, a charge state of 2-5 and a threshold of abundance of more than 200 accounts (cps).

### Data Protocol
The computer analysis of the raw data obtained was carried out using ProteinPilotTM 5.0.1 software (ABSciex). Analysis was performed with the Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) score SAINTexpress. 34 Preys with SAINT probability score cut-off of 1 detected by at least two exclusive spectral counts were deemed high confidence Hakai-interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The E3 ubiquitin-ligases are important for cellular protein homeostasis and their deregulation is implicated in cancer. The E3 ubiquitin-ligase Hakai is involved in tumour progression and metastasis, through the regulation of the tumour suppressor E-cadherin. Hakai is overexpressed in colon cancer, however, the implication in colitis-associated cancer is unknown. Here, we investigated the potential role of Hakai in intestinal inflammation and cancer bowel disease. Several mouse models of colitis and associated cancer were used to analyse Hakai expression by immunohistochemistry. We also analysed Hakai expression in patients with inflamed colon biopsies from ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. By Hakai interactome analysis, it was identified Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN) as a novel Hakai-interacting protein. Moreover, we show that Hakai induces FASN ubiquitination and degradation via lysosome, thus regulating FASN-mediated lipid accumulation. An inverse expression of FASN and Hakai was detected in inflammatory AOM/DSS mouse model. In conclusion, Hakai regulates FASN ubiquitination and degradation, resulting in the regulation of FASN-mediated lipid accumulation, which is associated to the development of inflammatory bowel disease. The interaction between Hakai and FASN may be an important mechanism for the homeostasis of intestinal barrier function and in the pathogenesis of this disease.

### Keywords
E3 ubiquitin-ligase hakai, Fasn, Intestinal inflammation and cancer bowel disease

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana B Bravo Lopez
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


