### Accession
PXD021859

### Title
SIK2-dependent Phosphoproteome and Interactome upon Salmonella infection

### Description
HeLa cells transfected with non-targeting control- and anti-SIK2 siRNA were left uninfected or infected with Salmonella and lysed 30 min pi. Following tryptic-digest peptides were labeled using TMT-pro 16-plex and phosphopeptides enriched. The endogenously tagged SIK2-HA IP workflow. Hela wild type or endogenous SIK2-HA-tagged HeLa cells were left uninfected or infected with Salmonella and lysed 1 h post-infection, followed by HA-IP, Tryptic digest, TMT-labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells transfected with non-targeting control- and anti-SIK2 siRNA were left uninfected or infected with Salmonella and lysed 30 min pi. Following tryptic-digest peptides were labeled using TMT-pro 16-plex and phosphopeptides enriched. The endogenously tagged SIK2-HA IP workflow. Hela wild type or endogenous SIK2-HA-tagged HeLa cells were left uninfected or infected with Salmonella and lysed 1 h post-infection, followed by HA-IP, Tryptic digest, TMT-labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database and Salmonella typhimurium (strain LT2 / SGSC1412 / ATCC 700720) database. Static modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and lysines and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the following dynamic modifications into account: Oxidation (M), Phospho (S,T,Y), Met-loss (N-term), Acetyl (N-term) and Met-loss acetyl (N-term). For whole cell proteomics, the same settings were used except phosphorylation was not allowed as dynamic modification. For phospho-proteomics all peptide groups were normalized by summed intensity normalization and then analyzed on peptide level. For whole cell proteomics normalized PSMs were summed for each accession and data exported for further use.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Salmonella</i> is an intracellular pathogen of a substantial global health concern. In order to identify key players involved in <i>Salmonella</i> infection, we performed a global host phosphoproteome analysis subsequent to bacterial infection. Thereby, we identified the kinase SIK2 as a central component of the host defense machinery upon <i>Salmonella</i> infection. SIK2 depletion favors the escape of bacteria from the <i>Salmonella</i>-containing vacuole (SCV) and impairs Xenophagy, resulting in a hyperproliferative phenotype. Mechanistically, SIK2 associates with actin filaments under basal conditions; however, during bacterial infection, SIK2 is recruited to the SCV together with the elements of the actin polymerization machinery (Arp2/3 complex and Formins). Notably, SIK2 depletion results in a severe pathological cellular actin nucleation and polymerization defect upon <i>Salmonella</i> infection. We propose that SIK2 controls the formation of a protective SCV actin shield shortly after invasion and orchestrates the actin cytoskeleton architecture in its entirety to control an acute <i>Salmonella</i> infection after bacterial invasion.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens (human)

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Marcel Hahn

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


