### Accession
PXD023784

### Title
Proteome analysis of Mycobacterium fortuitum biofilm

### Description
Biofilm formation by the environmental and clinical contaminant Mycobacterium fortuitum causes economic losses and serious threat to human health, as a consequence of its increasing contribution to nosocomial infections. There are no reports that elucidate physiological adaptations taking place during its planktonic to biofilm transition. The present study was hence carried out considering the global proteome of the mycobacterium. This is the first description of a global proteomic investigation into M. fortuitum biofilm. Scrutiny of biological functions in the two states provided insights into the phenotypic switch, and fundamental pathways associated with M. fortuitum pathobiology.

### Sample Protocol
25 µl samples were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP. These were further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37°C. Digests were cleaned using a C-18 silica cartridge to remove the salt, and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellets were resuspended in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). All the experiment was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive, equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1.0 µg of the peptide mixture was resolved using 25 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 1.9 µm of C-18 resin (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
All samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the UniProt M. fortuitum reference proteome database. For SEQUEST search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm formation by Mycobacterium fortuitum causes serious threats to human health due to its increased contribution to nosocomial infections. In this study, the first comprehensive global proteome analysis of M. fortuitum was reported under planktonic and biofilm growth states. A label-free Q Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed on the protein lysates. The differentially abundant proteins were functionally characterized and re-annotated using Blast2GO and CELLO2GO. Comparative analysis of the proteins among two growth states provided insights into the phenotypic switch, and fundamental pathways associated with pathobiology of M. fortuitum biofilm, such as lipid biosynthesis and quorum-sensing. Interaction network generated by the STRING database revealed associations between proteins that endure M. fortuitum during biofilm growth state. Hypothetical proteins were also studied to determine their functional alliance with the biofilm phenotype. CARD, VFDB, and PATRIC analysis further showed that the proteins upregulated in M. fortuitum biofilm exhibited antibiotic resistance, pathogenesis, and virulence. Heatmap and correlation analysis provided the biomarkers associated with the planktonic and biofilm growth of M. fortuitum. Proteome data was validated by qPCR analysis. Overall, the study provides insights into previously unexplored biochemical pathways that can be targeted by novel inhibitors, either for shortened treatment duration or for eliminating biofilm of M. fortuitum and related nontuberculous mycobacterial pathogens. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Proteomic analyses of M. fortuitum reveals novel biofilm markers. &#x2022; Acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase acts as the phenotype transition switch. &#x2022; The study offers drug targets to combat M. fortuitum biofilm infections.

### Keywords
Pathogenesis, Mycobacterium fortuitum, Proteomics, Biofilm, Label-free

### Affiliations
Jaypee University of Information Technology Waknaghat, Solan - 173234 (H.P.), India
Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of Information Technology, Waknaghat, Solan - 173234 (H.P.), India

### Submitter
Rahul Shrivastava

### Lab Head
Dr Rahul Shrivastava
Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of Information Technology, Waknaghat, Solan - 173234 (H.P.), India


