### Accession
PXD030091

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor cereblon targets the C-terminal cyclic imide degron

### Description
We identify cyclic imides, previously overlooked post-translation modifications, across different tissues (red blood cells and bovine lens) and human-derived cell lines and found that these modifications are globally regulated by cereblon.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were desalted by S-trap protocol and digested by trypsin on trap at 47 degC for 1 h. The dried peptides were labeled by TMT isobaric tags and quenched by neutral Tris buffer. Then the labeled peptides were fractionated using a high-pH reverse phase column, followed by the immediate quench by formic acid to minimize the hydrolysis of the cyclic imide PTMs.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15. The raw spectra were searched against SwissProt Human or Bovine database and contaminant proteins using SequestHT algorithm. Search guidelines: spectra with signal-to-noise greater than 1.5; mass tolerance 10 ppm for precursor ions, 0.6 Da (CID) and 0.02 Da (HCD) for fragment ions; semi tryptic peptides at N-term only; 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation on Cys (+57.021 Da); static TMT labeling at Lys and N-termini (+226.163 Da); variable dehydration (-18.015 Da) on Gln and Asn. TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporters Ion Quantifier node and normalized to internal standard (GFP) or total peptide intensity. PSMs were filtered using 1% or 5% FDR using Target Decoy PSM Validator.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin E3 ligase substrate adapter cereblon (CRBN) is a target of thalidomide and lenalidomide<sup>1</sup>, therapeutic agents used in the treatment of haematopoietic malignancies<sup>2-4</sup> and as ligands for targeted protein degradation<sup>5-7</sup>. These agents are proposed to mimic a naturally occurring degron; however, the structural motif recognized by the thalidomide-binding domain of CRBN remains unknown. Here we report that C-terminal cyclic imides, post-translational modifications that arise from intramolecular cyclization of glutamine or asparagine residues, are physiological degrons on substrates for CRBN. Dipeptides bearing the C-terminal cyclic imide degron substitute for thalidomide when embedded within bifunctional chemical degraders. Addition of the degron to the C terminus of proteins induces CRBN-dependent ubiquitination and degradation in vitro and in cells. C-terminal cyclic imides form adventitiously on physiologically relevant timescales throughout the human proteome to afford a degron that is endogenously recognized and removed by CRBN. The discovery of the C-terminal cyclic imide degron defines a regulatory process that may affect the physiological function and therapeutic engagement of CRBN.

### Keywords
Degron, Cereblon, Lc-ms/ms, Ptm, Cyclic imide

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


