### Accession
PXD027741

### Title
Laser capture microdissection-capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry (LCM-CZE-MS/MS) for spatially resolved top-down proteomics: a pilot study of zebrafish brain

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based spatially resolved top-down proteomics (TDP) of tissues is crucial for understanding the roles played by microenvironmental heterogeneity in the biological functions of organs and for discovering new proteoform biomarkers of diseases. There are few published spatially resolved TDP studies. One of the challenges relates to the limited performance of TDP for the analysis of spatially isolated samples using, for example, laser capture microdissection (LCM) because those samples are usually mass-limited. We present the first pilot study of LCM-capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS for spatially resolved TDP and used zebrafish brain as the sample. The LCM-CZE-MS/MS platform employed a non-ionic detergent and a freeze-thaw method for efficient proteoform extraction from LCM isolated brain sections followed by CZE-MS/MS without any sample cleanup step, ensuring high sensitivity. Over 400 proteoforms were identified in a CZE-MS/MS analysis of one LCM brain section via consuming the protein content of roughly 250 cells. We observed drastic differences in proteoform profiles between two LCM brain sections isolated from the optic tectum (Teo) and telencephalon (Tel) regions. Proteoforms of three proteins (npy, penkb, and pyya) having neuropeptide hormone activity were exclusively identified in the isolated Tel section. Proteoforms of reticulon, myosin, and troponin were almost exclusively identified in the isolated Teo section, and those proteins play essential roles in visual and motor activities. The proteoform profiles accurately reflected the main biological functions of the Teo and Tel regions of the brain. Additionally, hundreds of post-translationally modified proteoforms were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Octyl glucopyranoside, OG, detergent was dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8) for cell lysis and the OG concentration was 4.5% (w/v). The tissue samples from the LCM were re-suspended in 5-μL of the lysis buffer by placing the lysis buffer directly onto the adhesive cap. The lysis buffer was then pipetted up and down several times, and the sample in the lysis buffer was transferred from the cap to the bottom of the eppendorf tube via a quick centrifugation. The samples were further processed by two different approaches, Figure 1. In one approach, we employed an on-ice sonication for 20 minutes (Branson Sonifier 250, VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) for cell lysis and protein extraction. We prepared three brain sections using the sonication approach.  In the other approach, another four samples originating from the same brain slice as the sonication method went through a repeated freeze/thaw protocol; the samples were placed into liquid nitrogen and thawed at 37 oC for 2 minutes for a total of 6 rounds of the freeze/thaw. The seven samples were marked in Figure 2. All the samples were then spun down. Each sample was diluted by a factor of two with water to get a sample containing 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8) and about 2% OG for CZE-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to get the intensity and migration time of proteoforms. The electropherograms were exported from Xcalibur and were formatted using Adobe Illustrator to report the final figures.  The LCM sample RAW files were analyzed using Top-down mass spectrometry based proteoform identification and characterization (TopPIC) platform for the proteoform identification and quantification.36 The RAW files were converted to mzML files using the MsConvert tool,37 and spectral deconvolution was done using the Top-down mass spectrometry feature detection (TopFD) to generate msalign files. The msalign files were used as the input for TopPIC (version 1.4.0) for database searching. UniProt databases for zebrafish (AUP000000437) were used for the database search. The maximum number of unexpected modifications was set to 2, and the maximum mass shift of unknown modification was set to 500 Da, while the precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were 15 ppm. The target decoy approach was used for the false discovery rate (FDR),38,39 and a 1% proteoform-spectrum match (PrSM) level FDR and a 5% proteoform level FDR were used to filter the PrSM and proteoform identifications. Label-free quantification for top-down proteomics was performed using the TopDiff tool integrated in the TopPIC platform.31

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based spatially resolved top-down proteomics (TDP) of tissues is crucial for understanding the roles played by microenvironmental heterogeneity in the biological functions of organs and for discovering new proteoform biomarkers of diseases. There are few published spatially resolved TDP studies. One of the challenges relates to the limited performance of TDP for the analysis of spatially isolated samples using, for example, laser capture microdissection (LCM) because those samples are usually mass-limited. We present the first pilot study of LCM-capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS for spatially resolved TDP and used zebrafish brain as the sample. The LCM-CZE-MS/MS platform employed a non-ionic detergent and a freeze-thaw method for efficient proteoform extraction from LCM isolated brain sections followed by CZE-MS/MS without any sample cleanup step, ensuring high sensitivity. Over 400 proteoforms were identified in a CZE-MS/MS analysis of one LCM brain section <i>via</i> consuming the protein content of roughly 250 cells. We observed drastic differences in proteoform profiles between two LCM brain sections isolated from the optic tectum (Teo) and telencephalon (Tel) regions. Proteoforms of three proteins (npy, penkb, and pyya) having neuropeptide hormone activity were exclusively identified in the isolated Tel section. Proteoforms of reticulon, myosin, and troponin were almost exclusively identified in the isolated Teo section, and those proteins play essential roles in visual and motor activities. The proteoform profiles accurately reflected the main biological functions of the Teo and Tel regions of the brain. Additionally, hundreds of post-translationally modified proteoforms were identified.

### Keywords
Spatially resolved top-down proteomics; capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry; laser capture microdissection; zebrafish brain; proteoform; high sensitivity; neuropeptide hormone activity; motor activity

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


