### Accession
PXD001927

### Title
An improved protocol to study the plant cell wall proteome

### Description
Cell wall proteins were extracted from alfalfa stems according to a 3-steps extraction procedure using sequentially CaCl2, EGTA and LiCl-complemented buffers. The efficiency of this protocol for extracting cell wall proteins was compared with the 2 previously  published methods optimized for alfalfa stem cell wall protein analysis. Following LC-MS/MS analysis the 3-steps extraction  procedure resulted in the identification of the highest number of cell wall proteins (242 NCBInr identifiers) and gave the lowest  percentage of non-cell wall proteins (about 30%). However, the 3 protocols are rather complementary than substitutive since 43% of  the identified proteins were specific to one protocol. This 3-step protocol was therefore selected for a more detailed proteomic characterization using 2D-gel electrophoresis. With this  technique, 75% of the identified proteins were shown to be fraction-specific and 72.7% were predicted as belonging to the cell wall  compartment. Although being less sensitive than LC-MS/MS approaches in detecting and identifying low-abundant proteins,  gel-based approaches are valuable tools for the differentiation and relative quantification of protein isoforms and/or modified proteins. In particular isoforms, having variations in their amino-acid sequence and/or carrying different N-linked glycan chains were detected and characterized.  This study highlights how the extracting protocols as well as the analytical techniques devoted to the study of the plant cell wall proteome are complementary and how they may be combined to elucidate the dynamism of the plant cell wall proteome in biological studies.

### Sample Protocol
Two previously published protocols for extracting alfalfa stem cell wall proteins are tested and compared with a third newly developed “hybrid” protocol. In contrast with the 2 already published methods which involve a 2-step sequential extraction using respectively CaCl2/LiCl and EGTA/LiCl complemented buffers, the “hybrid” method shows the benefits of the use of a sequential 3-step extraction using CaCl2/EGTA/LiCl complemented buffers. Comparisons are based on the LC-MSMS analysis of the 7 cell wall proteome fractions.  All raw MS data are available in the following files 1.RAW: hybrid – CaCl2 2.RAW: hybrid – EGTA 3.RAW: hybrid – LiCl 4.RAW: Verdonk, 2012 - EGTA 5.RAW: Verdonk, 2012 - LiCl 6.RAW: Watson, 2004 - CaCl2  7.RAW: Watson, 2004 - LiCl  Further interpretation has been submitted for publication. Please note that the 3 fractions of the "hybrid" protocol were further characterised by 2D-gel electrophoresis

### Data Protocol
CID spectra were processed in an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.1, Matrix Scienceusing Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288 Searches were carried out against the NCBInr database using the taxonomy viridiplantae (September 23, 2013) and containing 32,770,904 sequences with the following parameters: used enzyme: trypsin, 2 missed cleavages, mass accuracy precursor: 10 ppm, mass accuracy fragments: 0.8 Da, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications: Dioxidation (W), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Oxidation (HW), Trp-> Kynurenin (W).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics, 2d-gel electrophoresis, Alfalfa, Stem, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology “Environmental Research and Innovation” (ERIN) department
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST)
Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN)

### Submitter
kjell sergeant

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Renaut
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology “Environmental Research and Innovation” (ERIN) department


