### Accession
PXD036735

### Title
Plasma extracellular vesicle proteome identifies diffuse large B cell lymphoma patients

### Description
The aggressive B cell lymphoma diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous entity that requires more precise monitoring and prognosis molecular tools.  Extracellular vesicles that are secreted by all cell types are currently recognized as serving as a proxy for the cell of origin. Utilizing cutting-edge mass spectrometry, the current study described and assessed the plasma small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) proteome's diagnostic and prognostic potential. The presence of DLBCL has a significant impact on the sEV proteome, and several proteins substantially correlate with DLBCL.Nevertheless, no proteins that highly correlated with non-GCB or GCB were found.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide Sample Preparation Samples containing a minimum of 20 μg of total proteins were further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In short, protein solutions containing SDS and DTT were loaded onto filtering columns (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and washed exhaustively with 8M urea in HEPES buffer as previously described. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Before trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C, proteins were equilibrated with ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with trypsin sequencing grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA).  Mass Spectrometry Analysis Samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics using a nano-LC-MSMS (Dionex RSLCnano 3000) coupled to an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) as previously described [16]. In brief, samples were loaded onto a custom made fused capillary pre-column (2 cm length, 360 µm OD, 75 µm ID, flowrate 5 µL per minute for 6 minutes) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 5.0 µm resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany), and separated using a capillary column (25 cm length, 360 µm outer diameter, 75 µm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 1.9-µm resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) at a flow of 250 nL per minute. A 56 min linear gradient from 89% A (0.1% formic acid) to 32% B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode in a data-dependent manner by switching between one Orbitrap survey MS scan (mass range m/z 350 to m/z 1200) followed by the sequential isolation and higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation and Orbitrap detection of fragment ions of the most intense ions with a cycle time of 2 s between each MS scan. MS and MSMS settings: maximum injection times were set to “Auto”, normalized collision energy was 30%, ion selection threshold for MSMS analysis was 10,000 counts, and dynamic exclusion of sequenced ions was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data from the 98 LC-MS runs of 15 HD and 32 DLBCL sEV samples were searched using VEMS. The MSMS spectra were searched against a standard human proteome database from UniProt (3AUP000005640). Permuted protein sequences, where arginine and lysine were not permuted, were included in the database for VEMS. Trypsin cleavage allowing a maximum of 4 missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was included as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, lysine and N-terminal protein acetylation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, ubiquitin diglycine and “LRGG” remnant on lysine were included as variable modifications. 5 ppm mass accuracy was specified for precursor ions and 0.01 m/z for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set at 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length for VEMS search. Identified proteins were divided into evidence groups as defined by Matthiesen et al.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive B cell lymphoma characterized by a heterogeneous behavior and in need of more accurate biological characterization monitoring and prognostic tools. Extracellular vesicles are secreted by all cell types and are currently established to some extent as representatives of the cell of origin. The present study characterized and evaluated the diagnostic and prognostic potential of plasma extracellular vesicles (EVs) proteome in DLBCL by using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry. The EV proteome is strongly affected by DLBCL status, with multiple proteins uniquely identified in the plasma of DLBCL. A proof-of-concept classifier resulted in highly accurate classification with a sensitivity and specificity of 1 when tested on the holdout test data set. On the other hand, no proteins were identified to correlate with non-germinal center B-cell like (non-GCB) or GCB subtypes to a significant degree after correction for multiple testing. However, functional analysis suggested that antigen binding is regulated when comparing non-GCB and GCB. Survival analysis based on protein quantitative values and clinical parameters identified multiple EV proteins as significantly correlated to survival. In conclusion, the plasma extracellular vesicle proteome identifies DLBCL cancer patients from healthy donors and contains potential EV protein markers for prediction of survival.

### Keywords
Plasma, Extracellular vesicles, Diagnostic, Liquid biopsy, Cancer

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa Portugal


