### Accession
PXD040936

### Title
The Zika virus infection remodels the expression of the synaptotagmin-9 secretory protein

### Description
The exact mechanisms involved in flaviviruses virions' release and the specific secretion of viral proteins, such as the Non Structural protein-1 (NS1), are still unclear. While these processes might involve vesicular transport to the cell membrane, NS1 from some flaviviruses was shown to participate in viral assembly and release. Here, we assessed the effect of the Zika virus (ZIKV) NS1 expression on the cellular proteome to identify trafficking-related targets that may be altered in the presence of the viral protein. We detected an increase in the synaptotagmin-9 (SYT9) secretory protein, which participates in the intracellular transport of protein-laden vesicles. We confirmed the effect of NS1 on SYT9 levels by transfection models while also detecting a significant subcellular redistribution of SYT9. We found that ZIKV prM-Env proteins, required for the viral particle release, also increased SYT9 levels and changed its localization,. Final-ly, we demonstrated that ZIKV cellular infection raises SYT9 levels and promotes changes in its subcellular localization, together with a co-distribution with both Env and NS1. Altogether, the data suggest SYT9's implication in the vesicular transport of viral pro-teins or virions during ZIKV infection, showing for the first time the association of syn-aptotagmins with the flavivirus' life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell extracts were prepared by suspending cells directly in SDS-sample buffer (125 mM Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.01% bromophenol blue and 10% b-mercaptoethanol). Tryptic peptides were obtained by in-gel digestion, as reported by Link and LaBaer  (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20147065/). Peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was loaded into an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and eluted into the analytical column (RSLC PepMap C18, 50 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter and 2 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min, using water + 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5–35% solvent B for 100 min, 35%-45% solvent B for 20 min, 45%-100% solvent B for 5 min and 100% solvent B for 15 min. MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For ionization, 2000 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 300–1800 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 200, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2.0 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. A dynamic exclusion time of 30s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the database of Homo sapiens (human) from Uniprot (UP000005640, 20594 sequences protein entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and acetylation N-terminal as a variable modification. Data on identified and quantified proteins were analyzed with Perseus, according to Tyanova and Cox (https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007/978-1-4939-7493-1_7)

### Publication Abstract
The exact mechanisms involved in flaviviruses virions' release and the specific secretion of viral proteins, such as the Non Structural protein-1 (NS1), are still unclear. While these processes might involve vesicular transport to the cell membrane, NS1 from some flaviviruses was shown to participate in viral assembly and release. Here, we assessed the effect of the Zika virus (ZIKV) NS1 expression on the cellular proteome to identify trafficking-related targets that may be altered in the presence of the viral protein. We detected an increase in the synaptotagmin-9 (SYT9) secretory protein, which participates in the intracellular transport of protein-laden vesicles. We confirmed the effect of NS1 on SYT9 levels by transfection models while also detecting a significant subcellular redistribution of SYT9. We found that ZIKV prM-Env proteins, required for the viral particle release, also increased SYT9 levels and changed its localization. Finally, we demonstrated that ZIKV cellular infection raises SYT9 levels and promotes changes in its subcellular localization, together with a co-distribution with both Env and NS1. Altogether, the data suggest SYT9's implication in the vesicular transport of viral proteins or virions during ZIKV infection, showing for the first time the association of synaptotagmins with the flavivirus' life cycle.

### Keywords
Ns1 protein, Lc-ms/ms, Synaptotagmin-9, Zika virus

### Affiliations
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR-CONICET-UNR)
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario-CONICET. Argentina.

### Submitter
Germán Rosano

### Lab Head
Dr Germán Rosano
Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario-CONICET. Argentina.


