### Accession
PXD006579

### Title
ISDoT: In Situ Decellularization of Tissues for proteomic analysis of native extracellular matrix

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a master regulator of cellular phenotype and behavior. It plays a critical role in both normal tissue homeostasis and disease pathology. We have developed a fast and efficient approach to enhance the study of ECM composition and structure. Termed In Situ Decellularization of Tissues (ISDoT), it allows whole organs to be decellularized leaving native ECM architecture intact. We demonstrate how our approach enriches for ECM components allowing deep quantitative proteomic interrogation of the ECM. Using the ISDoT procedure, native ECM under normal and pathological conditions can be catalogued in unprecedented detail.

### Sample Protocol
Following ISDoT decellularization, organs were thoroughly washed and dissected free of extraneous tissue before being ground in liquid nitrogen to a fine powder using a chilled mortar and pestle. Tissues were then fully solubilized in in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8. Protein yields were assessed using the Bradford assay, and were ready for submission for mass spectrometry analysis. Solubilized proteins were reduced in 5 mM DTT (Sigma) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) before deglycolsylation with PNGase F overnight at 37 °C with shaking (100 U per 10 mg tissue). Deglycosylated samples were then sequentially digested with 2.5 ug LysC (Wako Chemicals) per 100 mg starting tissue and MS-grade trypsin (7.5 ug per 100 mg starting tissue) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid at a final concentration of 2%, after which they were desalted on an in-house packed C18 StageTips as previously described. Briefly, 2 discs of C18 material (3M Empore) were packed into a 200 ul pipette tip and activated with 20 ul of methanol (HPLC grade) and 20 ul of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid (FA). The C18 material was equilibrated with twice with 20 ul of 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 3% acetonitrile. 5 ug of each sample was then loaded onto individual StageTips. After washing with twice with 20ul 0.1% FA, peptides were eluted with twice with 40 ul 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA, and concentrated to 5 ul in an Eppendorf Speedvac. This final concentrate was acidified with 4 ul 1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analysis. Each sample was run unfractionated as a single-shot fraction on a Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer. For each run, 5 ug of peptide was loaded onto a 50 cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES803) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) at a pressure of 720 bar using the Thermo EasyLC 1000 uHPLC system in a single-column setup and the column oven operating at 45°C. Peptides were eluted over a 4 hour gradient ranging from 6 to 60% of a solution containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run using the DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3 x 10^6 or a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a scan range of 300–1750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1 x 10^6 or a maximum injection time of 60 ms, a normalized collision energy of 25% and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s, and ions with a charge state <2 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 software and searched against the mouse protein database UP000000589_10090 [released 25/02/16]). Peptides identified with a false discovery rate < 1.0% were assembled into identified proteins. MS/MS spectra searches allowed for carbamidomethylation of cysteines and possible acetylation of N termini as fixed/mix modifications. Allowed variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine and pyro-glutamic acid modification at N-terminal glutamine and hydroxyproline. To ensure high confidence identifications and quantification, a MaxQuant score of >50 and a minimum of two unique peptides per protein detected by MS were required.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a master regulator of cellular phenotype and behavior. It has a crucial role in both normal tissue homeostasis and disease pathology. Here we present a fast and efficient approach to enhance the study of ECM composition and structure. Termed in situ decellularization of tissues (ISDoT), it allows whole organs to be decellularized, leaving native ECM architecture intact. These three-dimensional decellularized tissues can be studied using high-resolution fluorescence and second harmonic imaging, and can be used for quantitative proteomic interrogation of the ECM. Our method is superior to other methods tested in its ability to preserve the structural integrity of the ECM, facilitate high-resolution imaging and quantitatively detect ECM proteins. In particular, we performed high-resolution sub-micron imaging of matrix topography in normal tissue and over the course of primary tumor development and progression to metastasis in mice, providing the first detailed imaging of the metastatic niche. These data show that cancer-driven ECM remodeling is organ specific, and that it is accompanied by comprehensive changes in ECM composition and topological structure. We also describe differing patterns of basement-membrane organization surrounding different types of blood vessels in healthy and diseased tissues. The ISDoT procedure allows for the study of native ECM structure under normal and pathological conditions in unprecedented detail.

### Keywords
Isdot, Extracellular matrix, Decellularisation, Cancer, Biomedical

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC) University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Thomas Cox

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Erler
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC) University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


