### Accession
PXD035626

### Title
Using global proteomics to investigate the effect of IQDMA treatment on Leukemic forms of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (L-CTCL)  cells

### Description
Leukemic cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (L-CTCL) are lymphoproliferative disorders of skin-homing mature T-cells causing chronic inflammation, tissue destruction, severe infections and sepsis, all linked to poor quality of life and high mortality. Despite numerous sequencing efforts in L-CTCL, recurrent driver mutations have not been identified, but chromosomal losses and gains are frequent and dominant. We integrated genomic landscape analysis with innovative pharmacologic interference studies to identify key vulnerable nodes in L-CTCL. In order to examine IQDMA-specific effects in an unbiased and dose-dependent manner without limiting the analysis to only kinases, we carried out global proteomics profiling in SeAx cells after 24 h treatment with 1, 2.5 and 10 µM IQDMA. The differential proteins affected in response to increasing IQDMA concentrations were found to be related to multiple cellular processes in metabolism, ribosomal RNA processing/modification, protein translation, and surprisingly keratinization.. Dual inhibition of STAT3/5 using small molecule degraders abolished L-CTCL cell growth in vitro. Furthermore, upstream broad range kinase targeting through IQDMA, a newly classified multi-kinase inhibitor, revealed a pharmacologic opportunity to alternatively block the STAT3/5 pathway by inhibiting the PAK2 serine/threonine kinase, which was very effective in patient cells carrying STAT3/5 copy number gains and in vivo in reducing tumor growth and disease dissemination in an intradermal xenograft mouse model. In summary, we conclude that STAT3/5 and PAK2 are new therapy targets to be further explored in L-CTCL.

### Sample Protocol
SeAx cells were treated with DMSO, 1 µM IQDMA, 2.5 µM IQDMA, or 10 µM IQDMA in biological triplicates (DMSO, 1 µM IQDMA, and 2.5 µM IQDMA) or biological duplicates (2.5 µM IQDMA) for 24 h, and cells were harvested by centrifugation. Lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1× cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche), in MilliQ water (MQ)) was added to the cell pellets and samples were homogenized using sonication with a probe sonicator (15×0.5-s pulses) at 4°C. The homogenized sample was clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. A BCA assay (Pierce) was used to determine the final protein concentration in the cell lysate. 200 µg protein for each sample was transferred to new tubes. The proteins were reduced by DTT ( 5 mM DTT, 30 min, 37 °C), then alkylated by iodoacetamide (15 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, room temperature). Thereafter, proteins were precipitated by acetone precipitation. Briefly, four volumes of cold acetone were added to samples, and the tubes were incubated for 90 min at -20 °C. The mixture was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 7 min to precipitate the proteins. The protein pellets were washed twice with 1 mL of acetone, centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 5 min, and the resulting washed pellets were allowed to air dry. The pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea in MQ, followed by a second BCA assay to determine the final protein concentration in the samples. 10 µg protein for each sample was transferred to new tubes.  Urea concentration was diluted to 1 M with the addition of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5 for digestion with trypsin/LysC mixture (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 h at 37 °C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) were added to samples according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 11-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1 h at room temperature and the reaction was quenched by the addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were then combined and dried down in a speed vacuum and were fractionated into 8 fractions using a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting fractions were dried down by speed vacuum, resuspended in 1% formic acid solution, and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Eksigent ekspert™ nanoLC 425 (Sciex) using a SPS-MS3 protocol. Peptides were eluted by a gradient at 200 nl/min from 2.5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid to 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid using a linear gradient of 120 minutes. This was followed by an 8 min gradient from 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid to 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. After, there was an 8 min wash with 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and equilibration for another 23min to 2.5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The MS1 scan was within a mass range of 400–1600Da, using orbitrap resolution of 120000, 30% RF lens, and 2400 volts. This was followed by MS/MS scans with a total cycle time of 2.5 seconds and the first mass of 120m/z. Accumulation time of 40 ms and 32% HCD collision energy was used for each MS/MS scan. Each candidate ion was required to have a charge state from 2-6, fragmented with 35% CID collision energy and an accumulation time of 10ms, using orbitrap resolution of 15000. Previously analyzed candidate ions were dynamically excluded for 15 seconds. Isobaric Tag loss exclusion used was TMT. This was followed by 6 MS3 events. The scan range was from 100-500m/z, using an orbitrap resolution of 50000 and HCD collision energy of 55%. All ions were required to be at 300% AGC target.  PEAKS Scientific XPro (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada) was used for data processing. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProt human database with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 Da. TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), and alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da) were selected as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da) and deamidation (+0.9840) were selected as variable modifications. Only unique peptides with an identification false discovery rate of 2% were selected for TMT reporter ion-based quantification. Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework.

### Publication Abstract
Leukemic cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (L-CTCL) are lymphoproliferative disorders of skin-homing mature T-cells causing severe symptoms and high mortality through chronic inflammation, tissue destruction, and serious infections. Despite numerous genomic sequencing efforts, recurrent driver mutations have not been identified, but chromosomal losses and gains are frequent and dominant. We integrated genomic landscape analyses with innovative pharmacologic interference studies to identify key vulnerable nodes in L-CTCL. We detected copy number gains of loci containing the STAT3/5 oncogenes in 74% (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;17/23) of L-CTCL, which correlated with the increased clonal T-cell count in the blood. Dual inhibition of STAT3/5 using small-molecule degraders and multi-kinase blockers abolished L-CTCL cell growth in&#xa0;vitro and ex&#xa0;vivo, whereby PAK kinase inhibition was specifically selective for L-CTCL patient cells carrying STAT3/5 gains. Importantly, the PAK inhibitor FRAx597 demonstrated encouraging anti-leukemic activity in&#xa0;vivo by inhibiting tumor growth and disease dissemination in intradermally xenografted mice. We conclude that STAT3/5 and PAK kinase interaction represents a new therapeutic node to be further explored in L-CTCL.

### Keywords
Kinase, Cutaneous t-cell lymphomas (l-ctcl), Global proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Physical Sciences, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Canada
Research Associate

### Submitter
Abootaleb Sedighi

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Gunning
Department of Chemical and Physical Sciences, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Canada


