### Accession
PXD010380

### Title
Platelet proteome is affected by cancer presence and therapy

### Description
Platelets play an important role in primary hemostasis, inflammation , (tumor) angiogenesis and cancer metastasis. Platelets are produced by megakaryocytes in the bone marrow and contain numerous bioactive proteins (e.g. growth factors, chemokine’s and proteases). These proteins inside platelets are either synthesized by the parental megakaryocytes or absorbed from the (micro)circulation. Therefore, it was postulated that changes in platelet protein content might indicate the presence or recurrence of a malignant tumor.  We followed up the notion that both cancer and cancer therapy affect the platelet proteome. The aim of the current study was 1) to identify a pan-cancer proteome signature that could be used to discriminate patients with cancer from healthy individuals, and 2) to investigate the effect of cancer therapy on the platelet proteome.  In this study, we included patients with cancer and healthy controls. Using global protein profiling by mass spectrometry-based proteomics we determined that the platelet proteome is affected by both cancer presence and antitumor therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Healthy volunteers and patients: In this study, ten milliliters of blood were used from ten healthy volunteers and nine cancer patients. From three patients a second blood sample was collected after start of antitumor treatment, which consisted of chemotherapy alone or in combination with surgery and/or radiation.   Platelet isolation: A schematic overview of the workflow is shown in Figure 1. Freshly drawn blood was collected by free-flow in 1/10 volume of 130 mM trisodium citrate. Platelet rich plasma (PRP) was prepared by centrifugation (156 x g, 15 min, 20°C). To prevent platelet activation during further centrifugation, the pH of PRP was lowered to 6.5 by addition of 0.1 volume ACD (2.5% trisodium citrate, 1.5% citric acid, 2% D-glucose). A platelet pellet was obtained by centrifugation (330 x g, 15 min, 20°C). The pellet was resuspended in Hepes-Tyrode (HT) buffer (0.145 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM Na2HPO4, 1 mM MgSO4, 10 mM Hepes, 5 mM D-glucose, pH 6.5) in approximately the same volume as the collected PRP. Prostacyclin (PGI2, ordered at Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) was added to a final concentration of 10 ng/mL to prevent aggregation. A platelet pellet was obtained by centrifugation (330 x g, 15 min, 20°C). This washing step was repeated once. Platelets were resuspended in HT buffer pH 7.3 (2x1011 platelets per liter). The tubes were then centrifuged at 330 x g, 15 min, 20°C, in the presence of PGI2. The platelet pellet was resuspended in 100 µl 1x sample buffer (ordered at....), heated for 5 minutes at 99°C and stored at -20°C.  Gel electrophoresis and in-gel digestion: NuPAGE 4–12% precast gradient Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) were used for all samples. Samples were corrected for platelet count before loading onto the gradient gel. If necessary we diluted the sample further in sample buffer and a total of 25µL was loaded onto the gel.  Proteins were separated with electrophoresis at 125V. Gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA), washed in MilliQ water, and stored at 4°C until processed by in-gel digestion. For in-gel digestion, each lane on the gel was cut into ten gel slices. The gel slices were then washed and dehydrated once in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and twice in 50 mM ABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN). Gel slices were incubated in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC at 56°C during one hour to break cysteine bonds. Afterwards, alkylation was performed by incubation in 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC at room temperature for 45 minutes in the dark. Gel slices were subsequently washed with ABC and ABC/50% ACN. Each slice was cut into nine small cubes and washed in ABC/ACN. Cubes were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Incubation overnight was performed with 6.25 ng/mL trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega cat# V5111) covered with ABC to allow digestion at 23°C. Extraction of peptides was performed once in 1% formic acid and twice in 5% formic acid/50% ACN. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the volume was reduced to 50 µL in a vacuum centrifuge.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (2014_01 with fragments removed, 61552 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free quantification Proteins were quantified by spectral counting, i.e. the number of identified MS/MS spectra for a given protein. Raw counts were normalized on the sum of spectral counts for all identified proteins in a particular sample, relative to the average sample sum determined with all samples. To find statistically significant differences in normalized counts between sample groups, we applied the beta-binomial test, which takes into account within-sample and between-sample variation using an alpha level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Platelets are involved in tumor angiogenesis and cancer progression. Previous studies indicated that cancer could affect platelet content. In the current study, we investigated whether cancer-associated proteins can be discerned in the platelets of cancer patients, and whether antitumor treatment may affect the platelet proteome. Platelets were isolated from nine patients with different cancer types and ten healthy volunteers. From three patients, platelets were isolated before and after the start of antitumor treatment. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics of gel-fractionated platelet proteins were used to compare patients versus controls and before and after treatment initiation. A total of 4059 proteins were detected, of which 50 were significantly more abundant in patients, and 36 more in healthy volunteers. Eight of these proteins overlapped with our previous cancer platelet proteomics study. From these data, we selected potential biomarkers of cancer including six upregulated proteins (RNF213, CTSG, PGLYRP1, RPL8, S100A8, S100A9) and two downregulated proteins (GPX1, TNS1). Antitumor treatment resulted in increased levels of 432 proteins and decreased levels of 189 proteins. In conclusion, the platelet proteome may be affected in cancer patients and platelets are a potential source of cancer biomarkers. In addition, we found in a small group of patients that anticancer treatment significantly changes the platelet proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Chemotherapy, Biomarker, Platelets, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


