### Accession
PXD039648

### Title
A positive feedback loop controls Toxoplasma chronic differentiation

### Description
Successful infection strategies must balance pathogen amplification and persistence. In Toxoplasma gondii, this is accomplished through differentiation into dedicated cyst-forming chronic stages that avoid clearance by the host immune system. The transcription factor BFD1 is both necessary and sufficient for stage conversion; however, its regulation is not understood. We examine five factors transcriptionally activated by BFD1. One of these is a cytosolic RNA-binding protein of the CCCH-type zinc finger family, which we name BFD2. Parasites lacking BFD2 fail to induce BFD1 and are consequently unable to fully differentiate in culture or in mice. BFD2 interacts with the BFD1 transcript under stress and deletion of BFD2 reduces BFD1 protein levels, but not mRNA abundance. The reciprocal effects on BFD2 transcription and BFD1 translation outline a positive feedback loop that enforces commitment to differentiation. BFD2 helps explain how parasites commit to the chronic gene-expression program and elucidates how the balance between proliferation and persistence is achieved over the course of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Tachyzoites of the ∆bfd1::BFD1-Ty and ∆bfd2 strains were inoculated onto 15 cm dishes seeded with HFFs and allowed to invade for 4 h before rinsing the monolayer with PBS and returning to standard culture conditions. After an additional 48 h of growth, parasites were mechanically released from monolayers by scraping and passage through a 27-gauge needle then filtered through a 5 μm filter unit, counted, and collected by centrifugation (1,500 x g for 10 min). Parasite pellets were resuspended in 10 uL PBS and lysed with 10 uL of 2X lysis buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM TEAB pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, and 2X HALT protease inhibitor). Lysates were stored at -80°C. Proteins were prepared for mass spectrometry using a modified version of the S-trap protocol (Protifi). Lysates were treated with benzonase at a final concentration of 5 units/uL to remove DNA.  Proteins in lysates were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 10 min at 55°C and alkylated with 15 mM MMTS for 10 min at room temperature. The lysates were acidified to a final concentration of 1.2% v/v phosphoric acid. A 6X volume of S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55) was mixed to each sample to precipitate proteins. The solution was loaded onto S-trap micro columns (Protifi) and spun at 4,000 x g for 1 min until all the solution had passed through the column. The columns were washed four times with 150 µL of S-trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 min between each wash. Proteins were digested on-column with 0.75 µg of trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 overnight at 37°C in a humidified incubator. Digested peptides were eluted in three steps at 4,000 x g for 1 min: 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB, 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid, and 35 µL of 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. The peptide concentrations of eluted peptides were quantified using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The remaining samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 to peptide concentrations of 0.7 µg/µL. TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 90110 LOT# VD294280) were resuspended in acetonitrile to 13.3 ug/uL. 25 µg of peptides in 35 µL were combined with 100 µg of TMT reagent in 15 µL to achieve approximately a 4:1 label:peptide weight/weight ratio (Zecha et al. 2019). The six TMT labels were assigned to minimize reporter ion interference and inter batch variability in the following scheme: WT (∆bfd1::BFD1-Ty) replicate 1, 2, 3 (128C, 129C, 130C); mutant (∆bfd2) replicate 1, 2, 3 (129N, 130N, 131) (Brenes et al. 2019). Samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature shaking at 400 rpm. Unreacted TMT reagent was quenched with hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.2%. The samples were pooled, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and lyophilized. The lyophilized TMT samples were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions for TMT-labeled peptides. The 8 fractions were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 35 µL of 0.1% formic acid and were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Bekker-Jensen et al. 2020) connected to an Vanquish HPLC chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Buffer A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Buffer B. Peptides were loaded onto a heated analytical column (ES902, Thermo, PepMap Neo Trap Cartridge C18 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 25 cm, 40°C) via trap column (174500, Thermo, Acclaim PepMap C18 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm x 5 cm nanoViper). Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min on a gradient of 3-25% B for 90 min, 25-40% B for 30 min, 40-95% B for 10 min, and 95% B for 6 min. The orbitrap and FAIMS were operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 2100V; with an ion transfer tube temperature of 300°C; using a standard FAIMS resolution and compensation voltage of -45, -55 and -65V with 4.2 mL/min carrier gas. DDA analysis was performed with a cycle time of 1 second. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000, with a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, 300% AGC target, maximum injection time set to automatic, intensity threshold of 2 x 104, 2-6 charge state, dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds, and mass tolerance of 10 ppm. MS2 spectra were generated in centroid mode using quadrupole isolation, an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, an CID collision energy of 35 with an activation time of 10 ms, ion trap detection with a turbo scan rate, standard AGC target, and maximum injection time set to automatic. The following filters were applied: precursor selection mass range of 400-1600 m/z, a precursor ion exclusion mass width of 25 ppm, and isobaric tag loss exclusion for TMT. Real-Time Search was performed using the ToxoDB release 49 GT1 protein database. The following modifications were included in the search: static methylthio (+45.9877 Da; C), static TMT6plex (+229.1629; K and any N termini), variable oxidation (+15.9949; M). A maximum of missed cleavages and maximum variable modifications per peptide were both set to 1. TMT SPS MS3 mode was used, enabling close-out, a maximum peptides per protein of 5, and maximum search time of 40 ms. Scoring thresholds were set Xcorr (2), dCn (0.1), precursor ppm (10), and charge state (2). MS3 spectra were generated in centroid mode, with synchronous precursor selection of 10 SPS precursors, with an MS isolation window of 2 m/z, and MS2 isolation window of 2 m/z, no isolation offset, an HCD collision energy of 55, detection with an orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, with a mass range of 100-500 m/z, 200% AGC target, maximum injection time set to automatic, for 10 data dependent scans. Raw files were analyzed in Proteome Discover 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptide IDs using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the ToxoDB release 43 ME49 protein database. The maximum missed cleavalge sites for trypsin was limited to 2. The following modifications were included in the search: dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da; N-terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; any N-terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; K), and static methylthio (+45.988 Da; C). TMTpro 6plex isotope correction values were accounted for (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 90110 LOT# VD294280). Peptides identified in each sample were filtered by Percolator to achieve a maximum FDR of 0.01 (Käll et al. 2007; Käll et al. 2008; Käll et al. 2008). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Reporter ion quantification used an integration tolerance of 20 ppm on the most confident centroid. Scan event filters were set for MS3 using HCD. Unique peptides were quantified using a co-isolation threshold of 50, average reporter signal-to-noise ratio of 10, and an SPS mass match threshold of 65%. Abundances were normalized on the total protein amount. Protein level ratios were generated for mutant parasites relative to WT parasites.

### Publication Abstract
Successful infection strategies must balance pathogen amplification and persistence. In the obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii this is accomplished through differentiation into dedicated cyst-forming chronic stages that avoid clearance by the host immune system. The transcription factor BFD1 is both necessary and sufficient for stage conversion; however, its regulation is not understood. In this study we examine five factors that are transcriptionally activated by BFD1. One of these is a cytosolic RNA-binding protein of the CCCH-type zinc-finger family, which we name bradyzoite formation deficient 2 (BFD2). Parasites lacking BFD2 fail to induce BFD1 and are consequently unable to fully differentiate in culture or in mice. BFD2 interacts with the BFD1 transcript under stress, and deletion of BFD2 reduces BFD1 protein levels but not messenger RNA abundance. The reciprocal effects on BFD2 transcription and BFD1 translation outline a positive feedback loop that enforces the chronic-stage gene-expression programme. Thus, our findings help explain how parasites both initiate and commit to chronic differentiation. This work provides new mechanistic insight into the regulation of T. gondii persistence, and can be exploited in the design of strategies to prevent and treat these key reservoirs of human infection.

### Keywords
T. gondii, Lc-msms, Parasite development, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alex Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research


