### Accession
PXD033235

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of adipose tissue in obese or obese T2D patients(TMT method)

### Description
To find out the regulating pathways of AIP1 in Type 2 Diabetes, we performed a proteomic array of omental adipose tissue between obese T2D and obese patients.

### Sample Protocol
1.Total protein extraction The human omental adipose tissue samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Subsequently, the powder was suspended in lysis buffer [1% sodium deoxycholate (SDS), 8M urea] which included appropriate protease inhibitor to inhibit protease activity. The mixture was allowed to settle at 4 °C for 30 min during which the sample were vortexed at every 5 min, and treated by ultrasound at 40 kHz and 40 W for 2 min. After centrifugation at 16000 g at 4 °C for 30 min, the concentration of protein supernatant was determined by using BCA Protein Assay Kit（(Pierce,Thermo, USA).  2.Protein Digestion and TMT Labeling Protein digestion was performed according to the standard procedure and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 10-plex TMT reagent (Thermo fisher, Art.No.90111) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, total protein (100 μg) taken from each sample was mixed with 100 μl lysate. TCEP (10 mM) was added and then it was stored at 37 °C. Sixty min later, iodoacetamide (40 mM) was added and stored in dark at room temperature for 40 min. Then 6 fold volumes of cold acetone was added to precipitate protein at -20 °C for 4 h. After centrifugation at 10000 g at 4 °C for 20 min, the pellet was re-suspended with 100 µl 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Then trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio and incubated at 37 °C overnight. After that one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 50 µl acetonitrile and incubated for 2 h at room temperature, hydroxylamine was added to react for 15 min at room temperature. In our study, the samples were labeled as TMT10-126(omental adipose tissue from obese patients), and TMT10-131 (omental adipose tissue from obese T2D patients). Finally, all samples were pooled, desalted and vacuum-dried. 3.High pH RPLC Separation The pooled samples were fractionated into fractions by ACQUITY Ultra Performance liquid chromatography (Waters, USA) with ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (1.7 µm, 2.1 mm × 150 mm, Waters, USA) to increase proteomic depth. Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of elution (Phase B: 5mM Ammonium hydroxide solution containing 80% acetonitrile, pH 10) over 48 min at a flowrate of 200 μL/min. Twenty fractions were collected from each sample, which was subsequently pooled, resulting in ten total fractions per sample. 4.LC-MS/MS analysis Labeled peptides were analyzed by online nano flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry performed on an 9RKFSG2_NCS-3500R system (Thermo, USA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, the C18-reversed phase column (75 μm x 25 cm , Thermo ,USA) as equilibrated with solvent A (A:2% formic acid with 0.1% formic acidr) and solvent B (B: 80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid).The peptides were eluted using the following gradient: 0-4 min, 0%-5% B; 4-66 min, 5%−23%B; 66-80 min, 23%−29% B; 80−89 min,29%−38% B; 89-91 min, 38-48% B; 91-92 min, 48-100% B; 92-105min, 100% B; 105-106min, 100-0% B) at a flow rate of 300 μl/min. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The survey of full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1300) was acquired in the Orbitrap with 70000 resolution. The automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3e6 and the maximum fill time was 20 ms. Then the top 20 most intense precursor ions were selected into collision cell for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). The MS/MS resolution was set at 35000 (m/z 100), the automatic gain control (AGC) target at 1x105, the maximum fill time at 50 ms, and dynamic exclusion was 18 seconds.

### Data Protocol
5.Protein identification The RAW data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific, Version2.2) Against Homo_sapiens database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). The MS/MS search criteria was as follows: Mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS and 0.02 Da for MS/MS Tolorance, trypsin as the enzyme allowing 2 missed cleavage, carbamido methylation of cysteine and the TMT of N- terminus and lysine side chains of peptides as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification was set as FDR ≤ 0.01. A minimum of one unique peptide identification was used to support protein identification. 6.Statistical analyses 5705 proteins expressed per group were identified as belonging to the proteome of adipose tissue in this study. The thresholds of fold change (>1.2 or <0.83) were used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs）.  Annotation of all identified proteins was performed using GO (http://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome; http://geneontology.org/) and KEGG pathway (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). DEPs were further used to for GO and KEGG enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.896753.].

### Keywords
Human, Adipose, Obese, T2d, Tmt

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University
Center for Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Zhigao Song

### Lab Head
Dr Zhigao Song
Center for Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, P. R. China.


