### Accession
PXD022218

### Title
Proteomics of aqueous humor for biomarkers discovery in retinoblastoma

### Description
Background: Recent therapeutic advances have greatly improved the eye preservation rate in patients affected by retinoblastoma (RB), however local tumor control remains more difficult in the presence of resistant and/or relapsing retinal or vitreous disease. Thus, the identification of new biomarkers is crucial to design more effective treatment approaches. Recently, technological advances have allowed to safely recover aqueous humor (AH) from patients affected by RB undergoing local treatment. Methods: in order to identify specific proteins associated to active vitreous seeding, we have performed proteomic analysis of AH samples derived from patients affected by RB in different disease stages. Fifty-five AH samples were firstly included in this study. A new widened cohort was then used to validate the proteins identified in the previous discovery set. Results: a total of 808 and 630 proteins were identified in the two analysis, respectively. Five proteins resulted more expressed in the active vitreous seeding group: C19orf57, Girdin, SRFBP, GULP-1 and DCD. These proteins are involved in cytoskeleton regulation, tumor proliferation and growth, invasion and migration of cancer cells. Conclusion: reliable prognostic biomarkers are needed to guide RB management. Proteomic analysis of AH provide a unique opportunity to identify tumor associated biomarkers in patients with RB.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by the in-Stage Tip (1) method slightly modified. Briefly, the pellets were re-suspended in 50 μL of lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP,40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5). In Eppendorf, samples were denatured, reduced, alkylated, and lastly was added 5% ProteaseMAX surfactant (Promega) to enhances protein digestion by providing a denaturing environment before protease addition. The samples were added with 0.3 µg LysC and 0.7 µg Trypsin in 250 µlof a dilution buffer (10% ACN, 25 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5) to dilute the ProteaseMAX to 0.1%. After overnight digestion at 37 °C, the peptides were acidified with 0.1% TFA and loaded into StageTip. 4.3.2. NanoLC setup The sample was loaded from the sample loop directly into the separation column and the peptides were eluted with increasing organic solvent at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The peptide separations were carried out at 60 °C using a 75-μm ID × 50 cm 2 μm, 100 Å C18 column-mounted in the thermostatted column compartment with a non-linear gradient of 5-45 % solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 78 min.  4.3.3. Mass spectrometer setup The tryptic peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instruments, Bremen, Germany). Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at resolving powers of 120 K (at m/z 200). Data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in top speed mode with a 2 sec. cycle-time, during which precursors detected within the range of m/z 375−1500 were selected for activation in order of charge state, using CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) (2). Briefly if the precursor charge state is 2, then follow with CID fragmentation and by scan in the ion trap with an isolation window 1.6 m/z, AGC of 3e4, maximum injection time 250 ms, and normalized collisiongy of 35%. If the precursor charge state is 3-7 and precursor intensity is greater than 500,000, then follow with HCD fragmentation and by scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution 15000, AGC of 1e4, and maximum injection time 40 ms. If the precursor charge state is 3-7 and precursor intensity is below 500,000, then follow with CID fragmentation and scan in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (3) (version 1.6.10 and 1.6.14) MS/MS spectra were searched against the human FASTA file from the UniProt database (version 08/17), a reverse decoy database and common contaminants (a list of 245 entries). The peptide search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the specified protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids, and the “match between runs” feature was enabled. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied at both the protein and PSM identification levels

### Publication Abstract
Aqueous humor (AH) can be easily and safely used to evaluate disease-specific biomarkers in ocular disease. The aim of this study was to identify specific proteins biomarkers in the AH of retinoblastoma (RB) patients at various stages of the disease. We analyzed the proteome of 53 AH samples using high-resolution mass spectrometry. We grouped the samples according to active vitreous seeding (Group 1), active aqueous seeding (Group 2), naive RB (group 3), inactive RB (group 4), and congenital cataracts as the control (Group 5). We found a total of 889 proteins in all samples. Comparative parametric analyses among the different groups revealed three additional proteins expressed in the RB groups that were not expressed in the control group. These were histone H2B type 2-E (HISTH2B2E), InaD-like protein (PATJ), and ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 V1 (UBE2V1). Upon processing the data of our study with the OpenTarget Tool software, we found that glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and CD44 were more highly expressed in the RB groups. Our results provide a proteome database regarding AH related to RB disease that may be used as a source of biomarkers. Further prospective studies should validate our finding in a large cohort of RB patients.

### Keywords
Humor aqueous, Biomarkers, Proteomic analysis, Retinoblastoma

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


