### Accession
PXD006421

### Title
Shotgun mass-spectrometry of HL-60 cell proteins for spectrum library development

### Description
ATRA-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells was studied using targeted mass-spectrometry including selected reaction monitoring (SRM) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) approach. PRM experiment was performed in time-course manner, without peptide standards usage. PRM data was inspected in Skyline 3.1 software. In order to check peptide identity we developed spectrum library based on shotgun mass-spectrometry data, which has been obtained for HL-60 cells protein samples at 0, 3, 24, 48 and 96h after ATRA treatment.

### Sample Protocol
HL-60 cells were induced to differentiation by ATRA treatment. The promyelocytic cell maturation into neutrophils was assessed by CD11b marker expression using flow cytometry. Cell samples were collected at 0, 3, 24, 48, and 96h after ATRA treatment followed by protein extraction with lysis buffer containing 4% SDS in 100mM Tris-HCl pH=7.4. Total protein concentration was measured by BCA assay and 100 µg of each sample was subjected to tryptic digestion according FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al., Nat Methods 2009; 6: 359–62). Peptide samples at each time point were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Velos mass-spectrometer in 5 technical replicates with following settings: peptides separation was carried out on a RP-HPLC Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (C18 3.5 µm, 75 µm inner diameter and 150 mm length) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and 5 % solvent B (water, 0.1% formic acid, and 80% acetonitrile (ACN)) to 40% solvent A and 60% solvent B over 200 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode using Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30000 (m/z 400) for MS and 7,500 (m/z 400) for MS/MS scans. Survey MS scan was followed by MS/MS spectra of the 10 most abundant precursors. For peptide fragmentation higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used, the signal threshold was set to 3000 for an isolation window of 2 m/z. The collision energy was set to 35 eV. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from targeting for 60 s. Singly charged ions and ion with not defined charge state were excluded from triggering the MS/MS scans. AGC target was set to 10^6 and 10^5 with injection time 500ms and 100 ms for MS and MS\MS scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against neXtProt (2017-01-23). Search parameters were set to a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, while two missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further processed using the machine learning algorithm Percolator. The false discovery rate was less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted mass spectrometry represents a powerful tool for investigation of biological processes. The convenient approach of selected reaction monitoring using stable isotope-labeled peptide standard (SIS) is widely applied for protein quantification. Along with this method, high-resolution parallel reaction monitoring has been increasingly used for protein targeted analysis. Here we applied two targeted approaches (selected reaction monitoring with SIS and label-free parallel reaction monitoring) to investigate expression of 11 proteins during all-trans retinoic acid-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells. In our experiments, we have determined the proteins expression ratio at 3, 24, 48, and 96&#x2009;h after all-trans retinoic acid treatment in comparison with 0&#x2009;h, respectively. Expression profiles of four proteins (VAV1, PRAM1, LYN, and CEBPB) were highly correlated ( r&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.75) and FGR expression was detected on proteome level starting from 24&#x2009;h by both techniques. For prominent differences (fold change&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;2) label-free parallel reaction monitoring is not inferior to selected reaction monitoring with isotopically labeled peptide standards. Differentially expressed proteins, that have been determined in our study, can be considered as potential drug targets for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) treatment.

### Keywords
Hl-60 cell line, Orbitrap velos, Differentiation, Atra

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Bhemistry (IBMC), Moscow
Laboratory of systems biology, IBMC, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Svetlana Novikova

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Zgoda
Laboratory of systems biology, IBMC, Moscow, Russia


