### Accession
PXD043864

### Title
Mode of action of glabridin against Listeria monocytogenes

### Description
This study explored the mode of action of glabridin, a prenylated isoflavan with antimicrobial activity, against L. monocytogenes, an important food-borne pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
L. monocytogenes EGD-e was grown at 30°C in Tryptone Soya Broth. After 6 hours of growth (OD600 = 0.3), glabridin dissolved in DMSO was added at a concentration of 6.25 µg/mL. Before and after 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour and 2 hours of glabridin treatment, 4 mL of samples were pelleted at 13,800 x g for 1 minute and washed twice with 100 mM Tris buffer (pH 8). Cells were lysed by sonication, and 100 µg of protein was reduced with 15 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 20 mM acrylamide, and digested with trypsin overnight. The resulting peptides were measured by injecting 5 µL into a nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) system (Thermo nLC1000 instrument connected to a Thermo Exploris 480 via a Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) setup.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (2.0.3.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Glabridin is a prenylated isoflavan which can be extracted from liquorice roots and has shown antimicrobial activity against foodborne pathogens and spoilage microorganisms. However, its application may be hindered due to limited information about its mode of action. In this study, we aimed to investigate the mode of action of glabridin using a combined phenotypic and proteomic approach on Listeria monocytogenes. Fluorescence and transmission electron microscopy of cells exposed to glabridin showed membrane permeabilization upon treatment with lethal concentrations of glabridin. Comparative proteomics analysis of control cells and cells exposed to sub-lethal concentrations of glabridin showed upregulation of proteins related to the two-component systems LiaSR and VirRS, confirming cell envelope damage during glabridin treatment. Additional upregulation of SigmaB regulon members signified activation of the general stress response in L. monocytogenes during this treatment. In line with the observed upregulation of cell envelope and general stress response proteins, sub-lethal treatment of glabridin induced (cross)protection against lethal heat and low pH stress and against antimicrobials such as nisin and glabridin itself. Overall, this study sheds light on the mode of action of glabridin and activation of the main stress responses to this antimicrobial isoflavan and highlights possible implications of its use as a naturally derived antimicrobial compound.

### Keywords
Natural antimicrobials, Two-component system, Prenylated isoflavonoids, Cell envelope, Cross-protection, Sigmab regulon

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


