### Accession
PXD016016

### Title
Structural insights into a HECT-type E3 ligase AREL1

### Description
Structural insights into a HECT-type E3 ligase AREL1 and its ubiquitination activities in vitro

### Sample Protocol
The ubiquitination reaction mixtures were resolved on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with coomassie blue stain. The bands corresponding to ubiquitinated species were excised from the gels and subjected to exhaustive trypsin digestion. Eksigent nanolC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) system was used in Trap Elute configuration to separate peptides. The desalting of samples was performed with Sep-Pak tC 18 μ Elution Plate (Waters, Miltford, MA, USA) and subsequently reconstituted with 20 μl of diluent (98% Water, 2% Acetonitrile, 0.05% Formic acid). The samples (2 μl) were loaded on a 200 μm x 0.5mm trap column followed by elution on an analytical 75 μm × 150mm column. Peptides were separated by a gradient formed by 2% ACN, 0.1% FA (mobile phase A) and 98% ACN, 0.1% FA (mobile phase B): 5 to 7% of mobile phase B in 0.1min, 7 to 30% of mobile phase B in 10min, 30 to 60% of mobile phase B in 4min, 90 to 90% of mobile phase B in 5min, 90 to 5% of mobile phase B in 0.1min and 5 to 5% of mobile phase B in 10min, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) was used to perform MS analysis in an information dependent mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400–1800 m/z in high-resolution mode (>30000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 20 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 15 s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution > 15000) with rolling collision energy on.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed on the ProteinPilot 4.5 software Revision 1656 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (4.5.0.0.) and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function. The data were searched against a database consisting 2018_Juneuniprot_sprot (total 40698 entries). The processing was specified as follows: ID Focus— Biological Modifications; Search Effort — Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold — 0.05 (10.0%). For FDR determination, data were searched against a concatenated database with insilico on-the-fly reversal for decoy sequences automatically by the software. Peptides identified with confidence interval ≥ 95% were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The HECT E3 ligase family comprises three subfamilies: NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (NEDD4), HECT and RLD domain-containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (HERC), and "other." Most previous studies have focused on the NEDD4 subfamily. Apoptosis-resistant E3 ligase 1 (AREL1) belongs to "other" subfamily HECT that inhibits apoptosis by ubiquitinating and degrading proapoptotic proteins. Here, we report the crystal structure of the extended HECT domain of AREL1 (amino acids (aa) 436-823) at 2.4 &#xc5; resolution and its ubiquitination of the proapoptotic protein second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (SMAC). We found that the extended HECT domain adopts an inverted, T-shaped, bilobed conformation and harbors an additional loop (aa 567-573) absent in all other HECT members. We also show that the N-terminal extended region (aa 436-482) preceding the HECT domain is indispensable for its stability and activity and that without this region, the HECT domain becomes inactive. AREL1 ubiquitinated SMAC, primarily on Lys<sup>62</sup> and Lys<sup>191</sup> We solved the crystal structure of the tetrameric form of SMAC to 2.8 &#xc5; resolution, revealing the Lys<sup>62</sup> and Lys<sup>191</sup> locations. The AREL1 HECT domain assembled Lys<sup>33</sup>-, Lys<sup>48</sup>-, and Lys<sup>63</sup>-linked polyubiquitin chains. Moreover, E701A substitution in the AREL1 HECT domain substantially increased its autopolyubiquitination and SMAC ubiquitination activity, whereas deletion of the last three amino acids at the C terminus completely abrogated AREL1 autoubiquitination and reduced SMAC ubiquitination. Finally, an AREL1-specific ubiquitin variant inhibited SMAC ubiquitination <i>in vitro</i> Our findings may assist in the development of AREL1 inhibitors that block its anti-apoptotic activity in cancer.

### Keywords
Hect domain, Posttranslational modification, Ubiquitination, Protein degradation, Apoptosis-resistant e3 ligase 1 (arel1), Autopolyubiquitination, Second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (smac), Structural biology, Cancer, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Professor, Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Sunil Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. J. Sivaraman
Professor, Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore


