### Accession
PXD010020

### Title
Associating H2O2 and NO related changes in the proteome of Mycobacterium smegmatis with enhanced survival in macrophages

### Description
In this study, we used mass spectrometry-based discovery proteomic analysis to examine the cell-wide changes of   Mycobacterium smegmatis, in response to sub-lethal concentrations of H2O2 and nitric oxide (NO) over time. Preliminary results have shown that sub-lethal concentrations of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species may act as signalling molecules by playing a role in the overall protein abundance that may be conducive to survival in vivo. The presented study showed that both treatments induced: the DosR regulon, alterations in protein expression and lipid metabolism. In addition to the proteomic changes observed, we have also observed increased survival after macrophage infection of Mycobacterium smegmatis pre-exposed to sub-lethal doses of H2O2 or DETA-NO. ¬ In total, 27 samples yielded approximately 3300 M. smegmatis protein group identifications. More in-depth analysis of this new dataset will provide a better understanding as to the inner workings of mycobacteria under oxidative and nitrosative stress and potential mechanisms by which exposure to sub-lethal concentrations of stressors results in an increased resistance to stress.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction M. smegmatis cultures were grown to mid-log phase and then treated with either H2O2 or DETA-NO to a concentration of 10mM and 50nM, respectively. Water was used as the vehicle control for the untreated condition. Bacteria were harvested at 30 minutes, 75 minutes and 150 minutes. Bacteria were lysed in; 1% m/v SDS, 1.5% m/v Sodium Deoxycholate, 1x protease inhibitor and 7.5ul lysozyme in 0.5M Tris-HCL at pH = 7. Samples were transferred to glass vials and sonicated on ice for eight 30 second intervals, using a probe sonicator. The resulting lysate was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 5 minutes, to sediment cell debris. The supernatant was passed through 20µm filter.  Protein was precipitated from the supernatant by chloroform/methanol precipitation and the protein pellet was resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris at pH 8. Protein was quantified using the modified Bradford assay. Proteins were digested to yield tryptic peptides. Briefly, 50µg of protein was digested at a ratio of trypsin (promega) to protein of 1:50 w/w at room temperature for 16 hours. Peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction.   LC/MS/MS Analysis Desalted peptide samples were separately injected for analysis into a Dionex UltiMate 3500 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Each sample was loaded onto a 2 cm trap (packed in-house, 5 μm beads, 100Å pores, Luna beads by phenomenex) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and subsequently run on a 20 cm C18 reversed phase analytical column (packed in-house, 5 μM beads, 100Å pores, Luna beads by phenomenex) at 40°C.  The amount of peptides loaded in each LC/MS run was ~ 600 ng. Elution from the column occurred over a 190 minute segmented gradient consisting of an increasing ratio of 2% ACN acidified with 0.1% FA (buffer B), to H2O acidified with 0.1% FA (buffer A): 1% B from 0-10 minutes, increasing up to 6% at 12 minutes, to 35% at 130 minutes, and to 80% at 135 minutes and continuing at 80% until 150 minutes, before decreasing from 80% to 2% at 152 minutes. Each run had an in-built wash at the end, increasing to 50% B at 167 minutes and continuing at this concentration until 169 minutes, at which time the gradient decreased to 2% and continued at 2% for the final 20 minutes. Before entering the mass analyzer, eluents were subjected to electrospray ionization (ESI). A known reference sample (tryptic digest of S5SHY neuroblastoma cells) analyzed at regular intervals provided a quality control benchmark. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 with a target value of 3 × 106 or a maximum integration time of 250 ms. The scan range at the MS level was limited from 300 to 1750 m/z and high energy collision dissociation (HCD) used for peptide fragmentation, with energy set at NCE 28. Multiple charge exclusion was used (unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8). MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17 500 with a target value of 5× 106 or a maximum integration time of 80 ms. The scan range at the MS/MS level was limited from 200 to 2000 m/z. The fixed first m/z was 200 to 2000 m/z and the isolation window was 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data was processed using MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.7.4) for protein and peptide identification and quantification and Trypsin/P were selected as proteases with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. Quantitation by MaxLFQ algorithm was selected with a minimum ratio count of 2 peptides. Protein ratios were calculated from unique and razor peptides. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation selected as a fixed modification.  The Andromeda search engine was used for identification of proteins and protein groups from the UniProt M. smegmatis reference proteome (FASTA, downloaded 02/05/2017). Mass tolerance for precursor ions in the initial search was set at 20-ppm and in the main search at 4.5-ppm tolerance. The default protein-level false discovery rate (FDR) setting of 1% was retained. Only proteins with a minimum of 1 unique peptide were accepted. The minimum length of acceptable identified peptides was set to 7 amino acids. The option to match retention times between runs was selected, to maximize identifications. MS/MS spectra were matched against a decoy database and reverse hits (i.e. spectral mapping to the decoy databases) and probable contaminants filtered from the protein list prior to statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium manages to evade the host cell immune system, partially owing to its ability to survive redox stress after macrophage engulfment. Exposure to redox stress has been linked to later replication, persistence, and latent infection. In this work, mass spectrometry was used to elucidate the cell-wide changes that occur in response to sublethal doses of hydrogen peroxide and nitric oxide over time, with Mycobacterium smegmatis being used as a model organism. A total of 3135 proteins were confidently assigned, of which 1713, 1674, and 1713 were identified under NO, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and control conditions, respectively. Both treatment conditions resulted in changes of protein expression from the DosR regulon as well as those related to lipid metabolism. Complementary to the changes in the proteome, sublethal exposure to NO and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> improved the survival of the bacteria after macrophage infection. Our data indicate that pre-exposure to sublethal doses of these redox stressors causes an alteration in the expression of proteins related to lipid metabolism, suggesting a link between altered lipid metabolism and enhanced survival in macrophages.

### Keywords
No, Sub-lethal concentrations, Mycobacterium, Ros, Proteomics, Signalling, H2o2

### Affiliations
University of Cape Town
Integrative biomedical sciences, Health Sciences Campus, University of Cape Town, South Africa

### Submitter
Bridget Calder

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Blackburn
Integrative biomedical sciences, Health Sciences Campus, University of Cape Town, South Africa


