### Accession
PXD037337

### Title
Proteomics explored the feasibility of curcumin as anticancer copper ionophore

### Description
As an essential micronutrient element in organisms, copper controls a host of fundamental cellular functions. Recently, copper-dependent cell growth and proliferation have been defined as "cuproplasia". Conversely, “cuproptosis” represents copper-dependent cell death, a nonapoptotic manner. So far, a series of copper ionophores have been developed to kill cancer cells. However, the biological response mechanism of copper uptake still lacks systematic analysis. Based on quantitative proteomics, we explored the feasibility of curcumin as anticancer copper ionophore. The copper ionophore curcumin can control the metabolisms of lipids, RNA, NADH and NADPH in colorectal cancer cells, and also up-regulates positive cuproptosis mediators. This work discolored the suppression and acceleration of cuproptosis by GSH and curcumin, respectively. Our results are significative for understanding cuproptosis process and developing novel anticancer reagents based on cuproptosis.

### Sample Protocol
After incubating Caco-2 cells with curcumin for, the cells were harvested for the further proteomic tests. The pooled peptide used for basic pH fraction was produced by mix 50 μg of six biological samples. Fraction was carried out as previously described.Brifly, the result 300 μg pooled sample was injected to an offline Agilent 1200 station equipped with an reverse C18 column(XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column, Waters), and separated according to the following gradient: 0-7 min, 0% B; 7-13 min, 0-16% B; 13-73 min, 16-40% B; 73-77 min, 40-44% B, 77-82 min, 44-60% B; 82-96 min, 60% B .The mobile phase A was 4.5 mM ammonium formate in 2% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O (pH 10), and phase B was 4.5 mM ammonium formate in 90% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O (pH 10). The fractions were collected chronologically into twelve tubes from 3 to 96 min, lyophilized and re-dissolved with H2O containing 0.1% FA for mass spectrometric analysis. The iRT kit (Biognosys) was added to all of the samples according to manufacture’s instructions. The DDA acquisition was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 system equipped with an AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 µm, 3 µm) and an AcclaimTM PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytic column (150 mm × 75 µm, 2 µm). The elution gradient was set as follows: 0-10 min, 1-5% B; 10-70 min, 5-20% B; 70-90 min, 20-35% B; 90-97min, 35-95% B; 97-101 min, 95% B; 101-103min, 95-50% B; 103-107min, 50% B; 107-110min, 50-2% B [A: 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (vol/vol)].  The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode. The MS1 had a resolution of 120 000 and a scan range between 350-1800 m/z, the maximum ion injection time was 110 ms with an AGC target of 2e5. The MS/MS had a resolution of 30 000 and a maximum ion injection time of 54 ms with an AGC target of 5e4. The isolation width was 1.3 m/z, and the stepped HCD energy was 25% ± 5%. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. The DIA acquisition was performed with a variable Q1 isolation window by equalized precursor ion population (PIP) as previously described. In brief, the m/z range of spectral library was obtained by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and divided into 40 variable isolation windows with 1 m/z overlap. For DIA runs, each cycle was built up as follows: one full MS scan at resolution 120 000(scan range between 350-1200), followed by 40 variable isolation width covering m/z 350-1200. The AGC target, LC separating gradient, and HCD energy was consistent with DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
The DIA data were processed by FragPipe (v18.0) configured with DIA-NN (v1.8.1) in the DIA_SpecLib _Quant mode as previously descriped. In brief, the raw data of DDA was searched using MSFragger engine. Protein sequence databases H. sapiens from UniProt and common contaminant proteins were used. Reversed protein sequences were appended to the original databases as decoys. The setting parameters of MSFragger, Validation and DIA-NN were keep default. The report was filtered at 0.01 precursor-level q-value and 0.01 precursor-level q-value. The file diann-output.pg_matrix was used for subsequent quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
As an essential micronutrient element in organisms, copper controls a host of fundamental cellular functions. Recently, copper-dependent cell growth and proliferation have been defined as "cuproplasia". Conversely, "cuproptosis" represents copper-dependent cell death, in a nonapoptotic manner. So far, a series of copper ionophores have been developed to kill cancer cells. However, the biological response mechanism of copper uptake has not been systematically analyzed. Based on quantitative proteomics, we revealed the crosstalk between copper stress and cuproptosis in cancer cells, and also explored the feasibility of curcumin as anticancer copper ionophore. Copper stress not only couples with cuproptosis, but also leads to reactive oxygen species (ROS) stress, oxidative damage and cell cycle arrest. In cancer cells, a feedback cytoprotection mechanism involving cuproptosis mediators was discovered. During copper treatment, the activation of glutamine transporters and the loss of Fe-S cluster proteins are the facilitators and results of cuproptosis, respectively. Through copper depletion, glutathione (GSH) blocks the cuproptosis process, rescues the activation of glutamine transporters, and prevents the loss of Fe-S cluster proteins, except for protecting cancer cells from apoptosis, protein degradation and oxidative damage. In addition, the copper ionophore curcumin can control the metabolisms of lipids, RNA, NADH and NADPH in colorectal cancer cells, and also up-regulates positive cuproptosis mediators. This work not only established the crosstalk between copper stress and cuproptosis, but also discolored the suppression and acceleration of cuproptosis by GSH and curcumin, respectively. Our results are significant for understanding cuproptosis process and developing novel anticancer reagents based on cuproptosis.

### Keywords
Curcumin

### Affiliations
Hubei University
College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, Hubei, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Xiang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang Li
College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan, 430062, Hubei, P. R. China.


