### Accession
PXD016605

### Title
Immediate adaption – Quantitative Proteomics of BCL6 silencing and EGFR TK inhibition

### Description
We aimed to identify the response mechanism to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibition. A431 cells were transfected with mock siRNA or BCL6 siRNA. Cells were then treated with gefitinib. Harvesting was done at 0h, at 24h and at 48h. Two TMT10plex sets were organized as follows: TMT set1: mock 0h (3x, channels 126, 127N and 127C), mock 24h (3x, 128N, 128C and 129N), mock 48h (3x, 129C, 130N, 130C) and internal pooled standard (131) composed from equal aliquots of all samples (mock siRNA and BCL6 siRNA). TMT set2: siBCL6 0h (3x, channels 126, 127N and 127C), siBCL6 24h (3x, 128N, 128C and 129N), siBCL6 48h (3x, 129C, 130N, 130C) and the same internal pooled standard (131) as for set 1.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed by addition of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT) and followed by heating to 95°C for 5 minutes and sonicating for 1 minute. After centrifuging at 14000 g (11000 rpm) for 15 minutes Supernatants were collected to new vials and protein concentration was measured by Bio-Rad DCC protein assay.  For each sample, 200 g protein lysate was diluted with fresh lysis buffer to reach 200 l of sample volume and protein concentration of 1 g/l. Protein cleanup was performed following a slightly modified standard SP3 protocol and followed by lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako, 129-02541, enzyme:protein = 1:50, diluted in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 4M Urea, diluted in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.6) digestion for 4 hours and trypsin (enzyme:protein = 1:50, Thermo Fisher Scientific) digestion for 14 hours, both in 37°C. Digested peptides solution was collected to new vials, peptide concentration was determined with Bio-Rad DCC assay. 100 g of peptides from each sample was labeled with TMT-10plex (Thermo Scientific, 90110) isobaric label reagent following the manufacturer’s instruction. Labeled samples were pooled, cleaned by strata-X-C-cartridges (Phenomenex) and dried with speed-vac. 400 g of the TMT labeled peptides were separated by immobilized pH gradient – isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3-10 strips using HiRIEF method. Peptides were extracted from the strips by a prototype liquid handling robot, supplied by GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB.  A plastic device with 72 wells was put onto each strip and 50 l of MQ was added to each well. After 30 minutes incubation, the liquid was transferred to a 96 well plate and the extraction was repeated 2 more times. The extracted peptides were dried in speed-vac for storage and dissolved in 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid before MS analysis. For each LC-MS run of a HiRIEF fraction, the auto sampler (Ultimate 3000 RSLC system, Thermo Scientific Dionex) dispensed 20µl of mobile phase A (95% water, 5% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% formic acid) into the corresponding well of the microtiter plate, mixed by aspirating/dispensing 10µl ten times, and finally injected 10µl into a C18 trap desalting column (Acclaim pepmap, C18, 3 m bead size, 100Å, 75 m x 20 mm, nanoViper, Thermo). After 5min of flow at 5µl/min with the loading pump, the 10-port valve switched to analysis mode in which the NC pump provided a flow of 250nL/min through the trap column. The curved gradient (curve 6 in the Chromeleon software) then proceeded from 3% mobile phase B (90% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 5% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 45% B in 50-110min (depending on IPG-IEF fraction complexity) followed by wash at 99%B and re-equilibration. Total LC-MS run time is 24min longer than the gradient time. We used a nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm x 50cm, Thermo) on the nano electrospray ionization (NSI) EASY-Spray source (Thermo) at 60ºC. Online LC-MS was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window and an isolation offset of 0.5m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30s duration. Precursors with charge states 2-7 were included. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. For all subsequent steps we used the ddamsproteomics pipeline (v1.1) in nextflow (v.19.04.0). Spectra were searched using MSGF+( v2017.07.21) and Percolator (v3.01), where search results from all fractions were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 92 using target/decoy concatenation. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully tryptic peptides, isotope error -1, 2, peptide length 7-50 amino acids and precursor charge states 2-6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS (v2.4.0) project’s IsobaricAnalyzer. FDR (false discovery rate) was estimated by target/decoy competition. PSMs and peptides found at 1% FDR were used to infer gene identities. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR. Hardklor (v2.3.0) was used for peptide feature identification and isotope deconvolution. Peptide areas were then estimated by Kronik (v2.20) and integrated to the data tables using msstitch (v2.15). Protein areas are calculated by averaging the areas of the Top 3 peptides mapping to the protein.

### Publication Abstract
Drug resistance is a major obstacle to curative cancer therapies, and increased understanding of the molecular events contributing to resistance would enable better prediction of therapy response, as well as contribute to new targets for combination therapy. Here we have analyzed the early molecular response to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition using RNA sequencing data covering 13,486 genes and mass spectrometry data covering 10,138 proteins. This analysis revealed a massive response to EGFR inhibition already within the first 24 h, including significant regulation of hundreds of genes known to control downstream signaling, such as transcription factors, kinases, phosphatases and ubiquitin E3-ligases. Importantly, this response included upregulation of key genes in multiple oncogenic signaling pathways that promote proliferation and survival, such as ERBB3, FGFR2, JAK3, and BCL6, indicating an early adaptive response to EGFR inhibition. Using a library of more than 500 approved and experimental compounds in a combination therapy screen, we could show that several kinase inhibitors with targets including JAK3 and FGFR2 increased the response to EGFR inhibitors. Further, we investigated the functional impact of BCL6 upregulation in response to EGFR inhibition using siRNA-based silencing of BCL6. Proteomics profiling revealed that BCL6 inhibited transcription of multiple target genes including p53, resulting in reduced apoptosis which implicates BCL6 upregulation as a new EGFR inhibitor treatment escape mechanism. Finally, we demonstrate that combined treatment targeting both EGFR and BCL6 act synergistically in killing lung cancer cells. In conclusion, or data indicates that multiple different adaptive mechanisms may act in concert to blunt the cellular impact of EGFR inhibition, and we suggest BCL6 as a potential target for EGFR inhibitor-based combination therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Time course, A431 cells, Bcl6 sirna, Tmt proteomics, Gefitinib, Egfr inhibition

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


