### Accession
PXD000697

### Title
Alterations in the Interactome of Serine/Threonine Protein Phosphatase Type-1 in Atrial Fibrillation Patients

### Description
Objectives: To test the hypothesis that serine/threonine protein phosphatase type-1 (PP1) is dysregulated in paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (pAF) at the level of its regulatory subunits (R-subunits). Background: AF is the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia yet current pharmacologic treatment is ineffective. PP1, a major phosphatase in the heart, consists of a catalytic subunit (PP1c) and a large set of R-subunits that confer localization and substrate specificity to the holoenzyme. Previous studies suggest that PP1 is dysregulated in AF but the mechanisms are unknown.  Methods: Cardiac lysates were co-immunoprecipitated with anti-PP1c antibody followed by mass spectrometry-based (quantitative) profiling of associated R-subunits. Subsequently, label-free quantification was used to evaluate altered R-subunit-PP1c interactions in pAF patients. R-subunits with altered binding to PP1c in pAF were further validated using qRT-PCR, Western blotting (WB), immunocytochemistry, and co-immunoprecipitation.  Results: 135 and 78 putative PP1c-interactors were captured respectively from mouse ventricles and human atria, with many previously unreported interactors with conserved PP1c-docking motifs. Increases in binding were found between PP1c and PPP1R7, CSDA, and PDE5A in pAF patients, with CSDA and PDE5A being novel interactors validated by bioinformatics, immunocytochemistry and co-immunoprecipitation. WB confirmed that these upregulated associations cannot be ascribed to changes in global protein expression alone.  Conclusion: Subcellular heterogeneity in PP1 activity and downstream protein phosphorylation in AF may be attributed to alterations in PP1c-R-subunits interactions, which impair PP1 targeting to proteins involved in electrical and Ca2+-remodeling. This represents a novel concept in AF pathogenesis and provides highly-specific drug targets for treating AF.

### Sample Protocol
Human samples: Right atrial appendages were dissected from patients and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, with the patients’ written informed consent. Experimental protocols were approved by the ethics committee of the Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg (No. 2011–216N-MA).  Tissue lysate preparation: Frozen whole mouse ventricles or human atrial tissues were pulverized in liquid nitrogen using a customized set of stainless steel mortar and pestle. To lyse the pulverized tissues, lysis buffer made from phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 0.1% Tween 20 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) was added. After vortexing, these samples were rotated for 45 minutes at 4 °C before being centrifuged at 16,000 RPM at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected and used for co-immunoprecipitation.  Co-immunoprecipitation, gel electrophoresis and protein digestion: The tissue lysates were incubated with Protein G Plus Agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) on a rotator for 2 hours at 4 °C for pre-clear. After removing the beads with centrifugation, the supernatant was incubated with either anti-PP1 or IgG isotype control antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX; sc-6104 and sc-2028, respectively) overnight at 4 °C. The next morning the samples were incubated with Protein G Plus Agarose beads on a rotator for 1 hour at 4 °C. The beads were washed 3 times with 0.5% Tween 20 (Bio-Rad) in PBS supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail Complete mini (Roche Applied Science). After incubation in Laemmli sample buffer supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol at 70 °C for 10 minutes, the samples were ran on a short gradient SDS-PAGE gel for 15-30 minutes at 40-80 V. The gels were washed with Milli-Q (MQ) water for 10 minutes, fixed with 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid for 30 minutes, stained with bio-safe Coomassie dye (Bio-Rad) for 1 hour, and destained with MQ water for 1 hour or overnight. Each sample lane on the gels was then cut into three equally spaced pieces. Gel pieces were subsequently washed with MQ and acetonitrile (ACN). Pieces were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 1 hour and then alkylated with iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. Then, proteins were in-gel digested overnight with trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Supernatant of the digest was collected and pieces were further washed 2-3 times in ACN for further peptide extraction. Samples were dried in vacuo and stored at -80 °C until further use. For analysis, the peptides were reconstituted in 10% formic acid.  Nano LC-MS/MS analysis: Nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed in technical duplicate on a reversed-phase easy nano-LC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation or a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a decision-tree based method employing collision induced dissociation (CID) or electron transfer dissociation (ETD). Briefly, peptides were loaded on a double-fritted trap column (100 µm inner diameter x 2 cm, packed with 5 μm C18 resin, ReproSil-Pur AQ; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min in 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). Peptides were transferred to an analytical column (50 µm inner diameter x 50 cm, packed with 2.7 µm C18 particles, Poroshell 120 EC-C18; Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) and separated using a 120 minutes gradient from 7 to 30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 100 nl/min. Q-exactive survey scans were acquired at 35,000 resolution to a scan range from 350 to 1500 m/z. The ten most intense precursors were submitted to HCD fragmentation using an MS/MS resolution set to 17,500, a precursor automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 5 × 10^4, a precursor isolation width set to 1.5 Da, and a maximum injection time set to 120 ms.  For LTQ Orbitrap Elite analysis, survey scans were acquired after accumulation to a target value of 500,000 in the linear ion trap from m/z 350 to m/z 1500 in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. After the survey scans, the 20 most intense precursors were subjected to CID or ETD with ion trap detection. A programmed data-dependent decision tree determined the choice of the most appropriate technique for a selected precursor. In essence, doubly charged peptides were subjected to CID fragmentation, and more highly charged peptides were fragmented using ETD. The normalized collision energy for CID was set to 35%. Supplemental activation was enabled for ETD. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list = 500, exclusion duration = 40 s).

### Data Protocol
The RAW output files were loaded into MaxQuant Version 1.3.0.51 and searched with either the mouse or human FASTA file from UniProt (Date Modified 7/24/2013) with the following default parameters: Methionine oxidation and N-term protein acetylation set as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification, Max charge peptide = 6, minimum peptide length = 7, FT MS/MS tolerance = 0.05 Da, IT MS/MS tolerance= 0.6 Da, peptide and protein identification set to 1% FDR. For label-free quantification (LFQ), match between runs was selected with a maximum shift time window of 4 minutes. Proteins that were only identified by site, reverse hits, or contaminants were filtered out from the resultant protein list generated by MaxQuant. Furthermore, proteins identified with only 1 unique peptide were also filtered out as well as all immunoglobulin proteins. The LFQ signals from the technical duplicates were averaged and ratios calculated from the averages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Q-exactive, Mouse, Ltq-orbitrap elite, Paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, Protein phosphatase 1, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8 3584 CH Utrecht The Netherlands, Janssen Infectious Diseases and Vaccines, Crucell Holland B.V., Leiden, the Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Nicolas Lebesgue

### Lab Head
Dr Arjen Scholten
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8 3584 CH Utrecht The Netherlands, Janssen Infectious Diseases and Vaccines, Crucell Holland B.V., Leiden, the Netherlands


