### Accession
PXD002435

### Title
Glycosylation analysis of TNF-alpha-induced insulin resistance

### Description
Glycoproteomics, TNF-alpha, membrane proteomics, insulin resistance, adipocyte, SILAC Insulin resistance (IR) is a complex process arising from both environmental and genetic perturbations and leads to a variety of diseases including type-2 diabetes (T2D). The expansion of adipose tissue during obesity results in secretion of proinflammatory cytokines which significantly impairs insulin sensitivity throughout the entire body. Inflammation modulates glycosylation in a variety of cell types however, an investigation of changes in glycosylation following inflammation-induced IR in adipocytes has not been performed. In the present study, we performed a quantitative N-glycomic analysis of TNF-alpha induced IR in adipocytes and identified the regulation of specific N-glycans including an increase in terminal di-galactose- and decrease in di-sialic acid-containing glycans with alpha-2,3 linkages. Quantitative analysis of the membrane-associated proteome in TNF-alpha treated adipocytes identified the regulation of specific glycosyltransferases and glycosidases which correlated with the regulated N-glycans. This included the up- and down-regulation of B4GalT5 and ST3Gal6, respectively at both the protein and mRNA level. To identify the protein and glycosylation sites modified with these regulated N-glycans, we performed a site-specific quantitative glycoproteomic analysis of enriched N-glycopeptides from TNF-alpha treated adipocytes with and without deglycosylation. The combined workflow provided a relative quantification of changes in protein abundance verses N-glycosylation occupancy verses site-specific N-glycans on a proteome-wide level. This revealed the modulation of a subset of N-glycan compositions on specific proteins including those previously associated with insulin-stimulated GLUT4 trafficking to the plasma membrane. Finally, knockdown of B4GalT5 with siRNA and analysis of released N-glycans resulted in the down-regulation of di-galactose containing glycans, confirming the involvement of this enzyme in the TNF-alpha regulated N-glycome.

### Sample Protocol
(Glyco)peptide sample preparation 3T3-L1 adipocytes were washed briefly in ice-cold PBS and lysed in 100 mM sodium carbonate containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was rotated at 4°C for 30 min and centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 90 min at 4°C. The microsomal pellet was resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% SDS, pH 7.5 and membrane-associated proteins precipitated using choroform/methanol/water (1:4:3). Proteins were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, pH 7.5. Quantification was performed with Qubit fluorescence and 2.2 mg of L- and H-labelled protein mixed followed by reduction with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 60 min and alkylation with 25 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 10 mM DTT and digested with LysC (1:50 enzyme:substrate; Wako, Japan) for 2 h at room temperature. The mixture was diluted 1:5 with 25 mM TEAB, pH 7.5 and further digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:substrate; Promega) for 12 h at 32°C. The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid (FA) and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min at room temperature. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic solid-phase extraction (HLB-SPE) cartridges washed with 5% acetonitrile (MeCN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and eluted with 80% MeCN, 1% TFA. Approximately 20 μg of peptide was removed and dried by vacuum centrifugation for total protein quantification. The remainder of the peptide was loaded directly onto an in-house made zic-HILIC SPE column to enrich glycopeptides. The column was washed with 80% MeCN, 1% TFA and enriched glycopeptides eluted with 0.1% TFA followed by 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate and concentrated with vacuum centrifugation. Non-enriched peptides were fractionated as previously described (27) using an in-house packed  320 μm x 20 cm column (3 μm amide-HILIC; Tosoh, Japan) into 12 fractions using an Agilent 1260 with a gradient of 90 - 60% MeCN containing 0.1% TFA over 40 min at 6 μl/min. Enriched glycopeptides were fractionated as previously described (28) using an in-house 320 μm x 30 cm column (3 μm C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) into 8 fractions using an Agilent 1260 with a gradient of 0 - 30% MeCN containing 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate over 40 min at 6 μl/min. One third of each fraction was treated with 100 units of glycerol-free PNGase F for 16 h at 37°C (New England Biolabs).  (Glyco)peptide mass spectrometry The analysis of peptides for total proteome analysis and deglycosylated peptides was performed on a Dionex 3500RS coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus with Tune v2.4.1824 in positive mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% MeCN containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1550 m/z (70,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the 20 most intense ions with HCD (17,500 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 60 ms injection time, 27 NCE, 1.2 m/z isolation). The analysis of glycopeptides was performed on a Dionex 3500RS coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion with Tune v1.2.1149 in positive mode. Glycopeptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% MeCN containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 550 – 1750 (120,000 resolution, 5e5 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the 10 most intense ions with HCD and detection in the orbitrap (30,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 200 ms injection time, 40 NCE, 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation). The acquisition strategy included a product ion triggered re-isolation of the precursor ion if HexNAc oxonium ions (204.0867 and 138.0545 m/z) were in the top 20 ions of the HCD MS/MS spectrum followed by EThcD and CID (29-31). These re-isolated precursor ions subjected to MS/MS analysis with EThcD were detected in the orbitrap (30,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 250 ms injection time, calibrated charge dependent ETD reaction times [2+ 121 ms; 3+ 54 ms; 4+ 30 ms; 5+ 20ms; 6+ 13 ms; 7+; 10 ms], 2 m/z quadrupole isolation) and, MS/MS analysis with CID was detected in the ion trap (rapid scan, 1e4 AGC, 70 ms injection time, 35 NCE, 2 m/z quadrupole isolation).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of (glyco)peptide data Total proteome and deglycosylated data was identified and quantified with MaxQuant (v1.5.2.10) (32) against the UniProt mouse database (September 2014; 51,196 sequences) with default settings of 20 and 4.5 ppm for first and main search precursor tolerance, respectively. HCD MS/MS was deisotoped and searched with a tolerance of 20 ppm. The peptides were searched with 2-plex Arg0/Lys0 and Arg10/Lys8 multiplicity with a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids and a maximum of 2 full trypsin misscleavages. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The re-quantify option was enabled with a minimum of 2 unique + razor peptides used for protein quantification. All data was searched as a single batch with both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein false discovery (FDR) set to 1%.  Confidently localized deamidation sites were considered with a probability >0.75. Deglycosylated data was further identified with Proteome Discoverer (v1.4) using SequestHT against the UniProt mouse database (September 2014; 51,196 sequences). Precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm and HCD MS/MS searched with a tolerance of 0.02 Da with a maximum of 2 full trypsin misscleavages allowed. The peptides were searched with 2-plex Arg0/Lys0 and Arg10/Lys8, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. All data was searched as a single batch with PSM FDR set to 1% using Percolator (33). Using the identification results of MaxQuant and Proteome Discoverer, a concatenated deamidated peptide database was created which consisted of 2,021 unique peptide sequences (concatenated into 1,041 gene entries). The identification and quantification of glycopeptides was performed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.0.0.802) using the Byonic node (v1.0.334) (34) against the concatenated deamidated peptide database. Precursor, HCD MS/MS and EThcD MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm with a maximum of 2 full trypsin miss cleavages. The peptides were searched with 2-plex Arg0/Lys0 and Arg10/Lys8, oxidation of methionine and N-glycan modification of asparagine (309 possible glycan compositions without sodium adducts available within Byonic) set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A precursor isotope off set was enabled (narrow) to account for incorrect precursor monoisotopic reporting (+/- 1 Da). All data was searched as a single batch with PSM FDR set to 1% using the PSM Validator node and an additional score cut-off of 100 was also applied. Only HCD MS/MS spectra containing HexNAc oxonium ions within the range of 204.08-204.09 and 138.05-138.06 m/z were annotated in the final list of glycopeptides as previously described (28). Localization of glycosylation sites in the EThcD data was performed manually for only significantly regulated glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin resistance (IR) is a complex pathophysiological state that arises from both environmental and genetic perturbations and leads to a variety of diseases, including type-2 diabetes (T2D). Obesity is associated with enhanced adipose tissue inflammation, which may play a role in disease progression. Inflammation modulates protein glycosylation in a variety of cell types, and this has been associated with biological dysregulation. Here, we have examined the effects of an inflammatory insult on protein glycosylation in adipocytes. We performed quantitative N-glycome profiling of membrane proteins derived from mouse 3T3-L1 adipocytes that had been incubated with or without the proinflammatory cytokine TNF-alpha to induce IR. We identified the regulation of specific terminal N-glycan epitopes, including an increase in terminal di-galactose- and a decrease in biantennary alpha-2,3-sialoglycans. The altered N-glycosylation of TNF-alpha-treated adipocytes correlated with the regulation of specific glycosyltransferases, including the up-regulation of B4GalT5 and Ggta1 galactosyltransferases and down-regulation of ST3Gal6 sialyltransferase. Knockdown of B4GalT5 down-regulated the terminal di-galactose N-glycans, confirming the involvement of this enzyme in the TNF-alpha-regulated N-glycome. SILAC-based quantitative glycoproteomics of enriched N-glycopeptides with and without deglycosylation were used to identify the protein and glycosylation sites modified with these regulated N-glycans. The combined proteome and glycoproteome workflow provided a relative quantification of changes in protein abundance versus N-glycosylation occupancy versus site-specific N-glycans on a proteome-wide level. This revealed the modulation of N-glycosylation on specific proteins in IR, including those previously associated with insulin-stimulated GLUT4 trafficking to the plasma membrane.

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Glycoproteomics, Membrane proteomics, Tnf-alpha, Insulin resistance, Silac

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


