### Accession
PXD026900

### Title
A patient-based Drosophila model for mitochondrial S-Adenosylhomocysteine transport deficiency

### Description
The SLC25A26 gene encodes a mitochondrial inner membrane carrier that transports S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) into the mitochondrial matrix in exchange for S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH). SAM is the predominant methyl-group donor for most cellular methylation processes, of which SAH is produced as a by-product. Pathogenic, bi-allelic SLC25A26 variants are a recognized cause of mitochondrial disease in children, with a severe neonatal-onset caused by decreased SAM transport activity. We describe two, unrelated adult cases presenting with exercise intolerance and mitochondrial myopathy associated with bi-allelic variants in SLC25A26 which lead to marked respiratory chain deficiencies and mitochondrial histopathological abnormalities in skeletal muscle that are comparable to the early-onset cases. We demonstrate using both mouse and fruit fly models that impairment of SAH, rather than SAM, transport across the mitochondrial membrane is the cause of this milder, later onset clinical phenotype. In this submission, the total larval proteome was assessed at two, three and four days after egg laying in mutants expressing a SAMC.R166Q mutation versus wDah genetic background controls. Our finding of a novel pathomechanism associated with a known disease-causing protein highlights the potential of precision medicine in clinical decision making.

### Sample Protocol
Flies were bred on a standard yeast-sugar-agar medium (42). Lines were kept and experiments performed at 25 °C, 60 % humidity, and a 12 h : 12 h light : dark cycle. For experimental crosses, mutant and control flies were put to lay for 8 h and grown for 4 days. Larvae were then picked in ddH2O for subsequent experiments. The genetic background wDah line was used as a control. Parental lines for homozygous CG4743 mutants were kept as a balanced heterozygous cross over TM6b, tb, GFP. At two, three and four days after egg laying,  larvae were picked, frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized with a Teflon pestle in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0. After sonication and centrifugal removal of larval detritus, proteins were reduced with 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreiotol at 55°C for 30 minutes, cooled briefly on ice and alkylated with 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark. 100 µg of protein quantified by BCA was diluted 1:10 in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0 and digested overnight with 2 µg MS-grade trypsin at 37°C and mild shaking. The digest was stopped by addition of 1.2% formic acid, precipitates were removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was desalted on pre-packed EmporeTM SPE cartridges following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted, dried at 30°C in a vacuum concentrator. Two μg of samples were injected onto an UltiMate 3000 nano UPLC equipped and chromatographic separation was achieved with a 50-cm-long C18 EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55°C. The following gradient was applied: 4 to 26% of solvent B (98% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA) in 90 min, 26 to 95% of solvent B in 5 min, and 95% of solvent B for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometric acquisition on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) comprised one survey full mass spectrum ranging from a mass/charge ratio (m/z) of 350 to 1600 at a resolution of R = 120,000 (at m/z 200) targeting 5 × 106 ions for a maximum injection time of 100 ms, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentations of maximum 18 most intense precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+, using 45-s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass spectra were acquired with a resolution of R = 60,000, targeting 2 × 105 ions for a maximum injection time of 54 ms, setting isolation width to m/z 1.4, and normalized collision energy to 33% setting first mass at m/z 100.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were search with Quandenser v0.061 (The and Käll, 2018) against a Dm UniProt library (August 2020) at standard settings separately for each age comparison. Result sheets were processed with R v4.0.3 in RStudio 1.2.5001.

### Publication Abstract
The SLC25A26 gene encodes a mitochondrial inner membrane carrier that transports S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) into the mitochondrial matrix in exchange for S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH). SAM is the predominant methyl-group donor for most cellular methylation processes, of which SAH is produced as a by-product. Pathogenic, biallelic SLC25A26 variants are a recognized cause of mitochondrial disease in children, with a severe neonatal onset caused by decreased SAM transport activity. Here, we describe two, unrelated adult cases, one of whom presented with recurrent episodes of severe abdominal pain and metabolic decompensation with lactic acidosis. Both patients had exercise intolerance and mitochondrial myopathy associated with biallelic variants in SLC25A26, which led to marked respiratory chain deficiencies and mitochondrial histopathological abnormalities in skeletal muscle that are comparable to those previously described in early-onset cases. We demonstrate using both mouse and fruit fly models that impairment of SAH, rather than SAM, transport across the mitochondrial membrane is likely the cause of this milder, late-onset phenotype. Our findings associate a novel pathomechanism with a known disease-causing protein and highlight the quests of precision medicine in optimizing diagnosis, therapeutic intervention and prognosis.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Samc, Slc25a26, Drosophila, Sah, Methylation, Sam

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemisty and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Department of Medical Biochemisty and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


