### Accession
PXD019033

### Title
First proteomic analysis of lysine acetylation on extensive functions in Solenopsis invicta Buren

### Description
Lysine acetylation (Kac) plays a critical role in the regulation of a great deal of important cellular processes. However, little is known about Kac in Solenopsis invicta, which is one of the 100 most dangerous invasive species in the world. Lysine acetylome in S. invicta was evaluated for the first time in this study. Altogether, 2387 Kac sites were tested in 992 proteins. The prediction of subcellular localization indicated that most identified proteins were located in cytoplasm, mitochondria and nucleus. The enriched Kac site motifs included Kac H, Kac Y, Kac G, Kac F, Kac T, and Kac W. H, Y, F, and W were of frequent occurrence at the +1 position, whereas G, Y and T were of frequent occurrence at the –1 position. Based on cellular component, acetylated proteins were enriched in cytoplasmic part, mitochondrial matrix, and cytosolic ribosome. Furthermore, 25 pathways were detected to be significantly enriched. Interestingly, arginine and proline metabolism as well asphagosome, which were related to immunity, contained several Kac proteins. Acetylation or deacetylation of the proline and phagosome proteins may adjust the protein function, which may be why S. invicta was highly immune. As for interaction network investigation, diverse interactions were adjusted by Kac. Our study of lysine acetylome supplies abundant information for function analysis of reversible Kac in the growth and development of S. invicta and other Hymenoptera insects. Confirming the functions of Kac target proteins may be useful to design specific and effective drugs to prevent and control this dangerous invasive species.

### Sample Protocol
S. invicta was collected from the wasteland in Huangpu, Guangzhou, China. The workers were abraded in liquid nitrogen, and then diverted to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. The powder was dissolved in dissolution buffer (3 μM Trichostatin A (TSA), 50 mM Nicotinamide (NAM), 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 10 mM dithiothreitol, Tris pH 8.0 and 0.1M ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol) on ice. After centrifugation at 5500g at 4 °C for 10 min, the liquid supernatant was gathered, and the concentration of protein was confirmed with BCA kit in accordance with the instructions of manufacturer. 1.5 mg of protein was used for the following steps. Reduction of proteins with 5 mM dithiothreitol was carried out for 30 min at 56 °C during first digestion, and alkylation of proteins with 11 mM iodoacetamide was implemented for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Then, 100 mM TEAB was added to thin the protein so that the final concentration of urea was less than 2M, and overnight digestion with trypsin was performed at a mass ratio of 1: 50 trypsin: protein. At the second digestion, trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1: 100 trypsin: protein for 4h. To concentrate acetylated peptides, the peptides of trypsin were lysed in NETN buffer (0.5% NP-40, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0). Next, they were incubated with pre-washed beads of anti-acetyl lysine antibody and softly shook at 4 °C overnight. After that, the peptides were eluted from the beads, which were scoured four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O, with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, vacuum- dried in a Speed Vac, and desalted with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) in accordance with the instructions of manufacturer. Moreover, the synthetic peptides were tested using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive TM plus (Thermo), which was connected online to the UPLC. By using Max Quant search engine (v.1.5.2.8), the tandem mass spectra were queried against the UniProt S. invicta database. The parameters were as followed: trypsin/P was appointed as a lyase, in which up to 4 lacking cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges were permitted. The mass tolerance of precursor ions was set as 5 ppm, and that of fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Error detection rates of protein, peptide and modification sites were adjusted to < 1%, and minimum score of modified peptides was set > 40.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of Kac proteins was extracted from the UniProt-GOA database in light of Chen et al. [13]. Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then, proteins were annotated from three aspects: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Domain annotation was carried out by making use of InterProScan on the database of InterPro domain. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. The pathways of Kac proteins were annotated by employing the database of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then, mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Wolfpsort was applied for predicting subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is a renew version of PSORT/PSORT II, which is used to predict eukaryotic sequences. Software MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was applied for evaluating motifs of amino acid sequences in appraised proteins. The least number of appearances was set as 20. Fisher’s exact test was employed to test GO, KEGG pathway and domain enrichments, when they were considered significant with a corrected p-value < 0.05. All identified acetylated protein sequences were blasted to Acromyrmex echinatior, and protein-protein interactions were searched in light of the 10.5 version of STRING database. All interactions with a confidence level ≥ 0.7 (high confidence) were acquired. Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation;solenopsis invicta;subcellular localization;enrichment

### Affiliations
Guangdong Institute of Applied Biological Resources, Guangdong Academy of Science

### Submitter
Jingwen Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Jingwen ye
Guangdong Institute of Applied Biological Resources, Guangdong Academy of Science


