### Accession
PXD029928

### Title
Differences in the abundance of auxin homeostasis proteins suggest a central role for in vitro tissue differentiation in Coffea arabica

### Description
Coffea arabica is one of the most important crops worldwide. In vitro culture is an alternative for achieving Coffea regeneration, propagation, conservation, genetic improvement, and genome editing. The aim of this work is to identify proteins involved in auxin homeostasis by isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) and the synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 technology on the Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid mass spectrometer™ in three types of biological material corre-sponding to C. arabica: plantlet leaves, calli, and suspension culture. Proteins included in the β-oxidation of indole butyric acid, and in the signaling, transport, and conjugation of in-dole-3-acetic acid were identified, such as the indole butyric response (IBR), the auxin binding protein (ABP), the ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC), the Gretchen-Hagen 3 proteins (GH3), and the indole-3-acetic-leucine resistant proteins (ILR). A more significant accumulation of pro-teins involved in auxin homeostasis was found in the suspension cultures vs the plantlet com-parison, followed by callus vs plantlet and suspension culture vs callus, suggesting greater par-ticipation of these proteins as cell differentiation increases.

### Sample Protocol
In order to extract the proteins, the plant tissue was triturated to obtain a fine powder, using a mortar and liquid nitrogen. The extraction buffer included 0.5 M Trizma base (pH 8; Sigma, T1503), 50 mM EDTA (pH 8; Sigma, EDS), 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM KCl (Sigma, P9541), 2% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, M6250), 1 mM PMSF (Sigma, 78830), 1% SDS (Sigma, L3771) and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, P9599). For each 100 mg of sam-ple in Eppendorf tubes, 1 mL of extraction solution was added, and it was vortexed for 5 min, with 1-min rest intervals. Subsequently, 1 mL of phenol solution (Sigma, P4557) was added in the fume hood to tubes sealed with parafilm to avoid spillage. The tubes were briefly vortexed and placed on ice with shaking for 20 min. Then they were centrifuged at 4 °C and 15,000 x g for 30 min. The upper phenolic phase was recovered. The volume of each tube was increased to 2 mL with acetone supplemented with 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, M6250), and they were allowed to precipitate overnight at -20 °C. The next day, the tubes were centrifuged at 4 °C and 3,000 x g for 30 min. The super-natant was discarded, and the samples were allowed to dry in the vacuum concentrator. The pellet was resuspended in 300 µL of 1x PBS (Sigma, P5493) supplemented with 1% SDS (Sigma, L3771) by vortexing for 15 min. The tubes were centrifuged at 24 °C, and 15,000 x g for 10 min, and the supernatant was recovered in new tubes. The quantification of the total protein was carried out with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, 23227), and the quality of the extract was verified by SDS-PAGE. Samples were stored at -80 °C until use. Protein reduction, alkylation, and digestion One hundred µg of protein was taken from the previous extract, and the volume was increased to 100 µL with PBS supplemented with 1% SDS solution. For the protein reduc-tion, 10 mM TCEP (Sigma, 68957) was added and incubated for 45 min at 60 °C. Subse-quently, the proteins were alkylated for 60 min with 30 mM IAM (Sigma, A3221) in the dark at room temperature. Then 30 mM DTT (Sigma, D9779) was added, and it was incu-bated for 10 min at room temperature. Cold acetone was added to the tubes and incubated overnight at -20 °C to precipitate the proteins. Next, the tubes were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was dried in a vacuum concentrator. The dry pellet was resuspended with 50 mM TEAB (Sigma, T7408) supplemented with 0.1% SDS (Sigma, L3771). Finally, the protein content was quantified again with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, 23227) and visualized on SDS-PAGE. Samples were stored at -80 °C until use. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 90058) 1:30 (trypsin:protein) overnight at 37 °C, followed by incubation with trypsin 1:60 at 37 °C for 4 h. Afterward, samples were vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MASCOT (v.2.4.1, Matrix, Sci-ence, Boston, MA) search engine implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). C. canephora and viridiplantae Swiss-Prot databases were used for MS/MS data analysis. Search parameters included 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass tolerance, trypsin diges-tion with two missed cleavages allowed. Static modifications included cysteine carbami-domethylation, N-terminal TMT6plex, and lysine TMT6plex. Dynamic modifications in-cluded methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation. Strict false discovery rate (FDR) was stablished for peptides and proteins in the respective node of analysis in Protein Discoverer Suite. Differentially abundant proteins were determined as a fold change ≥1.5 for those up-accumulated or ≤0.66 for those down-accumulated, and P < 0.05 was used to identify statistical significance. Functional annotation and GO classification of all identified proteins were determined with Blast2GO software against the viridiplantae NCBI Swiss-Prot database, with a default functional annotation pipeline. The heatmaps were generated using the ggplot2 package for R. The InteractiveVenn tool was used to create the Venn diagram. The hierarchical grouping of the KEGG enrichment was carried out with the ShinyGO V0.66 online platform  Peptide isobaric labeling with tandem mass tag (TMT) and fractionation  The TMT Isobaric Label Reagent Set plus TMT11-131C kit (Thermo Scientific, A34808) was used to perform the isobaric labeling. Two biological replicates were used for each tissue. Peptides were labeled with 127C and 128N tags for peptides from leaves; 128C and 129N tags for peptides from callus; and 129C and 130N tags for peptides from suspension cultures. After protein labeling, peptide fractionation was carried out with Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, 84868). Nano LC/MS-MS analysis  Samples were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with an “EASY spray” nano ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The Orbitrap Fu-sion Tribid (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, California, USA) was interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Each sample was reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A; Thermo Scientific, 85178), and 5 μL was in-jected into a nanoviper C18 trap column (3µm, 75 µm X 2 cm, Dionex) at 3 μL min-1 flow rate, and then separated with a 100 min gradient on an EASY spray C18 RSLC column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm), with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1, and using solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient was as follows: 10 min solvent A, 7-20% solvent B for 25 min, 20% solvent B for 15 min, 20-25% solvent B for 15 min, 25-95% solvent B for 20 min, and eight min solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 23.5 kV and source temperature at 280 °C. External calibrants included caffeine, Met-Arg-Phe-Ala (MRFA) and Ultramark 1621 (88323, Thermo Fisher ScientificTM PierceTM). Full MS scans were run in the Orbitrap analyzer with 120,000 (FWHM) resolution, scan range 350-1500 m/z, AGC of 2.0e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms, intensity threshold 5.0e3, dynamic exclusion one at 70s and 10 ppm mass tolerance. For MS2 anal-ysis, the 20 most abundant precursors ions (MS1s) were isolated with charge states set to 2–7. Fragmentation parameters included collision-induced dissociation with collision en-ergy set to 35% and an activation Q of 0.25, an AGC of 1.0e4 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms, a precursor selection mass range of 400-1200 m/z, a precursor ion exclu-sion width of a low of 18 m/z and a high of 5 m/z, isobaric tag loss TMT and detection run in the ion trap. Afterward, MS3 spectra were acquired as previously de-scribed using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) of 10 isolation notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD with 65% of collision energy and analyzed using the Orbitrap with 60,000 resolution power at 120-500 m/z scan range, a two m/z isolation window, 1.0e5 AGC, and a maximum injection time of 120 ms with one microscan.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Coffea arabica</i> is one of the most important crops worldwide. In vitro culture is an alternative for achieving <i>Coffea</i> regeneration, propagation, conservation, genetic improvement, and genome editing. The aim of this work was to identify proteins involved in auxin homeostasis by isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) and the synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 technology on the Orbitrap Fusion&#x2122; Tribrid mass spectrometer&#x2122; in three types of biological materials corresponding to <i>C. arabica</i>: plantlet leaves, calli, and suspension cultures. Proteins included in the &#x3b2;-oxidation of indole butyric acid and in the signaling, transport, and conjugation of indole-3-acetic acid were identified, such as the indole butyric response (IBR), the auxin binding protein (ABP), the ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC), the Gretchen-Hagen 3 proteins (GH3), and the indole-3-acetic-leucine-resistant proteins (ILR). A more significant accumulation of proteins involved in auxin homeostasis was found in the suspension cultures vs. the plantlet, followed by callus vs. plantlet and suspension culture vs. callus, suggesting important roles of these proteins in the cell differentiation process.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Coffea arabica, Tmt

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecolog'ia A.C.
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.

### Submitter
Miguel Elizalde

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Miguel Elizalde Contreras
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.


