### Accession
PXD025860

### Title
Comparative Proteomics at the Critical Node of Vigor Loss in Wheat Seeds Differing in storability

### Description
iTRAQ-based comparative proteomic analysis on the critical node of viability loss in wheat seeds with obvious divergence in storability.

### Sample Protocol
The protein profiles during the critical node of seed viability between the two wheat accessions with contrasting in storability were investigated using an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics approach. Protein extracts from the embryos of 24 h-water imbibed seeds samples, which contained control groups and aged groups with ~90%,~80% and ~60% of germination percentage by CDT, were obtained using the tris-saturated phenol methods. The total protein contents of the samples were detected by Bradford method. Protein digestion was performed based on the filter-aided sample preparation procedure (FASP). After trypsin digestion, peptides were freeze-dried into a powder, reconstituted in iTRAQ dissolution buffer, and labeled using iTRAQ 8-plex kits (AB Sciex Inc., MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.The labelled peptide mixtures were pooled, vacuum-frozen, and dried into powder.The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a 4.6×100 mm polysulfethyl column (5 μm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc., Maryland, USA), and then seperated into thirty-two fractions with SCX chromatography,finally combined into 16 pools and desalted on C18 Cartridges.All fractions were applied to NanoRPLC-MS/MS experiments performing on a Triple-TOF 5600+ system (AB SCIEX, Massachusetts, USA) coupled to an Eksigent nanoLCUltra binary pump system (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
The raw file was processed in the ProteinPilot 4.5 software (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm and an integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. Only unique peptide sequences were used as evidence for protein identification. The data were run against the UniProt database(Triticum aestivum 20170920).For FDR determination, data were searched against concatenated databases in silico for decoy sequences, by on-the-fly reversal, automatically by the software. Only proteins with a 1% global FDR from fit were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The critical node (CN, 85% germination) of seed viability is an important threshold for seed regeneration decisions after long-term conservation. Dependent on the germplasm, the storage period until CN is reached varies and information on the divergence of the proteomic profiles is limited. Therefore, the study aims to identify key proteins and mechanisms relevant for a long plateau phase and a late CN during artificial seed aging of wheat. Seeds of the storage-tolerant genotype (ST) TRI 23248, and the storage-sensitive genotype (SS) TRI 10230 were exposed to artificial ageing (AA) and extracted embryos of imbibed seeds were analyzed using an iTRAQ-based proteomic technique. ST and SS required AA for 24 and 18 days to reach the CN, respectively. Fifty-seven and 165 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were observed in the control and aged groups, respectively. Interestingly, a higher activity in metabolic processes, protein synthesis, transcription, cell growth/division, and signal transduction were already found in imbibed embryos of control ST seeds. After AA, 132 and 64 DAPs were accumulated in imbibed embryos of both aged ST and SS seeds, respectively, which were mainly associated with cell defense, rescue, and metabolism. Moreover, 78 DAPs of ST appeared before CN and were mainly enriched in biological pathways related to the maintenance of redox and carbon homeostasis and they presented a stronger protein translation ability. In contrast, in SS, only 3 DAPs appeared before CN and were enriched only in the structural constituents of the cytoskeleton. In conclusion, a longer span of plateau phase might be obtained in seeds when proteins indicate an intense stress response before CN and include the effective maintenance of cellular homeostasis, and avoidance of excess accumulation of cytotoxic compounds. Although key proteins, inherent factors and the precise regulatory mechanisms need to be further investigated, the found proteins may also have functional potential roles during long-term seed conservation.

### Keywords
Seed storability, Triticum aestivum l., Comparative proteomics, Wheat, Seed longevity

### Affiliations
National Crop Genebank, Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China
Chengde Medical University

### Submitter
chen xiuling

### Lab Head
Dr Xinxiong Lu
National Crop Genebank, Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China


