### Accession
PXD030886

### Title
Proteomic and functional analyses of the periodic membrane skeleton in neurons

### Description
Actin, spectrin, and associated proteins form a membrane-associated periodic skeleton (MPS) in neurons. The molecular composition and functions of the MPS remain incompletely understood. Here, we combined co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analyses to identify candidate MPS-interacting proteins from cultured hippocampal neurons and adult mouse brains. In addition, we also used quantitative mass spectrometry analysis based on Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) isobaric labeling to determine how the expression levels of proteins are differentially regulated at the proteomic scale upon depletion of βII-spectrin, an important molecular component of the MPS. These results provide a systematic picture of the interactome of the MPS, and new insights into new functions of the MPS in neurons.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of MPS-interacting proteins for mass spectrometry analyses, the magnetic protein-G-coated beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were incubated with the irrelevant (control) antibody or antibody against βII-spectrin, αII-spectrin, or α-adducin at 4 ºC overnight, followed by 3x washes using the washing buffer (PBS (pH 7.4) containing 0.02% (vol/vol) Tween-20). For mouse whole brain co-immunoprecipitation experiments, adult mouse brains were isolated and dounce-homogenized in the co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on ice. For cultured neuron co-immunoprecipitation experiments, cultured hippocampal neurons at DIV 20 were lysed on ice using the co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer.  After incubating 15 min, lysates from cultured neurons or whole adult mouse brain were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 5 min at 4 ºC. The supernatant was collected and then incubated with the antibody-coated magnetic beads for 3 hours at 4 ºC. The magnetic beads with the co-immunoprecipitated products were washed 5 times using the washing buffer. Finally, the co-immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted using Laemmili sample buffer (Bio-Rad) for 10 min at 90 ºC. The eluted protein mixtures from whole mouse brain or cultured neurons were then separated using SDS-PAGE, and each gel lane was cut into gel pieces and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2009; Hao et al., 2013). For preparing samples for quantitative mass spectrometry analysis to compare the proteomes between wild type neurons and neurons depleted of βII-spectrin, at DIV 20, cultured hippocampal neurons treated with adenoviruses expressing either βII-spectrin shRNA or scrambled (control) shRNA were lysed on ice using the RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) complemented with 1x protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell lysates were transferred to microcentrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 5 min at 4 ºC, and the supernatants were collected for quantitative mass-spectrometry analyses.  Protein mixtures (three replicates for each condition) were digested and labeled by tandem mass tags (TMT) 6plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Experiments were performed on a hybrid ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for all analytical runs. HPLC samples (Waters) were injected into the trap column (75 µm column ID, 5 cm packed with 5 µm beads on 200 Å poros, from Michrom Bioresources, Inc.) and washed for 15 min, and were then eluted to the analytical column with a gradient from 2 to 32% of 0.1% formic acid over 90 min. The instrument was set up to run the TOP 20 method for MS/MS in iontrap. The raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and searches were performed against mouse (Mus musculus) Uniprot database and known common lab contaminants. 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was held for both protein and peptide levels for all output reported data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spectrin, Neuron, Membrane skeleton, Actin, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802

### Submitter
Ruobo Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaowei Zhuang
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA


