### Accession
PXD024747

### Title
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay relies on "two-factor authentication" by SMG5-SMG7

### Description
Eukaryotic gene expression is constantly regulated and controlled by the translation-coupled nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway. Aberrant translation termination leads to NMD activation and robust clearance of NMD targets via two seemingly independent and redundant mRNA degradation branches. Here, we uncover that the loss of the first SMG5-SMG7-dependent pathway also inactivates the second SMG6-dependent branch, indicating an unexpected functional hierarchy of the final NMD steps. Transcriptome-wide analyses of SMG5-SMG7-depleted cells confirm complete NMD inhibition resulting in massive transcriptomic alterations. The NMD activity conferred by SMG5-SMG7 is determined to varying degrees by their interaction with the central NMD factor UPF1, heterodimer formation and the initiation of deadenylation. Surprisingly, we find that SMG5 functionally substitutes SMG7 and vice versa. Our data support an improved model for NMD execution that features two-factor authentication involving UPF1 phosphorylation and SMG5-SMG7 recruitment to access SMG6 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichment of FLAG-tagged proteins FLAG-tagged SMG5 proteins or FLAG control were expressed in stable cell lines induced with 1 µg ml-1 doxycycline for 72 h. Samples were lysed and immunoprecipitated using mild wash buffer for washing steps and eluted in 42.5 µl of a 200 mg ml-1 dilution of FLAG peptides (Sigma) in 1x TBS. 1 volume of 10% SDS was added and the samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with CAA (final concentrations 5 mM and 55 mM, respectively). Tryptic protein digestion was performed using a modified version of the single pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3). In brief, reduced and alkylated proteins were supplemented with paramagnetic Sera-Mag speed beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mixed in a 1:1-ratio with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). After 8 min incubation protein-beads-complexes were captured using an in-house build magnetic rack and two times washed with 70% EtOH. Afterwards, samples were washed once with 100% ACN, air-dried and reconstituted in 5 µl 50 mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate supplemented with 0.5 µg trypsin and 0.5 µg LysC and incubated overnight at 37°C. On the next day, the beads were resuspended and mixed with 200 µl ACN, incubated for 8 min and again placed on the magnetic rack. Tryptic peptides were washed once with 100% ACN, airdried, dissolved in 4% DMSO and transferred into 96-well PCR tubes. After acidification with 1 µl of 10% formic acid, the samples were ready for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Affinity enrichment of TurboID-FLAG-tagged proteins Stable WT or SMG7 KO cell lines were seeded and reverse transfected using 6.25 µl Lipofectamine RNAiMAX and 200 pmol siRNA (control or SMG5). The expression of FLAG-TurboID-tagged UPF1 or control proteins was induced on the next day with 30 µg ml-1 cumate. Proximity labelling by biotinylation was performed on the next day with the addition of 50 µM biotin for 15 minutes. Afterwards, the cells were washed twice with PBS on ice, scraped in 1 ml ice cold PBS, collected for 5 min at 100 x g and 4 °C, and finally resuspended in 200 µl phospho-RIPA buffer supplemented with protease / phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Samples were sonicated and 50 µl input aliquots containing 100 µg of total protein were prepared and mixed with SDS-sample buffer. Concentration-adjusted lysates containing 1 mg total protein were concentrated to approximately 100 µl in 0.5 ml Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter devices (3K cutoff) for 45 min at 4 °C and 14.000 x g, to minimize excess biotin in the sample. The concentrated sample was combined with 200 µl RIPA buffer, mixed with 25 µl pre-washed Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads and incubated for 2 h at 4°C with overhead shaking. The beads were washed four times for 5 min with 800 µl RIPA buffer, followed by one times wash with 800 µl mild wash buffer. Biotinylated proteins were eluted with 50 µl 1x SDS-sample buffer, supplemented with 20 mM DTT and 3 mM biotin, for 15 min at 96°C, followed by another elution with 25 µl and both eluates were combined. Tryptic digestion was performed using the above described SP3 protocol.  LC-MS/MS analysis Proteomics analysis was performed by data-dependent acquisition using an Easy nLC1000 ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system coupled via nanoelectrospray ionization to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (all Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides were separated based on their hydrophobicity using a chromatographic gradient of 45 min (affinity enrichments) or 60 min (turbo-ID samples) with a binary system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). In-house made analytical columns (length: 50 cm, inner diameter: 75 µm) filled with 1.9 µm C18-AQ Reprosil Pur beads (Dr. Maisch) were used for separation. Using the 45 min chromatographic gradient, buffer B was linearly increased from 9% to 30% over 30 min followed by a steeper increase to 47% within 6 min. Finally, buffer B was increased to 95% within 4 min and stayed at 95% for 5 min to wash the analytical column. For the 60 min chromatographic gradient, buffer B was linearly increased from 3% to 30% over 40 min followed by an increase to 50% within 8 min. Finally, buffer B was increased to 95% within 1 min and the colum washed for 10 at 95%. Full MS spectra (300 – 1,750 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, a maximum injection time of 20 ms, and an AGC target of 3e6. The top 10 most abundant peptide ions of each full MS spectrum were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE: 26) with an isolation width of 1.8 m/z and a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds. MS/MS spectra were measured with a resolution of 17,000, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target of 5e5 for the 45 min gradient and a resolution of 35,000, a max. injection time of 110 ms and an AGC target of 5e5 using the 60 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS RAW files were analysed using the standard settings of the MaxQuant suite (version 1.6.17.0). Peptides were identified by matching against the human UniProt database using the Andromeda scoring algorithm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestion protein. A false discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01 was used for identification of peptide-spectrum matches and protein quantification. Data processing and statistical analysis was done in the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0) (REF). Intensities were calculated using the LFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant with the standard parameters. LFQ-normalized protein intensities were Log2-transformed for normal distribution and filtered for at least three valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were imputed by drawing random values from a 1.8 standard deviations downshifted, 0.3 standard deviations broad normal distribution. Statistical testing was performed using a two-sided Welch's t-test. Significantly different proteins were identified using the permutation-based FDR correction (significant = FDR < 0.05, S0 = 0.1) Visualization was performed with the R package ggplot2 (version 3.1.0).

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic gene expression is constantly controlled by the translation-coupled nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway. Aberrant translation termination leads to NMD activation, resulting in phosphorylation of the central NMD factor UPF1 and robust clearance of NMD targets via two seemingly independent and redundant mRNA degradation branches. Here, we uncover that the loss of the first SMG5-SMG7-dependent pathway also inactivates the second SMG6-dependent branch, indicating an unexpected functional connection between the final NMD steps. Transcriptome-wide analyses of SMG5-SMG7-depleted cells confirm exhaustive NMD inhibition resulting in massive transcriptomic alterations. Intriguingly, we find that the functionally underestimated SMG5 can substitute the role of SMG7 and individually activate NMD. Furthermore, the presence of either SMG5 or SMG7 is sufficient to support SMG6-mediated endonucleolysis of NMD targets. Our data support an improved model for NMD execution that features two-factor authentication involving UPF1 phosphorylation and SMG5-SMG7 recruitment to access SMG6 activity.

### Keywords
Nonsense-mediated mrna decay, Mrna degradation, Gene expression, Smg5-smg7, Smg6, Upf1

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center University of Cologne
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sebastian Kallabis

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Boehm
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany


