### Accession
PXD002010

### Title
Natural genetic variation on proteome level in Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Natural genetic variation is the raw material of evolution and influences disease development and progression. To analyze the effect of the genetic background on protein expression in the nematode C. elegans (Caenorhabditis elegans), the two genetically highly divergent wild-type strains N2 (Bristol) and CB4856 (Hawaii) were compared quantitatively. In total, we quantified 3,238 unique proteins in three independent SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) experiments. The differentially expressed proteins were enriched for genes that function in insulin-signaling and stress response pathways.

### Sample Protocol
N2 and CB4856 worms at the larval stage 4 (L4) were isotopically labelled with either light (Arg0, Lys0) or heavy amino acids (Arg10, Lys8) for two generations including label switching. Proteins were extracted using glass beads in freshly prepared cell lysis buffer (Urea, Tris), mixed in a 1:1 ratio, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodacetamid (IAA) and digested with trypsin. Peptides were separated by HPLC at pH of 11, desalted using ZipTip C18 and analyzed by LC-MS/MS at pH of 3 on an LTQ Orbitrap XL MS. Worm samples were analyzed in three biological replicates. For every biological replicate, two nematode pellets were processed and analyzed separately to include biochemical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.3.0.5 searching the C. elegans 6239 database. Search parameters were: Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications; SILAC labeling (Arg10, Lys8) as heavy labels; enzyme trypsin; two missed cleavages; a minimum of six amino acids per identified peptide were required. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The peptide FDR was set to 1%, protein FDR was set to 5%. The RAW files generated for every biological replicate were combined for database searching and the match between run was set to 2 min. The effect of the arginine-to-proline conversion was estimated to 20% using the “Progenesis QI for Proteomics” software. Using a Perl script kindly provided by Jacob D. Jaffe (Broad Institute, Cambridge), new protein group log2 H/L ratios were calculated from the corrected peptide evidence file. The intensity values of heavy peptides with prolines were corrected by adding to the measured signal intensity a value, which corresponds to 20% x n of heavy peptides intensity, where n is the number of prolines in the peptide. The adjusted peptide log2 H/L ratios were built and combined into the protein groups based on the MaxQuant protein group identifications. The protein group log2 H/L median ratios were calculated separately for each biological replicate and the median was normalized to one. Corrected peptide intensity values were also used to calculate the corrected IBAQ values. Using an in-house written R function, corrected intensities of peptides per protein were summed up and divided by the corresponding number of tryptic peptides. Heavy and light iBAQ values were calculated separately and normalized using an intersect of 0 and corresponding slopes.

### Publication Abstract
Natural genetic variation is the raw material of evolution and influences disease development and progression. An important question is how this genetic variation translates into variation in protein abundance. To analyze the effects of the genetic background on gene and protein expression in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, we quantitatively compared the two genetically highly divergent wild-type strains N2 and CB4856. Gene expression was analyzed by microarray assays, and proteins were quantified using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture. Among all transcribed genes, we found 1,532 genes to be differentially transcribed between the two wild types. Of the total 3,238 quantified proteins, 129 proteins were significantly differentially expressed between N2 and CB4856. The differentially expressed proteins were enriched for genes that function in insulin-signaling and stress-response pathways, underlining strong divergence of these pathways in nematodes. The protein abundance of the two wild-type strains correlates more strongly than protein abundance versus transcript abundance within each wild type. Our findings indicate that in C. elegans only a fraction of the changes in protein abundance can be explained by the changes in mRNA abundance. These findings corroborate with the observations made across species.

### Keywords
C. elegans, N2, Cb4856, Aging, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Institute of Molecular Life Sciences
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Polina Kamkina

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Otmar Hengartner
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


