### Accession
PXD034366

### Title
SortaseA cleavable CD1d and H2Kb

### Description
Identification of SortaseA cleavable MHC class I proteins (CD1d, H2Kb) for shotgun lipidomics

### Sample Protocol
Purified proteins were separated by 12.5% SDS PAGE and stained using Coomassie blue. Visible bands were excised, cut into 1 × 1 mm cubes and incubated consequently with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 55 mM iodacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. In-gel digestion was performed overnight using trypsin (12 ng/µl, Promega) at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted twice by exchange using 5% formic acid (FA) and acetonitrile, extracts pooled together and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were re-suspended in 25 µl of 5% FA and a 5 µl aliquot was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system interfaced to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nano-UPLC was equipped with an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm i.d. x 20 mm trap column and 75 μm x 15 cm analytical column (3 μm/100A, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using 80 min linear gradient: Solvent A was 0.1% aqueous formic acid and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in neat acetonitrile. Three blank runs were performed after each sample analysis to minimize carryover. Spectra were acquired by data-dependent acquisition method using Top20 approach and dynamic exclusion time of 15 s. Lock mass was set to the singly charged ion of dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane ion ((Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z = 445.1200).

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were searched using Mascot software (v. 2.2.04) against UniProt database (April 2018) and the results evaluated by Scaffold software v.4.7.5 (Proteome Software, Portland). Protein hits were accepted if matched with two peptides and proteins and spectra False Discovery Rates (FDR, function of the Scaffold software) was below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
CD1d is an atypical MHC class I molecule which binds endogenous and exogenous lipids and can activate natural killer T (NKT) cells through the presentation of lipid antigens. CD1d surveys different cellular compartments including the secretory and the endolysosomal pathway and broadly binds lipids through its two hydrophobic pockets. Purification of the transmembrane protein CD1d for the analysis of bound lipids is technically challenging as the use of detergents releases CD1d-bound lipids. To address these challenges, we have developed a novel approach based on Sortase A-dependent enzymatic release of CD1d at the cell surface of live mammalian cells, which allows for single step release and affinity tagging of CD1d for shotgun lipidomics. Using this system, we demonstrate that CD1d carrying the Sortase A recognition motif shows unimpaired subcellular trafficking through the secretory and endolysosomal pathway and is able to load lipids in these compartments and present them to NKT cells. Comprehensive shotgun lipidomics demonstrated that the spectrum and abundance of CD1d-associated lipids is not representative of the total cellular lipidome but rather characterized by preferential binding to long chain sphingolipids and glycerophospholipids. As such, sphingomyelin species recently identified as critical negative regulators of NKT cell activation, represented the vast majority of endogenous CD1d-associated lipids. Moreover, we observed that inhibition of endolysosomal trafficking of CD1d surprisingly did not affect the spectrum of CD1d-bound lipids, suggesting that the majority of endogenous CD1d-associated lipids load onto CD1d in the secretory rather than the endolysosomal pathway. In conclusion, we present a novel system for the analysis of CD1d-bound lipids in mammalian cells and provide new insight into the spectrum of CD1d-associated lipids, with important functional implications for NKT cell activation.

### Keywords
H2kb, Mhc class i, Sortasea cleavable, L cells, Cd1d

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center Dresden, Technische Universität (TU) Dresden, Dresden, Germany
CRTD TU Dresden

### Submitter
Maren RUDOLPH

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Zeissig
Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center Dresden, Technische Universität (TU) Dresden, Dresden, Germany


