### Accession
PXD009776

### Title
SWATH-MS analysis of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase specific inhibitor (F-244)-treated Arabidopsis

### Description
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMGS) is the second enzyme in the mevalonate pathway. F-244 is the specific inhibitor of HMGS. F-244 treatment caused reduced primary root growth. SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics analysis was carried out to identify differential expressed proteins in F-244-treated primary roots.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of proteins extracts from Arabidopsis roots and mass spectrometry analysis of peptides were performed as previously described (Zhu et al., 2016). Four biological repeats of 7-d-old Arabidopsis roots (~100 mg fresh weight) treated with F-244 (2 µM) or DMSO (control) for 4 days were used. Samples were frozen and ground in liquid nitrogen before sequential washes with 10× volume of pre-cooled (-20oC) 10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone and 80% methanol in 0.1 M ammonium acetate. After each wash, the sample was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000g) for 5 min at 4oC and the supernatant removed. The pellet was then homogenised with 8× volume of freshly prepared SDT (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT and 0.1 M Tris-Cl pH 8.0) solution and protein extraction was assisted by incubating the mixture at 95oC for 5-10 min. Undissolved debris was removed by repeated centrifugation at 16,000g for 5 min at 4oC. The clear supernatant was mixed with 4× volume of pre-cooled (-20oC) 80% acetone to precipitate the protein overnight at -20oC. Subsequently, the sample was centrifuged at 1600g at 4oC for 15 min and the pellet was washed with 10× volume of pre-cooled (-20oC) 80% acetone. The protein pellet was air-dried at room temperature for about 10 min followed by addition of 100 µl of freshly prepared urea buffer (8M urea in 200 mM MOPS-Cl/4 mM CaCl2, pH 8.0). The pellet was sonicated for 1-2 min to assist dissolution. Protein concentration was measured according to the Bradford method (Bio-Rad).       Each protein sample (100 µg) was aliquoted and diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 1 µg µl-1. Reduction of proteins was performed by mixing with 10 mM DTT, and incubating at 50oC for 40 min with gently shaking. After cooling to room temperature, the reduced protein samples were alkylated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min using 40 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were further diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to decrease the urea concentration to below 2 M. Trypsin was applied to digest the protein at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37oC overnight. The peptide samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted using the SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and dried using a speed vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis or were stored at -80oC for later use.

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS measurement and analysis All Arabidopsis peptide samples were analysed by a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer coupled with an Eksigent NanoLC-2DPlus and a cHiPLC nanoFlex system (SCIEX, USA) following Zhu et al. (2016). In brief, each peptide sample (2 µg) was loaded to a cHiPLC trap (3 µm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 0.5 mm × 200 µm) at 500 nl min-1 using 95% of solvent A (H2O containing 0.1% formic acid) and 5% of solvent B (acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) for 15 min. The peptide sample was then separated on a cHiPLC column (3 µm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 15 cm × 75 µm) using a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B for 120 min at 300 nl min-1. The column and trap temperature was kept at 30oC to stabilise the retention time. Nano-ion spray was performed using a voltage of 2300 V in positive ion mode. The Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was applied to obtain the SWATH-MS spectral library (Gillet et al., 2012). The MS1 spectra were collected by survey scanning of 250 ms (TOF-MS) in the range of 350-1250 m/z. The top 40 precursor ions with a charge state (+2 to +5) were chosen for fragmentation with 50-ms accumulation time for each MS/MS experiment for 2.3-s total cycle time and MS/MS spectra were obtained in the range of 100-1800 m/z. Selected ions and their isotopes were excluded from further analysis for 18 s. Peptide ions were fragmented in a pre-scheduled rolling collision energy based on their m/z and charge state. For SWATH analysis, the same peptide sample (2 µg) was loaded and separated under the same conditions but the mass spectra data were collected with cyclic data-independent acquisition (DIA) method (Gillet et al., 2012). The MS1 spectra were obtained by survey scanning of 50 ms and all precursors were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS experiments were performed with accumulation time 56.6 ms per 15 Da swath (total 58) for 3.334 s total cycle time. Collision energy for each SWATH (DIA experiment) was optimised for a +2 ion centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV. For instance, a group of 58 overlapping windows were generated, containing the precursor mass range from 400 to 1250 Da.         All the DDA mass spectrometry data files were thoroughly searched against the A. thaliana genome protein sequences (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548) using ProteinPilot 5.0 (Sciex) to produce a reference spectral library. The search parameters were set as trypsin digestion, iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation and biological modification. Precursor and product ion mass tolerance were respectively set as 0.05 and 0.1 Da. The criteria for accepting peptide assignment and protein identification was < 1% of the global false discovery rate. The generated library together with all DIA data of all samples were subsequently loaded into the PeakView software v1.2 (SCIEX) for analysis. The data were analysed with the following settings: eight peptides, six transitions, 10 min for extraction of window, 50 ppm as ion library mass tolerance, 99% peptide confidence, and exclude shared peptides. The retention was realigned based on high abundance peptides that existed across all samples. The results were exported in MRKVW format which could be opened and normalised with MarkerView (SCIEX). In total, three files were generated: (1) sum of peptide areas for each protein; (2) sum of fragment ion areas for each protein; and (3) extracted peak area for individual fragment ion. The normalisation was done by averaging the total peak area of all samples. The relative quantification of proteins between F-244-treated Arabidopsis roots and the DMSO control was expressed in form of fold change. Proteins with a P value < 0.05 by the Student’s t-test were considered as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMGS) catalyses the second step of the mevalonate (MVA) pathway. An HMGS inhibitor (F-244) has been reported to retard growth in wheat, tobacco, and Brassica juncea, but the mechanism remains unknown. Although the effects of HMGS on downstream isoprenoid metabolites have been extensively reported, not much is known on how it might affect non-isoprenoid metabolic pathways. Here, the mechanism of F-244-mediated inhibition of primary root growth in Arabidopsis and the relationship between HMGS and non-isoprenoid metabolic pathways were investigated by untargeted SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics, quantitative real-time PCR, and target metabolite analysis. Our results revealed that the inhibition of primary root growth caused by F-244 was a consequence of reduced stigmasterol, auxin, and cytokinin levels. Interestingly, proteomic analyses identified a relationship between HMGS and glucosinolate biosynthesis. Inhibition of HMGS activated glucosinolate biosynthesis, resulting from the induction of glucosinolate biosynthesis-related genes, suppression of sterol biosynthesis-related genes, and reduction in sterol levels. In contrast, HMGS overexpression inhibited glucosinolate biosynthesis, due to down-regulation of glucosinolate biosynthesis-related genes, up-regulation of sterol biosynthesis-related genes, and increase in sterol content. Thus, HMGS might represent a target for the manipulation of glucosinolate biosynthesis, given the regulatory relationship between HMGS in the MVA pathway and glucosinolate biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Hmgs, F-244, Proteomics, Swath

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, School of Biological Sciences, the University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Pan Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Mee-Len Chye
Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, School of Biological Sciences, the University of Hong Kong


