### Accession
PXD030404

### Title
Comprehensive Profiling of Mammalian Tribbles Interactomes Implicates TRIB3 in Gene Repression

### Description
The three human Tribbles (TRIB) pseudokinases have been implicated in a plethora of signaling and metabolic processes linked to cancer initiation and progression and can potentially be used as biomarkers of disease and prognosis. While their modes of action reported so far center around protein–protein interactions, the comprehensive profiling of TRIB interactomes has not been reported yet. Here, we have developed a robust mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics approach to characterize Tribbles' interactomes and report a comprehensive assessment and comparison of the TRIB1, -2 and -3 interactomes, as well as domain-specific interactions for TRIB3. Interestingly, TRIB3, which is predominantly localized in the nucleus, interacts with mul-tiple transcriptional regulators, including proteins involved in gene repression. Indeed, we found that TRIB3 repressed gene transcription when tethered to DNA in breast cancer cells. Tak-en together, our comprehensive proteomic assessment reveals previously unknown interacting partners and functions of Tribbles proteins that expand our understanding of this family of pro-teins. In addition, our findings show that MS-based proteomics provides a powerful tool to un-ravel novel pseudokinase biology.

### Sample Protocol
The precipitated proteins were denatured and alkylated in 50 µL 8 M Urea, 1 M am-monium bicarbonate containing 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM 2-chloro-acetamide. After 4-fold further dilution with 1M ammonium bicar-bonate and digestion with trypsin (250 ng/200 µL), peptides were separated from the se-pharose beads and desalted with homemade C-18 stage tips (3 M, St Paul, MN). Peptides were eluted with 80% ACN and, after evaporation of the solvent in the speedvac, redis-solved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). After separation on a 30-cm pico-tip column (75 µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with C-18 material (1.9 µm aquapur gold, dr. Maisch) using a 140-min gradient (7% to 80% ACN, 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), peptides were electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The MS was run in DDA mode with a cycle time of 1 s, in which the full scan (400–1500 mass range) was performed at a resolution of 240,000. Ions reaching an intensity threshold of 10.000 were isolated by the quadrupole and frag-mented with a HCD collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant [version 1.6.3.4], using the Uniprot fasta file (UP000005640) of Homo sapiens (taxonomy ID: 9606), extracted at 21/01/2021. Minimum and maximum peptide lengths of 7 and 25 amino acids respec-tively, with Oxidation on Methionine and Acetylation on Protein N-term as variable mod-ifications and Carbamidomethyl on Cysteine as a fixed modification. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%.  To determine proteins of interest, we performed a differential enrichment analysis on the generated Maxquant output. First, we generated unique names for the genes associated to multiple proteins to be able to match them. Second, we filtered for proteins that were identified in at least three out of four of the replicates of one condition. Then, we back-ground corrected and normalized the data by variance stabilizing transformation; shifting and scaling the proteins intensities by sample group. We used a left-shifted Gaussian dis-tribution to impute for missingness, since our data presented a pattern of missingness not at random (MNAR). Finally, we performed a differential enrichment analysis to identify those proteins that were over-enriched and selected those with at least a 2.5-fold change and adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05. The adjusted p-value was calculated using the Benjamin–Hochberg procedure. The program used for the analyses was R [version 4.0.4] through R-Studio [version 1.5.64].

### Publication Abstract
The three human Tribbles (TRIB) pseudokinases have been implicated in a plethora of signaling and metabolic processes linked to cancer initiation and progression and can potentially be used as biomarkers of disease and prognosis. While their modes of action reported so far center around protein-protein interactions, the comprehensive profiling of TRIB interactomes has not been reported yet. Here, we have developed a robust mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics approach to characterize Tribbles' interactomes and report a comprehensive assessment and comparison of the TRIB1, -2 and -3 interactomes, as well as domain-specific interactions for TRIB3. Interestingly, TRIB3, which is predominantly localized in the nucleus, interacts with multiple transcriptional regulators, including proteins involved in gene repression. Indeed, we found that TRIB3 repressed gene transcription when tethered to DNA in breast cancer cells. Taken together, our comprehensive proteomic assessment reveals previously unknown interacting partners and functions of Tribbles proteins that expand our understanding of this family of proteins. In addition, our findings show that MS-based proteomics provides a powerful tool to unravel novel pseudokinase biology.

### Keywords
Tribbles; proteomics; interactome; breast cancer

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University,  3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Kalkhoven
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University,  3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands


