### Accession
PXD021152

### Title
C4PR_LIV: N-terminomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2-infected ACE2-A549 cells (Enriched)

### Description
Many events in viral infection are regulated through post-translational modification. In the case of positive-sense RNA viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 which encodes two viral proteases, proteolytic cleavage of both viral and cellular proteins is crucial for productive viral infection. In this work we study proteolysis in the context of SARS-CoV-2 infection of ACE2-A549 and Vero E6 cells, infected at a multiplicity of infection of 1, with samples harvested at 0,6,12 and 24h post-infection.   Neo-N-termini and lysine residues were labelled at the protein level with TMTpro reagents prior to tryptic digestion. For unenriched samples, the trypsin-digested material was then fractionated offline, and analysed by LC-MS/MS for the study of total protein abundance over the infection timecourse. For enriched samples, unblocked neo-N-termini generated by tryptic digested were labelled with undecanal and depleted, yielding a sample enriched for blocked neo-N-termini (TMTpro, N-terminal acetylation, and pyroGlu). The enriched samples were similarly fractionated offline and analysed by LC-MS/MS.  Please note this is one of several linked datasets.  This dataset contains data from ACE2-A549 cells infected with SARS-CoV-2, enriched for neo-N-termini.

### Sample Protocol
ACE2-A549 or Vero E6 cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% Serum and pen/strep. ACE2-A549 cells were supplemented with 10µg/mL blasticidin.  Cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 1, and collected at 0/6/12 or 24h post-infection. Mock-infected samples were collected at 0 and 24h. N-terminomic sample preparation is based around Weng et al. 2019 Mol. Cell. Proteomics, adapted for TMTpro-based quantitation. 2x10^6 cells for each sample was resuspended in lysis buffer (100mM HEPES pH8, 1% SDS, 1% NP40 and 2x HALT protease inhibitor). Samples were heated to 95°C for 5 min, then frozen at -80°C. Samples were then thawed, and incubated with benzonase for 30 min at 37°C. Sample concentrations were normalized by BCA assay, and 25µg of material from each sample was used for downstream processing.  DTT was added to 10mM and incubated at 37°C for 30 min, before alkylation with 50mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. DTT at 50mM final concentration was added to quench the 2-chloroacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Samples were washed by SP3-based precipitation. Each sample was resuspended in 22.5µL 6M GuCl, 30µL of 0.5M HEPES pH8, and 4.5µL TCEP (10mM final) and incubated for 30 mi at room temperature.  0.5mg of individual TMTpro aliquots (Lot VB294905) were resuspended in 62uL of anhydrous DMSO. 57µL of the TMTpro was then added to each sample, mixed and incubated for 1.5h. Label allocation was randomized (details included). Excess TMTpro was quenched with the addition of 13µL of 1M ethanolamide and incubated for 45 min. All samples were combined for downstream processing. SP3 cleanup was performed on the combined samples. These were resuspended in 400µL of 200mM HEPES pH8, containing Trypsin gold at a concentration of 25ng/µL and incubated overnight at 37°C.  Samples were placed on a magnetic rack for 5 min. 10% of the samples was retained – this 10% represents the material used for the UNENRICHED analysis.  The remaining material was supplemented with 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 40%,  undecanal added at a undecanal:peptide ratio of 20:1 and sodium cyanoborohydride to 30mM. pH was confirmed to be between pH7-8 and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 1h. Samples were then sonicated for 15 seconds, and bound to a magnetic stand for 1 min. The supernatant was retained and then acidified with 5% TFA in 40% ethanol to pH3-4. Macrospin colums (Nest group) were conditioned with methanol, then with 0.1% TFA in 40% ethanol. The acidified sample was applied to the column, and the flow through retained as the N-terminal-ENRICHED sample.  Both unenriched and enriched samples were then dried down on a speedvac, resuspended and desalted on macrospin columns (Nest group), before drying down again. Off-line basic reverse phase fractionation for both unenriched and enriched samples was performed on a Waters nanoAcquity with an Acquity UPLC M-Class CSH C18 130A 1.7µm, 300µm x 150µm column. The sample was run on a 70 minute gradient at 6µL/min flow rate. Gradient parameters were 10 min 3% B, 10-40 min 3-34% B, 40-45 min 34-45% B, 45-50 min 45-99%B, 50-60 min 99% B, 60.1-70 min 3% B. Buffers A and B were 10mM ammonium formate pH10, and 10mM ammonium formate pH10 in 90% acetonitrile respectively. Both samples were resuspended in buffer A, and 1 minute fractions were collected for 1-65 min of the run. These were concatenated into 12 (1:13:24…) or 5 fractions (1:6:11…) for unenriched and enriched samples respectively using a SunChrom Micro Fraction Collector. Samples were dried down and resuspended in 1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Dionex 3000 coupled in-line to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer. Digests were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 microM inner diameter, C18, 3 microM, 100 Å) at 5 µL per min in 0.1%(v/v) TFA and 2%(v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 15 cm x 50cm inner diameter, C18, 2 microlM, 100 Å) (Dionex). Peptides were loaded in 0.1%(v/v) formic acid and eluted with a linear gradient of 3.8–50% buffer B (HPLC grade acetonitrile 80%(v/v) with 0.1%(v/v) formic acid) over 95 min at 300 nl per min, followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (25 min at 3.8% solvent). All peptide separations were carried out using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific).. The Q-Exactive-HF was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans aquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200m/z over a scan range of 350-2000m/z. The top 16 most abundant ions with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected for MS2 analysis at 60,000 m/z resolution with an isolation window of 0.7m/z, with a (N)CE of 30. The maximum injection times were 100ms and 90ms for MS1 and MS2 respectively, and AGC targets were 3e6 and 1e5 respectively. Dynamic exclusion (20 seconds) was on.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed in MaxQuant 1.6.7.0. Data were searched against a reviewed human UniProt protein database (20350 entries, downloaded 8th May 2020) for ACE2-A549 samples, African Green Monkey proteome (19223 entries, downloaded 16th May 2020) for Vero E6 samples, and a custom SARS-CoV-2 database including both cleaved and uncleaved forms of the viral polyprotein as well as ORFs identified by recent ribosome profiling experiments. A modifications.xml file including TMTpro labels is included in this upload. Default settings were used with the following alterations. Quantification was performed at MS2-level with the correction factors from Lot VB294905. Digestion was semi-specific ArgC, as TMTpro labelling of lysines blocks trypsin-cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-terminus), Gln/Gluto pyroglutamine were selected as variable modifications. PSM and Protein FDR were set at 0.01. Downstream analysis was conducted in Matlab.   The .mqpar, modifications.xml, .fasta, TMTpro lot details, and TMT labelling strategy files are included in this upload.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ace2-a549, Covid-19, N-terminomics, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Ed Emmott

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Emmott
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


### SDRF

