### Accession
PXD032235

### Title
Pitfalls and Solutions in Mass Spectrometry-based Identification of Protein Glycation

### Description
Protein glycation is a type of post-translational modification (PTM) involving complex non-enzymatic reactions of reducing sugars or reactive dicarbonyls with proteins, generating a heterogeneous group of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) such as carboxymethyllysine (CML). In bottom-up proteomics, 2-iodoacetamide (IAA) is the most commonly used reagent for cysteine alkylation before trypsin digestion, which exogenously gives a carbamidomethylation (CAM) group on the side chain of cysteine residue. However, offisite alkylation of IAA can occur at the protein N-terminus and other amino acid residues such as lysine residue. Here, for the first time, we provided evidence that IAA alkylation can result in false-positive identifications of CML, and N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) can be used as an IAA alternative to avoid these pitfalls.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli lysate proteins were obtained from Bio-Rad (California, USA). HEK293 cells (ATCC, CRL-1573) were harvested with a lysis buffer (0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 0.1 M dithiothreitol), and lysate proteins were obtained by sonication. Tryptic digests were produced according to the standard filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Lysate proteins were reduced with 0.1 M dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min. After washing with U8 solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5), the proteins were alkylated with 50 mM IAA or NIPAM (purity ≥99%, Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA) in U8 solution at room temperature in the dark for 20 min. The tryptic digests were cleaned up with C18 ZipTip (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After SpeedVac drying, the cleaned peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray LC Column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm 100 Å particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an ACN gradient from 5 to 35% in 0.1% formic acid over 300 min at a constant flow of 250 nL/min. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed on the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (300–2000 m/z) were acquired at 70,000 resolution. Top 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by HCD at normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
All LC–MS/MS data were searched against the human or E. coli protein sequence database using PEAKS Studio Xpro (PEAKS for short, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada) and MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany). A reviewed E. coli K12 reference proteome (2033 sequences, August 2021) and a reviewed human reference proteome (20,371 sequences, August 2021) from UniProt were used. For all searches, oxidation of methionine (+15.994915 Da), deamidation of asparagine (+0.984016 Da), and acetylation of protein N-termini (+42.010565 Da) were set as variable modifications. When using IAA as the alkylation reagent, CAM of cysteine (+57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification. When identifying protein glycation, CM of lysine (i.e., CML, +58.005479 Da) was set as an additional variable modification. When searching for false-positive identifications of protein glycation caused by the use of IAA as the alkylation reagent, CAM of lysine (+57.021464 Da) was set as an additional variable modification. When using PEAKS, the peptide mass error tolerance was 5 or 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance was 0.05 Da. When using MaxQuant, the default mass error tolerance values were used for the peptides and the fragments, i.e., first search peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, main search peptide mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance of 20 ppm. Default cleavage site specificity for trypsin was used. Two missed cleavages were allowed. For PEAKS, the proteins were identified at PSM FDR of 1%, peptide FDR of 1%, and protein FDR of 1%. For MaxQuant, the default settings were used, i.e., 1% PSM FDR and 1% protein FDR. When using NIPAM for alkylation, the data analysis method was the same as abovementioned, except that N-isopropylcarbamidoethylation (NIPCAE, +113.084064 Da) was used to replace CAM.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidence suggests that advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) such as <i>N</i><sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CML) and <i>N</i><sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-(carboxymethyl)lysine (CEL) may play important roles in certain human diseases. Reliable analytical methods are needed for their characterizations and measurements. Pitfalls have been reported for applications of LC-MS/MS to identify various types of post-translational modifications, but not yet for the case of AGEs. Here, we showed that in the absence of manual inspection, cysteine alkylation with 2-iodoacetamide (IAA) can result in false-positive/ambiguous identifications of CML &gt;20%. They were attributed to offsite alkylation together with incorrect monoisotopic peak assignment (pitfall 1) or together with deamidation (pitfall 2). For pitfall 1, false-positive identifications can be alleviated using a peptide mass error tolerance &#x2264;5 ppm during the database search. Pitfall 2 results in ambiguous modification assignments, which may be overcome by using other alkylation reagents. According to calculations of theoretical mass shifts, the use of other common alkylation reagents (iodoacetic acid, 2-chloroacetamide, and acrylamide) should face similar pitfalls. The use of acrylamide can result in false-positive identifications of CEL instead of CML. Subsequently, we showed that compared to IAA, the use of <i>N</i>-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) as an alkylation reagent achieved similar levels of proteome coverage, while reducing the offsite alkylation reactions at lysine by more than five times. Furthermore, false-positive/ambiguous identifications of CML due to the two types of pitfalls were absent when using NIPAM. NIPAM alkylation results in a unique mass shift that allows reliable identifications of CML and most likely other AGEs, such as CEL.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Hek293, Escherichia coli, Ptm, Advanced glycation end-product, Cm, Orbitrap, Kidney, N-isopropylcarbamidoethylation, Lc-ms/ms, Carbamidomethylation, Nipam, E. coli, Age, Post-translational modification, Human, Cml, Nipcae, Iaa, Protein glycation, Cam, Hela, Cell line, Carboxymethyllysine, Carboxymethylation, N-isopropylacrylamide, 2-iodoacetamide

### Affiliations
Pilot Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Centre for Precision Medicine Research and Training, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau, China
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau

### Submitter
Humphrey, Wendong Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Terence Chuen Wai Poon
Pilot Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Centre for Precision Medicine Research and Training, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau, China


