### Accession
PXD014042

### Title
Dissecting Alzheimer’s disease molecular substrates by proteomics and discovery of novel post-translational modifications (PTMs)

### Description
Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) serve as diagnostic markers in Alzheimer’s disease. We aimed to discover new PTMs in the context of this disease from MS/MS-based proteomic datasets. Publicly available label-free proteomics data were searched for select PTMs using SEQUEST-HT. Only high-confidence PTMs were analyzed further using bioinformatics analysis. We identified 4,961 unique modified peptides corresponding to 1,856 proteins from datasets pertaining to Alzheimer’s disease. Of these, 52 proteins were known to be involved in Alzheimer’s pathway. Also, 3,164 PTMs are reported to be novel in the context of this disease. Further, protein quantification reveals expression of 13 high-abundant secretary proteins across multiple studies which can be exploited as biomarkers. Identification of novel PTMs from the publicly available proteomic data may provide novel molecular insights in the progression and management of Alzheimer’s disease. Novel high abundant secretory proteins identified can be candidate CSF biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
The datasets were obtained from PRIDE repository pertianing to AD samples by Adav et al. 2015 (PXD002516); Li et al. 2016 (PXD004010) and Huang et al. 2014 (PXD004863).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were searched against NCBI Human RefSeq (release 89) protein database using SEQUEST-HT through Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2) software suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters included full tryptic specificity with up to 1 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as static modification while oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini along with phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, O-GluNAcetylation (O-GlcNAc) of asparagines, serine and threonine, methylation of lysine and arginine, acetylation of lysine and citrullination of arginine were set as variable modification. The mass error for precursor ion and fragment ions was set as 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The probability of site modification was estimated by ptmRS node and q-value was calculated by Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer suite. A strict false discovery rate of 1% at PSM and peptide level was considered.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common complex disease and a major public health burden in both developed and developing countries. Postgenomic technologies such as proteomics and intelligent mining of multi-omics Big Data offer new prospects for diagnostics and therapeutics innovation for AD. In this context, it is noteworthy that mass spectrometry (MS) data are often searched against proteomics databases to unravel the identity of protein biomarkers. In contrast, only a fraction of the MS data can be matched to known proteins, while a large portion of such raw data remains underutilized. Furthermore, the spectral data can be mined for multiple high-confidence post-translational modifications (PTMs) without <i>a priori</i> enrichment. Thus, AD research stands to gain by greater attention to the biological mechanisms regulated by PTMs. Protein modifications may serve as diagnostic biomarkers or as novel molecular targets for drug discovery. We report here novel PTMs discovered in relation to the AD from MS/MS-based proteomic datasets. Publicly available label-free proteomics data were searched for select PTMs using SEQUEST-HT. Only high-confidence PTMs were analyzed using bioinformatics analysis. We identified 4961 unique modified peptides corresponding to 1856 proteins from AD datasets. Of these, 52 proteins were known to be involved in Alzheimer's pathway. Importantly, 3164 PTMs reported in this study are novel in the context of AD. Furthermore, protein quantification revealed expression of 13 high-abundant secretary proteins across multiple studies, which can be potentially harnessed in the future to develop biomarkers. In summary, this study identifies novel PTMs which might help develop new insights on the molecular substrates of AD and thus inform future development of novel diagnostics and treatments for this highly prevalent disease.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Drug targets, Diagnostics, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Ptms

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India


