### Accession
PXD014833

### Title
The olfactory secretome varies according to season in female sheep and goat

### Description
Background: Small ungulates (sheep and goat) display a seasonal breeding, characterised by successive periods of sexual activity (SA) and sexual rest (SR). In sexual activity period the ovarian cycle of females is active and ready for reproduction (oestrus) whereas in sexual rest no ovulation and reproduction are possible (deep anoestrus). Odours emitted by a sexually active male can reactivate the ovarian cycle of anoestrus females. The plasticity of the olfactory system under these hormonal changes has never been explored at the peripheral level of odours reception. As it was shown in pig that the olfactory secretome (proteins secreted in the nasal mucus) could be modified under hormonal control, we monitored its composition in females of both species along several seasons, thanks to a non-invasive sampling of olfactory mucus.   Results: In both species the olfactory secretome is composed of isoforms of OBP-like proteins, generated by post-translational modifications, phosphorylation, N-glycosylation and O-GlcNAcylation. Important changes were observed in the olfactory secretome between the sexual rest and the sexual activity periods, characterised in ewe by the specific expression of SAL-like proteins and the emergence of OBPs O-GlcNAcylation. In Goat, the differences between SA and SR did not come from new proteins expression, but from different post-translational modifications, the main difference between the SA and SR secretome being the number of isoforms of each protein.  Conclusion: Despite common behaviour, seasonal breeding, and genetic resources, the two species seem to adapt their sensory equipment in SA by different modalities: the variation of olfactory secretome in ewe could correspond to a specialization to detect male odours only in SA, whereas in goat the stability of the olfactory secretome could indicate a constant capacity of odours detection suggesting that the hallmark of SA in goat could be the emission of specific odours by the sexually active male.

### Sample Protocol
Nasal mucus was collected in a non-invasive manner, by gently wiping the nasal cavity with sterile gauzes, immediately put in 20 mL glass vials and stored at -80 °C until protein extraction. Proteins were extracted from gauzes by phase partition with iced cooled solution of CHCl3/MeOH 2/1. Four mL were added to the gauzes and let stand at 4 °C during 1 h 30. Then, gauzes were squeezed with a syringe and 1 mL of MilliQ water. A second extraction was performed with 2 mL of CHCl3/MeOH and 0.5 mL of water. The resulting liquid solution was centrifuged at 4,200 rpm during 20 min at 4 °C. The methanol phase (c. a. 4 mL) was collected, dried in Speed-Vac (Eppendorf) and stored at -20 °C until use. Protein concentration was estimated in SDS-PAGE (22), in order to make standardization of aliquots to be further analyzed by 2-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE). For 2-DE, dried proteins were resuspended in 10 µL water, then in 120 µL of rehydration buffer as already described. Immobiline DryStrips (IPG strips: pH 3-5.6, 7 cm, GE Healthcare or pH 4-7, 7 cm, Bio-Rad)) were submitted to passive rehydration with samples during 16 h at room temperature (RT). First dimension (isoelectrofocalisation) was performed on PROTEAN i12™ IEF system (BioRad), with the standard program “7-cm Gradual S-1” (250 V rapid for 30 min, 1000 V gradual for 1 h, 5000 V gradual for 2 h and a hold of 5000 V), with a current limited to 50 μA/gel. When IEF was complete (9,000 VH final), IPG strips were incubated successively for 15 min in the equilibration buffer (375 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 6 M Urea, 2% (w/v) SDS and 30% (v/v) glycerol) containing first 1.5% (w/v) DTT then 2% (w/v) iodoacetamide. The second dimension was performed using 16.8% SDS-PAGE in Mini-PROTEAN® Tetra cell (Bio-Rad) with the Prestained SDS-PAGE Standards Low Range or Precision Plus Protein Standard All blue or Precision Plus Protein Standard Dual Color (Bio-Rad) as molecular weight markers. Spots were excised from stained gels. Digestion of in-gel proteins was performed as previously described (Miguet et al, J Proteome Res. 2009 Jul;8(7):3346–54). An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) was used for the separation of protein digests. Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reverse phase column (75 µm × 150 mm, 2-µm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) at 35 °C. Trapping was performed during 4 min at 5 μL/min, with solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile-ACN and 0.1% formic acid-FA). Elution was performed using two solvents, A (0,1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min. Gradient separation was 2 min from 2 % to 5 % B, 12 min from 5 % to 25 % B, 2 min from 25 % to 80 % B, 3 min 80 % B. The column was equilibrated for 8 min with 2% buﬀer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analyzed by a Q-Exactive device (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 300–1200 range with a resolution of 35,000 (m/z 200). The target value was 5.00E + 05 and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms. Three most intense peaks with charge state between 2 and 4 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 35 %, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00E+04 and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 150 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 7 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nano LC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). MS/MS data were interpreted using search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.2 Da for the precursor and 0.2 Da for the ion fragment, against two composite target decoy databases built with C. hircus NCBI databases (TaxID=9925, 05 January 2017, 46032 entries) or O. aries UniProt database (TaxID: 9940, 20 March 2017, 27139 entries), both fused with the sequences of recombinant trypsin and a list of classical contaminants (118 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, cysteine propionamidation, serine and threonine phosphorylation were searched as variable modiﬁcations. Up to one trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. For each sample, peptides were ﬁltered out according to the cut-oﬀ set for proteins hits with two or more peptides larger than nine residues, ion score >15, no false positive protein was identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproduction, Ungulates, Seasonality, Olfactory secretome

### Affiliations
CNRS, INSERM, Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Centre d’Infection et d’Immunité de Lille, 59000 Lille, France
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Saliou
CNRS, INSERM, Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Centre d’Infection et d’Immunité de Lille, 59000 Lille, France


