### Accession
PXD009500

### Title
Bi-directional cell-pericellular matrix interactions direct stem cell fate

### Description
Modifiable hydrogels have revealed tremendous insight into how physical characteristics of cells’ 3D environment drive stem cell lineage specification. However, in native tissues, cells do not passively receive signals from their niche. Instead they actively probe and modify their pericellular space to suit their needs, yet the dynamics of cells’ reciprocal interactions with their pericellular matrix when encapsulated within hydrogels remains relatively unexplored. Here, we show that human bone marrow stromal cells (hMSC) encapsulated within hyaluronic acid-based hydrogels modify their pericellular environment through degradation and/or protein secretion, imparting them with similar pericellular stiffnesses, regardless of initial hydrogel properties. These cell-secreted pericellular matrices play a role in regulating hMSC fate, with secretion of a stiff proteinaceous pericellular matrix associated with adipogenesis, and degradation with osteogenesis. Our observations suggest that hMSC participate in a bi-directional interplay between the properties of their 3D milieu and their own secreted pericellular matrix, and that this combination of interactions drives fate.

### Sample Protocol
Each hydrogel was incubated for 10 min at RT with 100 μL acetonitrile which caused them to shrink and whiten in colour. Each hydrogel was then transferred to a 2 mL tube and the acetonitrile was removed. Lyophilised trypsin was made up to 100 ng/μL in 50 mM acetic acid, then diluted ten-fold in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to give a 10 ng/μL working solution. 50 ng trypsin was added to the hydrogel and allowed to absorb into the hydrogel for 30 min at RT. 100 μL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was then added and the hydrogel was incubated overnight at 37 °C on a bench top mixer set to mix at 800 rpm. The tube was centrifuged (2,000 rpm, 3 min, 25 ºC) and the supernatant (containing peptides) was transferred to a new 2 mL tube. 30 μL acetonitrile was added to the hydrogel and incubated for 5 min at RT. The tube was then centrifuged (2,000 rpm, 3 min, 25 ºC) again and the supernatant was combined with the previous supernatant creating the final peptide sample. The sample was vacuum centrifuged to dryness for 30 min then a C18 reversed phase clean-up was performed using in-house prepared StageTips. Peptides were finally eluted from the StageTip with 80% acetonitrile/5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Dried peptides were re-suspended in 15 μL 0.1% TFA, sonicated for 10 min and centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 3 min, 25 °C). 5 μL of supernatant was transferred to a glass autosampler vial containing 45 μL of 0.1% TFA to give a 1:10 dilution. This was determined as an appropriate concentration based on preliminary experiments. 10 μL sample was analysed in technical duplicate using a ThermoFisher Scientific QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for on-line liquid chromatographic separation. The sample was initially loaded onto a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 5 mm length, 300 μm inner diameter) then transferred onto a C18 reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 50 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5–40% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 35 min. Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) was selected as the activation method. Singly charged and unknown charge state precursor ions were not analyzed. Full MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1800; resolution 70k; AGC target value 1E6) with the MS/MS spectra of the ten most abundant precursors from the preceding MS survey scan then acquired (resolution 17.5k, AGC target value 1E5; normalised collision energy 28 eV; minimum AGC target 1E2). Selected precursors were dynamically-excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). MaxQuant was set up to analyze SILAC samples by selecting a multiplicity of 2 and heavy labels Arg10 and Lys8. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB human protein database (downloaded May 2017; 159,743 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. Common protein contaminants were included in the search. Trypsin enzyme was selected (C-terminal cleavage of arginine and lysine residues) and a maximum of two missed cleavages was permitted. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. All other MaxQuant parameters were maintained at default including a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The resulting proteinGroups.txt file was opened in Microsoft Office Excel 2016. Percentage heavy label incorporation values were created for each protein using the formula “(Ratio H/L) 309 / (1+ Ratio H/L)”. The file was saved as a .txt file and then opened in Perseus (version 1.4.0.2). For each sample, a minimum “Ratio H/L count” threshold of 3 for both technical duplicates was set. The “Ratio H/L count” refers to the number of peptide quantification events used for protein quantification. Technical replicates were plotted using the scatterplot function. Gene Ontology annotation was performed to identify extracellular matrix proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Modifiable hydrogels have revealed tremendous insight into how physical characteristics of cells' 3D environment drive stem cell lineage specification. However, in native tissues, cells do not passively receive signals from their niche. Instead they actively probe and modify their pericellular space to suit their needs, yet the dynamics of cells' reciprocal interactions with their pericellular environment when encapsulated within hydrogels remains relatively unexplored. Here, we show that human bone marrow stromal cells (hMSC) encapsulated within hyaluronic acid-based hydrogels modify their surroundings by synthesizing, secreting and arranging proteins pericellularly or by degrading the hydrogel. hMSC's interactions with this local environment have a role in regulating hMSC fate, with a secreted proteinaceous pericellular matrix associated with adipogenesis, and degradation with osteogenesis. Our observations suggest that hMSC participate in a bi-directional interplay between the properties of their 3D milieu and their own secreted pericellular matrix, and that this combination of interactions drives fate.

### Keywords
Stem cells, Silac, Orbitrap, Interactions, Lumos, Fate, Matrix proteins

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis and Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute London NW1 1AT UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Protein Analysis and Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute London NW1 1AT UK


