### Accession
PXD018754

### Title
A global data-driven census of Salmonella small proteins and their potential functions in bacterial virulence

### Description
Small proteins are an emerging class of gene products with diverse roles in bacterial physiology. However, a full understanding of their importance has been hampered by insufficient genome annotations and a lack of characterization in microbes other than Escherichia coli. Here, we have taken an integrative approach to accelerate the discovery of small proteins and their putative virulence-associated functions in Salmonella Typhimurium. We merged the annotated small proteome of Salmonella with new small proteins predicted with in silico and experimental approaches. We then exploited existing and newly generated global datasets that provide information on small open reading frame expression during infection of epithelial cells (dual RNA-seq), contribution to bacterial fitness inside macrophages (TraDIS), and potential engagement in molecular interactions (Grad-seq). This integrative approach suggested a new role for the small protein MgrB beyond its known function in regulating PhoQ. We demonstrated a virulence and motility defect of a Salmonella ΔmgrB mutant and revealed an effect of MgrB in regulating the Salmonella transcriptome and proteome under infection-relevant conditions. Overall, our study highlights the power of interpreting available “omics” datasets with a focus on small proteins, and may serve as a blueprint for a data integration-based survey of small proteins in diverse bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and growth conditions. The ΔmgrB strain was generated as previously described (Datsenko, K.A., and Wanner, B.L. (2000). One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97, 6640-6645). For growth in SPI-2-inducing conditions, cells that had reached SPI-1 conditions were centrifuged for 2 min at 12,000 rpm at room temperature (RT), washed twice with PBS and once with SPI-2 medium (Löber, S., Jäckel, D., Kaiser, N., and Hensel, M. (2006). Regulation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 genes by independent environmental signals. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 296, 435-447), and then diluted 1:50 into fresh SPI-2 medium. The cultures were again grown at 37°C and 220 rpm to an OD600 0.3. When required, the medium was supplemented with 100 μg/ml ampicillin. Whole proteome preparation. For the preparation of the total Salmonella proteome for mass spectrometry analysis, cells were grown in SPI-2-inducing conditions (see above). At an OD600 of 0.3, cells were pelleted, washed, and resuspended in protein loading dye for loading on a precast gel at a concentration of 1 OD/100 μl. Proteins were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE and prepared for MS/MS analyses as previously described (Bonn, F., Bartel, J., Büttner, K., Hecker, M., Otto, A., and Becher, D. (2014). Picking Vanished Proteins from the Void: How to Collect and Ship/Share Extremely Dilute Proteins in a Reproducible and Highly Efficient Manner. Anal. Chem. 86, 7421-7427). Briefly, gel lanes were fractionated into 10 gel pieces, cut into smaller blocks and transferred into low binding tubes. Samples were and washed until gel blocks were destained. After drying of gel pieces in a vacuum centrifuge, they were covered with trypsin solution. Digestion took place at 37 °C overnight before peptides were eluted in water by ultrasonication. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography (LC) separation and electrospray ionization-based mass spectrometry applying exactly the same injected volumes in order to allow for label-free relative protein quantification. Therefore, peptides were loaded on a self-packed analytical column (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with of Reprosil-Gold 300 C18, 5 µm material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5 - 99% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 83 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) using an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system. For mass spectrometry analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the twenty most abundant precursor ions. MS2 experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap. MS Data Analysis. A database search against a Salmonella Typhimurium SL1344 downloaded from Uniprot (date 23/08/2018, organism ID 216597, 4,659 entries) as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Common laboratory contaminants and reversed sequences were included by MaxQuant. Search parameters were set as follows: Trypsin/P specific digestion with up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) as a variable and carbamidomethylation at cysteines (+57.02 Da) as fixed modification, match between runs with default parameters enabled. The FDRs (false discovery rates) of protein and PSM (peptide spectrum match) levels were set to 0.01. Two identified peptides with at least one of those being unique were required for protein identification. LFQ was performed using the following settings: LFQ minimum ratio count 2 considering only unique for quantification. Results were filtered for proteins quantified in at least two out of three biological replicates before statistical analysis. Here, two strains (of either wild-type, ΔmgrB, mgrB+) were compared by a student’s t-test applying a threshold p-value of 0.01, which was based on all possible permutations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tradis, Infection, Spepfinder, Dual rna-seq, Small proteins, Virulence, Grad-seq, Salmonella typhimurium, Ribo-seq, Host-pathogen interaction, Mgrb

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


