### Accession
PXD032982

### Title
Identification of Bacillus subtilis YjoB-binding proteins using AP-MS

### Description
Bacillus subtilis YjoB has been an uncharacterized AAA+ ATPase which consists of a single ATPase domain and a unique N-terminal domain. To understand the molecular function of YjoB, we identified YjoB-binding proteins through proteomics approaches, and analyzed the relationship between YjoB and its binding proteins. YjoB was coeluted with catalase and iron-sulfur cluster proteins in affinity purification and enhanced the activity of a catalase by specifically preventing heat-induced aggregation of catalase.

### Sample Protocol
DNAs encoding YjoB or EGFP with Strep and FLAG-affinity tag was inserted into the shuttle vector pHT254 (MoBiTec, Göttingen, Germany), respectively. Each plasmid was introduced into B. subtilis 168 strain (ATCC-23857, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), and the transformed B. subtilis cells were cultured in Lennox Luria-Bertani medium at 37 °C. When the optical density of the medium at 600 nm reached 0.6–0.7, the protein expression was induced by adding 0.5 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside into the culture medium. The cells were cultured overnight at 20 °C, harvested by centrifugation at 3,000 × g for 10 min, and resuspended in PBS buffer (4.3 mM Na2HPO4, 1.4 mM KH2HPO4, 137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The resuspended cells were lysed by sonication, incubated with DNase I and RNase A at 10 μg/mL for 30 min, and clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 30 min. YjoB or EGFP was purified using Strep-Tactin and anti-FLAG resin. Clarified cell lysates were incubated with 100 μL pre-clearing beads (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for 3 h, transferred to 150 μL Strep-Tactin Sepharose (IBA, Göttingen, Germany), incubated for 2 h, and washed three times using PBS containing 0.05% Nonidet P-40. Proteins bound to the resin were eluted by incubating with 240 μL of E buffer (IBA) for 30 min and centrifuging at 1000 × g for 1 min. For the second affinity purification step, the eluates were diluted with PBS buffer and incubated with 60 μL anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (MilliporeSigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 1 h. The resin was washed three times with PBS containing 0.05% NP40, and proteins were eluted by incubating for 30 min with 100 μL of PBS buffer supplemented with 0.05% NP40 and 500 μg/mL 3xFLAG peptide and centrifuging at 1000 × g for 1 min.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples purified by Strep-Tactin and anti-FLAG resins were digested by trypsin in solution and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The sample was then injected into an analytical C18 column connected to Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides’ molecular weight was analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were identified using the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline v5.0.1 (Integrated Proteomics Application, San Diego, Ca, USA).

### Publication Abstract
AAA+ ATPases are ubiquitous proteins associated with most cellular processes, including DNA unwinding and protein unfolding. Their functional and structural properties are typically determined by domains and motifs added to the conserved ATPases domain. Currently, the molecular function and structure of many ATPases remain elusive. Here, we report the crystal structure and biochemical analyses of YjoB, a <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> AAA+ protein. The crystal structure revealed that the YjoB hexamer forms a bucket hat-shaped structure with a porous chamber. Biochemical analyses showed that YjoB prevents the aggregation of vegetative catalase KatA and gluconeogenesis-specific glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase GapB but not citrate synthase, a conventional substrate. Structural and biochemical analyses further showed that the internal chamber of YjoB is necessary for inhibition of substrate aggregation. Our results suggest that YjoB, conserved in the class Bacilli, is a potential molecular chaperone acting in the starvation/stationary phases of <i>B. subtilis</i> growth.

### Keywords
Aaa+ protein, Atpase, Bacillus subtilis, Chaperone, Yjob

### Affiliations
Structural Biology Lab, College of Pharmacy, Yeungnam University
Yeungnam University

### Submitter
Eunju Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Dong Young Kim
Structural Biology Lab, College of Pharmacy, Yeungnam University


