### Accession
PXD004882

### Title
Greatwall kinase regulates SAC by controlling phosphorylation and activity of MPS1

### Description
The Greatwall/Mastl kinase is an essential gene, which regulates the phosphatase activity that counteracts the phosphorylation of Cdk1 substrates. Although Mastl-/- MEFs can enter mitosis, they are unable to complete mitosis due to chromosome segregation defects. Here, we show that Mastl is essential for robust spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) maintenance. Mastl-/- MEFs display reduced phosphorylation and kinase activity of MPS1, which causes mislocalization of MPS1, Mad1, and Aurora B from the kinetochore and the inner centromere regions. This results in premature inactivation of SAC signalling and early anaphase onset without correction of chromosome-spindle attachment mistakes. Treatment of the knockout cells with protein phosphatase II inhibitor okadaic acid (OA) rescued decreased MPS1 activity, mislocalization of Aurora B, Mad1, MPS1, and premature mitotic slippage. Our data demonstrates how regulation of PP2A activity by Mastl kinase prevents premature SAC silencing as a result of controlling the phosphorylation status and activity of MPS1.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Mass Spectrometry (MS).   Primary MEFs with MastlFLOX/FLOX Cre-Esr1 genotype were cultured in either media containing light isotopes of L-lysine-(12C614N2) (K0) and L-arginine-(12C614N4) (R0) or media containing stable heavy isotope L-lysine-(13C615N2) (K8) and L-arginine-(13C615N4) (R10) for three passages for a complete exchange of isotopes. Cells were syncronized by serum starvation and released to enter cell cycle as usual. Cells were treated with 5µM Eg5 kinesin II inhibitor for 4 hours between 20-24 hours after serum release. Mitotic cells were isolated by pipetting and lysed in 8 M urea lysis buffer. Equal amounts of cell lysates from light (K0R0) and heavy (K8R10) cells were mixed. A total of two biological replicates were carried out, namely one Forward (light Mastl WT cells versus heavy Induced/Mastl KO cells) and one Reverse (heavy Mastl WT cells versus light Induced/Mastl KO cells) experiments. Preparation of peptide samples: Protein extracts in 8 M urea lysis buffer was reduced by the addition of 1/10 volume of 45 mM DTT to the cleared cell supernatant and incubated for 20 min at 60ºC. The samples were cooled to room temperature followed by addition of 110 mM iodoacetamide at a volume equal to the DTT solution and incubate for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted 4-fold to a final concentration of 2 M urea in 20 mM HEPES (pH8). Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added with a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). After overnight digestion at room temperature, the peptide solution was cleaned up using EmporeTM C18-SD Cartridge (3M Empore). The amount of peptide obtained was measured using Nanodrop (ThermoScientific). Phosphopeptide enrichment: Phosphopeptides were enriched from the tryptic peptides as described with slight modifications [24]. Around 230 µg of in-solution digested tryptic peptides reconstituted in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate were diluted 4 times with 1M glycolic acid / 80% acetonitrile (v/v)/ 2% TFA (v/v) and added to 1.25 mg of ‘Titansphere TiO2 10μm’ (GL Sciences Inc., Japan). The mixture was incubated on a rotating wheel for 10 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation at 4000g for 3 seconds.  The supernatant was collected and mixed with another portion of the beads and incubated as above. The bead-pellets from each incubation were separately transferred to a 200 μl pipet tip plugged with two layers of C8 empore disks (3M Empore). The beads were washed 3 times with 1M glycolic acid / 80% acetonitrile (v/v) / 2% TFA (v/v) solution and 3 times with 80% acetonitrile (v/v) / 0.1% TFA (v/v) solution. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads with 140 µl 40% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 15% NH4OH (m/v) and were vacuum-concentrated to 50 μl. The phosphopeptides were acidified and stored on a stage tip [25] before being analysed by LC-MS. MS analysis: SEach samples was analyzed in duplicate on an Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher). Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1400) were acquired with a resolution of r = 60,000 at m/z 400, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. The ten most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an ion intensity of >2000 counts and a charge state ≥2 were isolated sequentially to a target value of 1e4 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collisionally-induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 35%. A dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count, repeat, and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) [26,27] against uniprot 2014-01 mouse database containing 262 commonly observed contaminants. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing maximum two missed cleavages and two labeled amino acids as well as an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, phosphorylated serine/threonine/tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Labeled arginine and lysine were specified as fixed or variable modifications, depending on the prior knowledge about the parent ion. SILAC peptide and protein quantification was performed using default settings. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 for both protein and peptide. Proteins were considered identified when supported by at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of six amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
The Greatwall kinase/Mastl is an essential gene that indirectly inhibits the phosphatase activity toward mitotic Cdk1 substrates. Here we show that although Mastl knockout (MastlNULL) MEFs enter mitosis, they progress through mitosis without completing cytokinesis despite the presence of misaligned chromosomes, which causes chromosome segregation defects. Furthermore, we uncover the requirement of Mastl for robust spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) maintenance since the duration of mitotic arrest caused by microtubule poisons in MastlNULL MEFs is shortened, which correlates with premature disappearance of the essential SAC protein Mad1 at the kinetochores. Notably, MastlNULL MEFs display reduced phosphorylation of a number of proteins in mitosis, which include the essential SAC kinase MPS1. We further demonstrate that Mastl is required for multi-site phosphorylation of MPS1 as well as robust MPS1 kinase activity in mitosis. In contrast, treatment of MastlNULL cells with the phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid (OKA) rescues the defects in MPS1 kinase activity, mislocalization of phospho-MPS1 as well as Mad1 at the kinetochore, and premature SAC silencing. Moreover, using in vitro dephosphorylation assays, we demonstrate that Mastl promotes persistent MPS1 phosphorylation by inhibiting PP2A/B55-mediated MPS1 dephosphorylation rather than affecting Cdk1 kinase activity. Our findings establish a key regulatory function of the Greatwall kinase/Mastl-&gt;PP2A/B55 pathway in preventing premature SAC silencing.

### Keywords
Greatwall kinase/mastl/cyclin-dependent kinase/knockout mice/cdk1/mps1/sac

### Affiliations
IMCB
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos#3-09, Singapore 138673, Republic of Singapore

### Submitter
Sheena Wee

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos#3-09, Singapore 138673, Republic of Singapore


