### Accession
PXD014959

### Title
YBEY is an essential biogenesis factor for mitochondrial ribosomes

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a key cellular process involving numerous protein factors, some of which are deeply conserved. This is namely the case of the bacterial endoribonuclease YbeY, whose loss is associated with ribosomal abnormalities, profound changes in gene expression, altered metabolism and death. Surprisingly, YbeY is also widespread among eukaryotes. Here we provide an in-depth characterisation of the human YBEY homologue localising in mitochondria. We show that YBEY loss results in a severe mitochondrial phenotype and complete inability of mitochondria to translate proteins and, consequently, perform oxidative phosphorylation. Through interactions with the important disease protein p32 and other factors, YBEY functions to recruit the mitoribosomal protein uS11m to the nascent small subunit in order to complete the assembly of initiation-competent ribosomal particles. This likely conserved mechanism shows striking similarities with final stages of the cytosolic ribosome biogenesis and may provide an important late checkpoint before the mitoribosome engages in translation.

### Sample Protocol
SAL001 cells inducibly overexpressing YBEY-3×FLAG were used to coimmunoprecipitate YBEY-containing complexes, whereas the parental Flp-In T-REx 293 cell line served as negative control. In both cases, 900 cm² of cells were grown to 80-90% confluency and induced with 0.1 mg/ml tetracycline 24 h prior the experiment. Cells were harvested, and crude mitochondria were isolated and lysed in 0.5 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside, 1 mM PMSF with the help of the Dounce homogeniser (20 strokes). This and the subsequent manipulations were carried out at 4°C. The lysate was cleared at 14,000g for 10 min and mixed with 50 µl of the α-FLAG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#F1804; RRID:AB_262044), followed by incubation for 30 min with constant rocking. Thereafter, the lysate was mixed with 100 µl of protein A-sepharose beads (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#P6649), pre-washed five times with 1 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF in an 1.5 ml tube, and incubated for another 30 min with constant rocking. The beads were collected at the bottom of the tube by pulse centrifugation, and the flow-through was discarded. The beads were washed five times with 1 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, and the retained proteins were eluted with 150 µl of 1× Laemmli buffer by boiling at 80°C for 5 min. Proteins eluted with Laemmli buffer were precipitated overnight with glacial 0.1M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (5 volumes, -20°C). After centrifugation at 12.000g and 4°C during 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 0.1M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Pellets were resuspended in 100µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and submitted to reduction (5mM Dithiothreitol, 95°C, 10 min) and alkylation (10mM Iodoacetamide, room temperature, 20 min). Proteins were finally digested overnight with 200ng of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on either a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, coupled to a NanoLC-2DPlus system) as described previously (Chicher et al., 2015 [1]) or on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000) as described previously (Waltz et al., 2019 [2]). Each sample was separated with an analytical C18 column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper 3µm Acclaim PepMap, Thermo) with a 160 min 300 nL/min gradient of acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched against the Homo sapiens Swissprot database with a target-decoy strategy (Swissprot release 2019_07, 20432 protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). Proline was used to align the Spectral Count values across all samples using the “Compare with SC” tool. The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least two independent biological replicates (2 YBEY samples and 3 control samples).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Translation, Ribosome, Oxidative phosphorylation, Ybey, Ribosomal protein, Us11m, P32

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
UMR7156 - GMGM, Génétique Moléculaire, Génomique, Microbiologie, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Smirnov
UMR7156 - GMGM, Génétique Moléculaire, Génomique, Microbiologie, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS.


