### Accession
PXD004130

### Title
Analysis of the CBL and CBLB signalosomes in primary T cells

### Description
T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling is essential for the function of T cells and negatively regulated by the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases CBL and CBLB. Here we combine mouse genetics and affinity purification coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry to monitor the dynamics of the CBL and CBLB signaling complexes that assemble in normal T cells over 600 seconds of TCR stimulation. We identify many previously known CBL and CBLB interacting partners, as well as a majority of proteins that have not yet been implicated in those signaling complexes. We exploit correlations in protein association with CBL and CBLB as a function of time of TCR stimulation for predicting the occurrence of direct physical association between them. The dataset is divided in two distinct subsets corresponding to the Cbl and to the Cblb interactomes. Each of them contains mass spectrometry results from the analysis of 10 different conditions of AP-MS purifications (based on affinity purification on Streptactin beads of One-Strep-tagged proteins) starting from CD4+ T cells which were either non stimulated or stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 antibodies as follows: CBL interactome: - CBL-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells non stimulated (noted Cbl_0) - CBL-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 30s (noted Cbl_30) - CBL-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 120s (noted Cbl_120) - CBL-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 300s (noted Cbl_300) - CBL-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 600s (noted Cbl_600) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells non stimulated (noted WT_0) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 30s (noted WT_30) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 120s (noted WT_120) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 300s (noted WT_300) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 600s (noted WT_600)  For the CBL interactome, 3 biological replicates were prepared for these 10 different conditions (noted Ech1, Ech2, Ech3), yielding 30 analyzed samples. Three technical nanoLC-MS runs were acquired for each sample (noted R1, R2, R3), leading to 90 nanoLC-MS raw files. CBL interactome: - CBLB-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells non stimulated (noted Cblb_0) - CBLB-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 30s (noted Cblb_30) - CBLB-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 120s (noted Cblb_120) - CBLB-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 300s (noted Cblb_300) - CBL-OST transgenic mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 600s (noted Cblb_600) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells non stimulated (noted WT_0) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 30s (noted WT_30) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 120s (noted WT_120) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 300s (noted WT_300) - WT mice, CD4+ T cells stimulated 600s (noted WT_600)  For the CBLB interactome, 4 biological replicates were prepared for these 10 different conditions (noted S1, S2, S3, S4), yielding 40 analyzed samples. For series S1 to S3, 2 technical nanoLC-MS runs were acquired for each sample (noted R1, R2) and for serie S4, 3 technical nanoLC-MS runs were acquired for each sample (noted R1, R2, R3), leading in total to 90 nanoLC-MS raw files.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, expanded for 48 hours in culture, harvested and grown in the presence of IL-2 for 48 h prior to stimulation. A total of 100 x 106 short-term expanded CD4+ T cells from CBL-OST, CBLB-OST and wild-type mice were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with antibodies. In the latter case, CD4+ T cells were incubated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4, followed by one round of washing and then cross-linkage with a purified Rabbit anti-Rat for 0.5, 2, 5 or 10 minutes at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by the addition of twice concentrated lysis buffer and postnuclear lysates were then used for affinity purification. Affinity purification of protein complexes was performed on Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads. Proteins were eluted from the beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin. Protein samples were partially air-dried in a Speed-Vac concentrators, reconstituted in Laemli buffer containing DTT (25 mM) and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Cysteines were alkylated for 30 min at room temperature by addition of iodoacetamide (90 mM). Protein samples were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel (0.15 x 3 x 8 cm) and subjected to electrophoresis. Migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered the gel. The gel was briefly stained with Coomassie blue and a single slice containing the whole sample was excised. The gel slice was washed in-gel digested using 0.6 μg modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the purified on C18 Zip-Tip (Millipore) and analyzed by MS. A mix of standard synthetic peptides (iRT Kit, Biognosys) was spiked in all samples to monitor the stability of the nanoLC-MS system during the analytical sequence. Peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to tandem MS using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System, Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each sample was loaded on a C-18 precolumn (300 μm inner diameter X 5 mm, Dionex) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 μL/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (75 μm inner diameter x 50 cm, in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5-50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. Survey scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350–2000 m/z range, with the resolution set to a value of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions survey scans were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap. Dynamic exclusion was used within 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries in the UniProt protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2014_09; 16699 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.5 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 0.5 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs.

### Publication Abstract
T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling is essential for the function of T cells and negatively regulated by the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases CBL and CBLB Here, we combined mouse genetics and affinity purification coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry to monitor the dynamics of the CBL and CBLB signaling complexes that assemble in normal T cells over 600&#xa0;seconds of TCR stimulation. We identify most previously known CBL and CBLB interacting partners, as well as a majority of proteins that have not yet been implicated in those signaling complexes. We exploit correlations in protein association with CBL and CBLB as a function of time of TCR stimulation for predicting the occurrence of direct physical association between them. By combining co-recruitment analysis with biochemical analysis, we demonstrated that the CD5 transmembrane receptor constitutes a key scaffold for CBL- and CBLB-mediated ubiquitylation following TCR engagement. Our results offer an integrated view of the CBL and CBLB signaling complexes induced by TCR stimulation and provide a molecular basis for their negative regulatory function in normal T cells.

### Keywords
Tcr, Signalosome, Ap-ms, Interactome, Primary t cell, Cblb, Cbl

### Affiliations
IPBS/CNRS
Institute of pharmacology and structural biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France

### Submitter
Karima Chaoui

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Gonzalez de Peredo
Institute of pharmacology and structural biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


