### Accession
PXD044512

### Title
A cytoplasmic chemoreceptor and Reactive Oxygen Species mediate bacterial chemotaxis to copper

### Description
Chemotaxis is a widespread strategy used by unicellular and multicellular living organisms to maintain their fitness in stressful environments. We previously showed that bacteria can trigger a negative chemotactic response to a copper (Cu)-rich environment. Cu ions toxicity on bacterial cell physiology has been mainly linked to mismetallation events and ROS production, although the precise role of Cu-generated ROS remains largely debated. Here, we found that the cytoplasmic Cu ions content mirrors variations of the extracellular Cu ions concentration and triggers a dose-dependent oxidative stress, which can be abrogated by superoxide dismutase and catalase overexpression. The inhibition of ROS production in the cytoplasm not only improves bacterial growth but also impedes Cu-chemotaxis, indicating that ROS derived from cytoplasmic Cu ions mediate the control of bacterial chemotaxis to Cu. We also identified the Cu chemoreceptor McpR, which binds Cu ions with low affinity, suggesting a labile interaction. In addition, we demonstrate that the cysteine 75 and histidine 99 within the McpR sensor domain are key residues in Cu chemotaxis and Cu coordination. Finally, we discovered that in vitro both Cu(I) and Cu(II) ions modulate McpR conformation in a distinct manner. Overall,our study provides mechanistic insights on a redox-based control of Cu chemotaxis, indicating that the cellular redox status can play a key role in bacterial chemotaxis.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains, plasmids and growth conditions Caulobacter crescentus (NA1000 strain) was grown at 30°C in Peptone Yeast Extract (PYE) medium (45) with 5 μg/ml kanamycin, 1 µg/ml chloramphenicol and/or an appropriate concentration of CuSO4.5H2O when required. Cultures in exponential phase were used for all experiments.Briefly, the bacteria were collected at an O.D.660 nm of 0.4 and centrifuged in Ludox LS colloidal silica gradient. After the centrifugation, SW are separated from the other cellular forms (ST and PD) based on a density difference. The SW cells were collected and washed several times with PBS prior the experiments.  Determination of cytoplasmic Cu content C. crescentus cells were fixed for 20 min in 2% paraformaldehyde at 4°C and then washed three times with an ice-cold wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 100 μM EDTA). The cells were then incubated for 10 min with zwitterionic detergent (0.0125 % Zwittergent 3-14 detergent, 200 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6), to disrupt the outer membrane but not the inner membrane. A final centrifugation at 14,500 x g for 15 min separated the spheroplasts (cytoplasm and inner membrane fraction) from the periplasm (and outer membrane fraction). The spheroplasts were lysed under 2.4 kbar by using a cell disrupter (Cell Disruption System, one shot model, Constant). Cells debris were removed by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 min. and cell lysates were diluted in HNO3 1 %. Samples were finally analyzed by inductively coupled plasma - optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) with an Optima 8000 ICP-OES from PerkinElmer. Cellular Cu concentration were calculated as described in (12). Briefly, 10 µl of the samples after fixation were diluted 1:100 in PBS and counted with a BD FACSVerseTM flow cytometer. Data were analyzed with the BD FACSuite V1.0.5 software. A ratio between the number of bacteria and the OD660nm was determined. The combination of both flow cytometry and ICP-OES analyses allows to determine the number of Cu atoms in one spheroplast. Protein digestion. 15 µg of purified McpR (8.98 µM) or McpRC75S were incubated with Cu(II), Cu(I), H2O2 and Cu(I)+H2O2 at a 1:100 ratio for 10 min at room temperature.  McpR samples were treated using Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP).The digest was analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims TOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) coupled with an UHPLC nanoElute (Bruker). Peptides were separated by nanoUHPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) on a 75 μm ID, 25 cm C18 column with integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Aurora, ionopticks, Melbourne) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min, at 50°C. LC mobile phases A was water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and B ACN with 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded directly on the analytical column at a constant pressure of 800 bar. The digest (1 µl) was injected, and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased linearly from 2% B to 15 % in 36 min, from 15 % B to 25% in 19 min, from 25% B to 37 % in 5 min and from 37% B to 95% in 5 min. Data acquisition on the tims TOF Pro was performed using Hystar 5.1 and timsControl 2.0. tims TOF Pro data were acquired using 100 ms TIMS accumulation time, mobility (1/K0) range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm². Mass-spectrometric analysis were carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. One MS spectra followed by ten PASEF MSMS spectra per total cycle of 1.1 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio X Pro with ion mobility module (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON). Protein identifications were conducted using PEAKS search engine with 15 ppm as parent mass error tolerance and 0.05 Da as fragment mass error tolerance. Carbamidomethylation was allowed as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, histidine, tryptophan, and acetylation (N-term) as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the maximum number of missed cleavages per peptide was set at three. The peak lists were searched against the E. coli-K12 (11002 sequences) and Caulobacter NA1000 (3863 sequences).from UNIREF 100. Peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were normalized to less than 1.0% false discovery rate.The identification results were processed with the PTM profile tool from PEAKS, which provides quantitative information of modified peptides compared with unmodified peptides for the modification sites of the protein across all MS samples.

### Publication Abstract
Chemotaxis is a widespread strategy used by unicellular and multicellular living organisms to maintain their fitness in stressful environments. We previously showed that bacteria can trigger a negative chemotactic response to a copper (Cu)-rich environment. Cu ion toxicity on bacterial cell physiology has been mainly linked to mismetallation events and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, although the precise role of Cu-generated ROS remains largely debated. Here, using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry on cell fractionates, we found that the cytoplasmic Cu ion content mirrors variations of the extracellular Cu ion concentration. ROS-sensitive fluorescent probe and biosensor allowed us to show that the increase of cytoplasmic Cu ion content triggers a dose-dependent oxidative stress, which can be abrogated by superoxide dismutase and catalase overexpression. The inhibition of ROS production in the cytoplasm not only improves bacterial growth but also impedes Cu chemotaxis, indicating that ROS derived from cytoplasmic Cu ions mediate the control of bacterial chemotaxis to Cu. We also identified the Cu chemoreceptor McpR, which binds Cu ions with low affinity, suggesting a labile interaction. In addition, we demonstrate that the cysteine 75 and histidine 99 within the McpR sensor domain are key residues in Cu chemotaxis and Cu coordination. Finally, we discovered that in&#xa0;vitro both Cu(I) and Cu(II) ions modulate McpR conformation in a distinct manner. Overall, our study provides mechanistic insights on a redox-based control of Cu chemotaxis, indicating that the cellular redox status can play a key role in bacterial chemotaxis.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species (ros), Bacteria, Stress response, Copper, Chemotaxis

### Affiliations
Research Unit in Microorganisms Biology (URBM), Narilis Institute, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jean-Yves MATROULE
Research Unit in Microorganisms Biology (URBM), Narilis Institute, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.


