### Accession
PXD031070

### Title
A proteome-level investigation into Plasmodiophora brassicae resistance in Brassica napus canola

### Description
Clubroot of Brassicaceae, an economically important soil borne disease, is caused by Plasmodiophora brassicae Woronin, an obligate, biotrophic protist. This disease poses a serious threat to canola and related crops in Canada and around the globe causing significant loss to seed yield. The pathogen is continuously evolving and new pathotypes are emerging, this necessitates the development of novel resistant canola cultivars to manage the disease effectively.  Given that proteins play a crucial role in majority of biological processes and molecular functions, the identification of differentially abundant proteins (DAP) using proteomics information is an attractive approach to understand the plant-pathogen interactions as well as in the future development of gene specific markers for developing clubroot resistant (CR) cultivars. In this study, P. brassicae pathotype 3 (P3H) was used to challenge CR and clubroot susceptible (CS) canola lines. Root samples were collected at three distinct stages of pathogenesis, 7-, 14-, and 21-days post inoculation (DPI), protein samples were isolated, digested with trypsin and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  A total of 937 proteins demonstrated a significant (q < 0.05) change in abundance in at least in one of the time points when compared between control and inoculated CR-parent, CR-progeny, CS-parent, CS-progeny and 784 proteins were significantly (q < 0.05) changed in abundance in at least in one of the time points when compared between the inoculated- CR and CS root proteomes of parent and progeny across the three time points tested. Functional annotation of the differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) revealed several proteins related to calcium dependent signaling pathways in response to the pathogen. In addition, proteins related to reactive oxygen species (ROS) biochemistry, dehydrins, lignin, thaumatin, and phytohormones were identified. Among the DAPs, 74 putative proteins orthologous to CR proteins and quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated with eight CR loci in four chromosomes including chromosomes A3 and A8 were identified. In conclusion, these results have contributed to an improved understanding of the mechanisms that are involved in mediating response to P. brassicae in canola at the protein level.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of Protein for Proteome Analysis   Frozen root tissue samples described above were homogenized in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Homogenized tissue (200 mg) was used for protein extraction using a 1:2 (w/v) ratio of 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0. 50 mM NaCl, and 4% SDS. Samples were solubilized by vortexing and incubated at 95°C with agitation at 600 rpm for 15 minutes. After cooling to room temperature, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5 min and the supernatants were transferred to fresh Eppendorf microcentrifuge tubes (2.0 ml). Protein estimation was then performed using a bicinchonic acid (BCA) assay (23225; ThermoScientific) and samples were normalized to 100 µg each in a total volume of 250 µL. Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95°C for 5 minutes, cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark and quenched with 10 mM DTT.  Proteins were digested using a magnetic bead based protocol using a 1:1 mix of hydrophilic and hydrophobic Sera-Mag SpeedBead Carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (45152105050250 & 65152105050250; GE Life Sciences) (Leutert et al., 2019).   Tryptic hydrolysis of protein samples was performed overnight at 37°C using sequencing-grade trypsin (V5113; Promega).  Digested peptides were quantified using a Nanodrop  and acidified by adding formic acid (FA)  to a final concentration of 5%.  The peptide samples were then dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) and desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (ZTC18S960; Millipore).  Desalting was performed by pre-equilibrating each tip sequentially with 100% ACN, 60% ACN/0.1% TFA, and 3% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were adsorbed by pipetting ten times followed by three washes with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA and eluted with 10 µL of 60% ACN/0.1% TFA five times. Desalted peptides were dried and dissolved in 3.8% ACN/0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Two technical replicates of peptides from each root tissue sample were prepared and used for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis   Peptides were analysed using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass-spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a BoxCarDIA data acquisition scheme as described previously (Mehta et al., 2022).  Briefly, the dissolved peptides were injected using an Easy-nLC 120 system (LC140; ThermoFisher Scientific) and separated using a 50 cm Easy-Spray PepMap C18 column (ES803A; ThermoFisher Scientific). The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA) and the samples were eluted using a segmented solvent B gradient (80% ACN/0.1% FA) from 4%-41% B (0-65 min).  MS1 acquisition was performed using two multiplexed tSIM scans of 10 BoxCar windows each spanning a range of 350-1400 m/z. Detection was performed at 120,000 resolution and normalized AGC targets of 100% per isolation window.  MS2 acquisition was performed using twenty-eight 38.5 m/z windows with an overlap of 1 m/z and a minimum m/z of 200. Resolution was set to 30,000 using a dynamic maximum injection time and the minimum desired points across each peak was set to 6.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and Bioinformatics analysis   BoxCarDIA raw files were processed using Spectronaut 14 (Biognosys AG) under a directDIA analysis mode and default search parameters without N-acetyl variable modification as described in Mehta et al (2022). Spectra were searched using a published B. napus Westar proteome (Song et al., 2020). Trypsin specificity was set to two missed cleavages and a protein and PSM false discovery rate of 1% each. Data filtering criteria was set to q-value ≤ 0.01 and global normalization with MS2-level quantification was performed. Comparative analysis between samples was performed using Spectronaut with a significance threshold of FDR-corrected p-value (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) to identify differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant-pathogen interaction, Calcium binding, Brassica napus, Clubroot, Boxcar dia proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Glen Uhrig
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB


