### Accession
PXD027195

### Title
Conserved exchange of paralog proteins during neuronal differentiation

### Description
Gene duplication enables the emergence of new functions by lowering the general evolutionary pressure. Previous studies have highlighted the role of specific paralog genes during cell differentiation, e.g., in chromatin remodeling complexes. It remains unexplored whether similar mechanisms extend to other biological functions and whether the regulation of paralog genes is conserved across species. Here, we analyze the expression of paralogs across human tissues, during development and neuronal differentiation in fish, rodents and humans. While ~80% of paralog genes are co-regulated, a subset of paralogs shows divergent expression profiles, contributing to variability of protein complexes. We identify 78 substitutions of paralog eggNOG pairs that occur during neuronal differentiation and are conserved across species. Among these, we highlight a substitution between the paralogs Sec23a and Sec23b subunits of the COPII complex. Altering the ratio between these two genes via silencing-RNA knockdown was able to influence neuronal differentiation in different ways. We propose that remodeling of the vesicular transport system via paralog substitutions is an evolutionary conserved mechanism enabling neuronal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets (roughly ~ 1 million cells / each) were thawed and resuspended in 100µl 1xPBS. An equivalent amount of 2x Lysis Buffer (200mM HEPES, 100mM DTT, 4% SDS) was added to the lysate, for a total volume of 200µl. Samples were then sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium) for 10 cycles with 1 min ON and 30 s OFF with high intensity at 20 °C. Samples were then boiled for 10min at 95°C, and a second sonication cycle was performed as described above. The lysates were centrifuged at 18,407 x g for 1 min. Samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT for 15min at 45°C, and alkylated using freshly made 15 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested using LysC (Wako sequencing grade) and trypsin (Promega sequencing grade), as described in (Buczak et al., 2020). The digested proteins were then acidified with 10 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The eluates were dried down using a vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted samples in 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid.   Samples were dried in SpeedVac and buffered using 0.1M HEPES buffer pH 8.5 (1:1 ratio) for labelling, and then sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium) for 5 cycles with 1 min ON and 30 s OFF with high intensity. 10-20 µg peptides were taken for each labelling reaction. TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) labeling was performed by addition of 1 μl of the TMT reagent. After 30 min of incubation at room temperature with shaking at 600 rpm in a thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), a second portion of TMT reagent (1μl) was added and incubated for another 30 min. After checking labelling efficiency, samples were pooled, desalted with Oasis® HLB µElution Plate and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to MS analysis. Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using a Waters XBridge C18 column (3.5 µm, 100 x 1.0 mm, Waters) with a Gemini C18, 4 x 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC, as described in (Buczak et al., 2020). Forty-eight fractions were collected along with the LC separation, which were subsequently pooled into 16 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and then stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  The 16 fractions separated by high pH, were resuspended in 10 μL reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) and 3 μL were injected. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm× 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 μm, 75 μm× 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/min, onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μL/min, at 40 °C.reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) and 3.5 μL were injected. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 5 to 7% in 10 min, then from 7% B to 28% B in a further 105 min and to 45% B by 120 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD ×20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective), and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C.Full-scan MS spectra with mass range 375–1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 FWHM using the quad isolation. The RF on the ion funnel was set to 40%. The filling time was set at a maximum of 100 ms with an AGC target of 4 × 105 ions and 1 microscan. The peptide monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled along with relaxed restrictions if too few precursors were found. The most intense ions (instrument operated for a 3 s cycle time) from the full scan MS were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation and a window of 1 Da. HCD was performed with collision energy of 35%. A maximum fill time of 50 ms for each precursor ion was set. MS2 data were acquired with a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 60 s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. For the MS3, the precursor selection window was set to the range 400–2000 m/z, with an exclude width of 18 m/z (high) and 5 m/z (low). The most intense fragments from the MS2 experiment were co-isolated (using Synchronus Precursor Selection = 8) and fragmented using HCD (65%). MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over the mass range 100–1000 m/z and resolution set to 30,000 FWMH. The maximum injection time was set to 105 ms, and the instrument was set not to injections for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
TMT-10plex data from mouse in vitro were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). raw files were searched against the fasta database (Uniprot Mus musculus database, reviewed entry only, release 2016_11) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and MS2 to 0.5Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine and acetylation (N-term) were set as variable. Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method used. The quantification method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20ppm). False discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator 13 (Brosch et al., 2009). Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed with procedures written in R (v.4.0.5) and R studio server (v.1.2.5042 and 1.4.1106), as described in (Heinze et al., 2018). Briefly, PSMs mapping to reverse or contaminant hits, or having a Mascot score below 15, or having reporter ion intensities below 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were discarded. TMT channels intensities from the retained PSMs were then log2 transformed, normalized and summarized into protein group quantities by taking the median value using MSnbase (Gatto and Lilley, 2012). At least two unique peptides per protein were required for the identification and only those peptides with no missing values across all 10 channels were considered for quantification. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t test moderated by the empirical Bayes method. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR, denoted as “adj. p”) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paralogs, Mouse, Neuronal differentiation, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany


