### Accession
PXD018589

### Title
SMD-IPTL 4-plex yeast and BSA-yeast

### Description
Isobaric peptide termini labeling (IPTL) is an attractive protein quantification method, because it provides more accurate and reliable quantification information than traditional isobaric labelling methods (TMT, iTRAQ) by making use of the entire fragment ion series instead of only a single reporter ion. The multiplexing capacity of published IPTL implementations is, however, limited to three. Here, we present a selective maleylation-directed isobaric peptide termini labelling (SMD-IPTL) approach for quantitative proteomics of LysC protein digests. SMD-IPTL extends the multiplexing capacity to 4-plex with the potential for higher levels of multiplexing using commercially available 13C/15N-labelled amino acids. SMD-IPTL is achieved in a one-pot reaction in three consecutive steps: 1) selective maleylation at the N-terminus; 2) labelling at the ԑ-NH2 group of the C-terminal Lys with isotopically labelled acetyl alanine; 3) thiol Michael addition of an isotopically labelled acetyl cysteine at the maleylated N-terminus. The isobarically labelled peptides are fragmented into sets of b- and y-ion clusters upon LC-MS/MS, which not only convey sequence information but also quantitative information for every labelling channel and avoid the issue of ratio distortion observed with reporter-ion-based approaches. We demonstrate the SMD-IPTL approach with a 4-plex labelled sample of BSA and yeast lysates mixed at different ratios. Utilizing SMD-IPTL for labelling and a narrow precursor isolation window of 0.8 Th with an offset of -0.2 Th, accurate ratios were measured across a 10-fold mixing range of BSA in a background of yeast proteome. With the yeast proteins mixed at ratios of 1:5:1:5, BSA was detected at ratios 0.94:2.46:4.70:9.92 when spiked at 1:2:5:10 ratios with an average standard deviation of peptide ratios of 0.34.

### Sample Protocol
400 μL maleylated LysC peptides of BSA or yeast protein was mixed with 50 μL 100 mM sodium tetraborate and the pH was adjusted to 9 with 5 M NaOH. The solution was split into 4 tubes for labelling reactions of 4-channels. 2 μL 100 mM Ac-Ala-PNP, 13C1-Ac-Ala-PNP, 13C2-Ac-Ala-PNP and 13C3-Ac-Ala-PNP was respectively added to the 4 tubes of maleylated LysC peptide solution and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. To ensure complete labelling, 2 μL of p-nitrophenol ester was added again and incubated for 30 min more. Afterwards, the pH of acetyl-alanine p-nitrophenol ester labelled solutions was adjusted to 9. 10 μL 400 mM 13C3-Ac-Cys-OH was added to the Ac-Ala-PNP labelled solution, 10 μL 400 mM 13C2-Ac-Cys-OH was added to the 13C1-Ac-Ala-PNP labelled solution, 10 μL 400 mM 13C1-Ac-Cys-OH was added to the 13C2-Ac-Ala-PNP labelled solution and 10 μL 400 mM Ac-Cys-OH was added to the 13C3-Ac-Ala-PNP labelled solution. The reaction solutions were bubbled with argon for 5 min and incubated overnight at 55 °C. Finally, potentially formed esters at the hydroxyl groups of Ser, Thr or Tyr and excess PNP ester were hydrolyzed by treatment with 5 % hydroxylamine43 for 5 min at 55 oC prior to desalting the samples by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure44 Procedure followed by LC-MS analysis.of Ser, Thr or Tyr and excess PNP ester were hydrolyzed by treatment with 5 % hydroxylamine43 for 5 min at 55 oC prior to desalting the samples by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure44 Procedure followed by LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed with PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatic Solutions) and searched against the Uniprot reference database of yeast (UP000002311, 6049 entries, downloaded on Jan. 20, 2020) into which the BSA entry (P02769) was inserted manually. LysC was selected as enzyme, digestion mode as specific and max missed cleavage sites as 0. A tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions was applied.  Carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation (+15.99) on methionine as variable modification. For 4-plex labelling experiments, fixed modifications (N-terminus/C-terminal Lys) were set to the 4 corresponding channels 13C3-Ac-Cys-Maleylation (+264.04) and Ac-Ala (+113.05), 13C2-Ac-Cys-Maleylation (+263.04) and 13C1-Ac-Ala (114.05), 13C1-Ac-Cys-Maleylation (+262.03) and 13C2-Ac-Ala (115.05), Ac-Cys-Maleylation (+261.03) and 13C3-Ac-Ala (116.06), respectively. The 4 labelling channels were searched separately because PEAKS cannot deconvolute the multiplexed fragment ions. The results were filtered with an FDR of 0.05 for peptides.  The PEAKS output on the supporting peptides (protein-peptides.csv) and the DB search peptide-spectrum matches (DB search psm.csv) were exported for every labelling channel. All the following steps were performed using in-house built Python scripts (available at https://github.com/tianxiaobo002/SMD-IPTL-4-plex-data-processing). Only the unique peptides extracted from all protein-peptides.csv files were used for quantification. For every peptide spectrum match (PSM) that was derived from unique peptides in the DB search psm.csv files, the corresponding theoretical fragment ions were calculated and grouped by scan number. The raw data was converted into a Python readable mgf file with RawConverter45 to circumvent altering peak intensities and modifying the mass of precursor ions by PEAKS. All MS/MS spectra were extracted from the resulting mgf file and also grouped by the scan number. Afterwards, based on the scan number, the original peak intensities in the mgf file were related to the corresponding theoretical fragment ions and the matched intensities were used to quantify peptides and ultimately proteins. The y1 ions from the C-terminal lysine and the fragment ions losing H2O and NH3 were excluded. The ratio of each PSM, peptide and protein were calculated based on the total peak intensities of the same labelling channel. For fragment ion spectra that were produced from monoisotopic peaks and in which no 13C interference existed, all matched b- and y-ions except y1 were used for quantification and the minimum number of matched ions was set to 3. For fragment ion spectra that were not produced from monoisotopic peaks only and in which 13C interference was observed in all fragment ions, only the small ions (b1, b2 and y2) were used for peptide quantification and the minimum number of matched ions was set to 1 Details and examples can be found in Figure S3 and Figure S4. Each peptide ratio was calculated from three spectra with the highest total peak intensity and each protein ratio was calculated from the three peptides with the highest total peak intensity. SMD-IPTL quantification outputs of 4-plex labelled yeast sample at fragment ion, PSM, peptide and protein level are available at https://github.com/tianxiaobo002/SMD-IPTL-yeast-quantification-ouputs-at-multiple-levels.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric peptide termini labeling (IPTL) is an attractive protein quantification method because it provides more accurate and reliable quantification information than traditional isobaric labeling methods (e.g., TMT and iTRAQ) by making use of the entire fragment-ion series instead of only a single reporter ion. The multiplexing capacity of published IPTL implementations is, however, limited to three. Here, we present a selective maleylation-directed isobaric peptide termini labeling (SMD-IPTL) approach for quantitative proteomics of LysC protein digestion. SMD-IPTL extends the multiplexing capacity to 4-plex with the potential for higher levels of multiplexing using commercially available <sup>13</sup>C/<sup>15</sup>N labeled amino acids. SMD-IPTL is achieved in a one-pot reaction in three consecutive steps: (1) selective maleylation at the N-terminus; (2) labeling at the &#x3b5;-NH<sub>2</sub> group of the C-terminal Lys with isotopically labeled acetyl-alanine; (3) thiol Michael addition of an isotopically labeled acetyl-cysteine at the maleylated N-terminus. The isobarically labeled peptides are fragmented into sets of b- and y-ion clusters upon LC-MS/MS, which convey not only sequence information but also quantitative information for every labeling channel and avoid the issue of ratio distortion observed with reporter-ion-based approaches. We demonstrate the SMD-IPTL approach with a 4-plex labeled sample of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and yeast lysates mixed at different ratios. With the use of SMD-IPTL for labeling and a narrow precursor isolation window of 0.8 Th with an offset of -0.2 Th, accurate ratios were measured across a 10-fold mixing range of BSA in a background of yeast proteome. With the yeast proteins mixed at ratios of 1:5:1:5, BSA was detected at ratios of 0.94:2.46:4.70:9.92 when spiked at 1:2:5:10 ratios with an average standard deviation of peptide ratios of 0.34.

### Keywords
Smd-iptl

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
University of Groningen, Department of >     Analytical Biochemistry

### Submitter
Xiaobo Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Bischoff
University of Groningen, Department of >     Analytical Biochemistry


