### Accession
PXD024445

### Title
A Multi-Mineral Intervention to Modulate Colonic Mucosal Protein Profile: Results from a 90-Day Trial in Human Subjects

### Description
The overall goal of this study was to determine if Aquamin®, a multi-mineral natural product, would alter the expression of proteins involved in growth-regulation and differentiation in the colon. Thirty healthy human subjects (at risk for colorectal cancer) were enrolled in a three-arm, 90-day interventional trial in which Aquamin® was compared to calcium alone and placebo.  Before and after the interventional period colonic biopsies were obtained. Biopsies were evalu-ated by immunohistology for expression of Ki67 (proliferation marker) and for CK20 and p21 (differentiation markers). Tandem mass tag-mass spectrometry-based detection was used to as-sess levels of multiple proteins. As compared to placebo or calcium, Aquamin® reduced the level of Ki67 expression.  Neither intervention altered CK20 expression, while a trend toward in-creased p21 was observed with calcium and Aquamin®. In the proteomic screen, Aquamin® treatment resulted in many more proteins being upregulated (including cytokeratins, cell-cell adhesion molecules and components of the basement membrane) or downregulated (prolifera-tion and nucleic acid metabolism) than placebo. Calcium alone also altered the expression of many of the same proteins but not to the same extent as Aquamin®. We conclude that daily Aquamin® ingestion alters protein expression profile in the colon that could be beneficial to colonic health.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic experiments were performed at the Proteomics Resource Facility (PRF) in the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan, employing mass spectrometry (MS)-based tandem mass tag (TMT) analysis (ThermoFisher Scientific) for the relative quantification of proteins. Individual colon biopsies were weighed (the weights were ranged from 5.5 mg to 12 mg) and exposed to Radioimmunoprecipitation Assay (RIPA) Lysis and Extraction Buffer (Thermo Scientific cat#89901) at 25 µl per mg for protein. After that, biopsies were manually homogenized employing 1.5 ml tube sample pestles (RPI item#199228) and then freeze fractured for 1 cycle. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min to remove insoluble material. Supernatants were removed to a clean tube and then protein concentrations were determined using a BCA assay kit (Pierce cat#23227).  Following this, individual samples were “pooled” in groups of five (i.e., 5 placebo, 5 cal-cium and 5 Aquamin® specimens, before and after intervention), allowing us to evaluate all 30 samples in two TMTsixplex runs. Each pool was comprised of 8 micrograms per sample, 5 samples per pool for a total of 40 µg. The volume was adjusted such that each pool was 40 µg of pooled protein in 40 µl total volume. Briefly, forty micrograms of protein from each pool were separately digested with trypsin and individually labeled with one of the 6 isobaric mass tags following the manufacturer’s protocol using TMTsixplex kit (ThermoFisher cat# 90061) for each MS analysis. After labeling, equal amounts of the pep-tide from each pool were mixed together. In order to achieve in-depth characterization of the proteome, the labeled peptides were fractionated using 2D-LC (basic pH reverse-phase separation followed by acidic pH reverse-phase) and analyzed on a high-resolution, tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, ThermoFisher Scientific) using condi-tions optimized at the PRF. MultiNotch MS3 approach [40] was employed to obtain accu-rate quantitation of the identified proteins/peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, ThermoFisher).  MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt human protein database (downloaded on 06/20/2019; 20353 reviewed entries) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable.  Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤2% false-discovery rate (FDR) threshold of detection. Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (av-erage signal-to-noise ratio of 6 and 75% isolation interference).

### Publication Abstract
The overall goal of this study was to determine whether Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>, a calcium-, magnesium-, trace element-rich, red algae-derived natural product, would alter the expression of proteins involved in growth-regulation and differentiation in colon. Thirty healthy human subjects (at risk for colorectal cancer) were enrolled in a three-arm, 90-day interventional trial. Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> was compared to calcium alone and placebo. Before and after the interventional period, colonic biopsies were obtained. Biopsies were evaluated by immunohistology for expression of Ki67 (proliferation marker) and for CK20 and p21 (differentiation markers). Tandem mass tag-mass spectrometry-based detection was used to assess levels of multiple proteins. As compared to placebo or calcium, Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> reduced the level of Ki67 expression and slightly increased CK20 expression. Increased p21 expression was observed with both calcium and Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>. In proteomic screen, Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> treatment resulted in many more proteins being upregulated (including pro-apoptotic, cytokeratins, cell-cell adhesion molecules, and components of the basement membrane) or downregulated (proliferation and nucleic acid metabolism) than placebo. Calcium alone also altered the expression of many of the same proteins but not to the same extent as Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>. We conclude that daily Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> ingestion alters protein expression profile in the colon that could be beneficial to colonic health.

### Keywords
Aquamin; biomarkers; calcium; colon cancer chemoprevention; minerals; proteomic analysis; trace elements

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

### Submitter
Muhammad Aslam

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad N. Aslam
Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA


