### Accession
PXD014152

### Title
Integrated analyses of shotgun proteomics and metabolomics reveal its association with rise of secondary metabolites of warm water imbibition soybean seeds

### Description
For production of soy-foods or supplements, imbibition of soybean seeds in the water is required step for generation of tofu, soy-milk, and other soy-products. With an aim to get new insight into effects of different imbibition temperature (4, 25, and 55℃), this study conducted integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis of soybean seeds. For total proteome analysis, we applied TMT labeling based quantitative proteomics combined to FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) with high-throughput LC-MS/MS. A total of 2,616 proteins were identified out of which 801 proteins showed significantly difference of protein abundance (≥1.5 fold change, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <0.05) among 4, 25, and 55℃ imbibition seeds. Functional analysis of identified proteins showed an increased abundance of proteins functioning as glycosyl hydrolase enzymes such as beta-glucosidase, alpha and beta-galactosidase, and alpha-mannosidase, or protease, and PTMs related enzymes as well. UPLC TOF-MS analysis showed around 20 fold increase in isoflavone aglycones (daidzein and genistein) while isoflavone glycosides (daidzin and genistin) were decreased in 55℃ imbibition seed, in agreement with proteomics results which we assume positively related to increase abundance of glycosyl hydrolase. A metabolomics analysis revealed 64 metabolites were significantly altered, for example, various free amino acids showed accumulation patterns by increased abundance of various protease enzymes and further confirmed the accumulation of isoflavone aglycones and degradation of raffinose and stachyose in 55℃ imbibition seeds. Based on these results, we recommend the use of 55℃ for soybean seed imbibition to increase the quality of soy-food products.

### Sample Protocol
Total seed proteins were isolated using the TCA/acetone precipitation method and protein digestion were conducted. Briefly, acetone precipitated proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer (4% SDS and 100mM DTT in 0.1 M TEAB pH 8.5). After sonication of sample for 3 min and heating at 99°C for 30min, denatured proteins were loaded onto the 30 kDa spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and dilute sample with UA (8 M Urea in 0.1 M TEAB pH 8.5) buffer as a 300 μL of final volume. The buffer was washed and exchanged three times using 300 μL of UA buffer by centrifugation at 14,000g for removal of SDS. After removing of SDS from samples, cysteine alkylation was accomplished through the addition of 200 μL of alkylation buffer (50 mM IAA, 8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. And then buffer was exchanged UA buffer to TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB pH 8.5) in spin filter unit. The protein was digested with trypsin (enzyme to substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 5% ACN at 37℃ overnight. After overnight digestion, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl and the peptide concentrations were measured using PierceTM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) by manufacturer’s instruction. Furthermore, Peptides labeling was and followed by manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, each TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 120 μL of anhydrous ACN, of which 25 μL was added to each channels of biological replicates. Prior to incubation the each sample sets, additional ACN was added as 30% of final concentration. After incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Finally, combined samples at equal amounts across all samples and lyophilized the sample to near dryness and subjected to the desalting procedure. The pooled TMT-labeled peptides were desalted using HLB OASIS column according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Consequently, dried peptides was reconstituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Prior to load the peptides, the stage-tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with loading solution. The peptide were loaded and 12 fractions were subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution containing 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, 35, 41, 44, 60, 80, and 100% CAN. Finally, the 12 fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80℃ until further LC-MS/MS analysis. Obtained peptides were dissolved in solvent-A (water/ACN, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a UHPLC Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) instrument. For trapping the sample, the UHPLC was equipped with Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and subsequently washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The sample was continuously separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent B (100% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, then 35% to 95% over 10 minutes, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 minutes, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 minutes. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was coupled with an electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based mass spectrometer QExactive™ Orbitrap High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, Waltham, USA). Resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica emitted tip (Scientific Instrument Service, NJ, Amwell Township, USA) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. The MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350-1650 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3 x 106 and the isolation window for MS/MS was 1.2 m/z. Eluted samples were used for MS/MS events (resolution of 35,000), measured in a data-dependent mode for the 15 most abundant peaks (Top15 method), in the high mass accuracy Orbitrap after ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) at 32 collision energy in a 100-1650 m/z mass range. The AGC target value for MS/MS was 2 x 105. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and MS/MS scan was 30 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used to apply for a database. All the three technical replicates were cross-referenced against the uniprot Glycine max database (75,674 entries, UP000008827, http://www.uniprot.org). TMT data processing was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda search engine, which is set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Reporter mass tolerance has to set minimum as 0.003 Da and the minimum reporter precursor ion fraction (PIF) was set as 0.5. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). Normalization of reporter ion intensities followed by IRS method. Briefly, we employed two different normalization procedure to handle triplicates of sample sets. The first normalization was applied within 10-plex sets by median and scaling factor was calculated by average intensity values of cross set pooled sample values were applied for normalization between triplicates of 10-plex TMT experiments. Missing values imputation was carried out from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8) using Perseus software. Multiple Sample test controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance (Kim et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Soaking of soybean seeds is a prerequisite for the production of soy foods, and it has been shown that the extent of water absorbed during different imbibition conditions directly affects the quality of the subsequent soybean seed products by yet unknown mechanisms. In order to elucidate the molecular changes in soybean seeds during different soaking temperatures, we performed an integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis of seeds soaked at 4, 25, and 55 &#xb0;C. Proteomics analysis revealed that various enzymes related to carbohydrate and protein hydrolysis were activated in soybean seeds during water soaking at 55 &#xb0;C. Interestingly, results obtained from this integrated proteomics and metabolomics study showed changes in various metabolites, including isoflavones, amino acids, and sugars, that were positively correlated with proteome changes occurring upon soaking at 55 &#xb0;C. Furthermore, soaking of soybean seeds at 55 &#xb0;C resulted in degradation of indigestible anti-nutrients such as raffinose oligosaccharides. Taken together, our results suggest that the seed soaking at a high temperature (55 &#xb0;C) increases the nutritional value of soybean seeds by decreasing the contents of some of the common anti-nutrients.

### Keywords
Isoflavone, Maxquant, Perseus, Tandem mass tag, Filter-aided sample preparation, Imbibition, Soybean seed, Shotgun proteomics, Basic ph reversed phase

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


