### Accession
PXD038927

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus protein binding in human serum

### Description
Overnight cultures of S. aureus were diluted to OD600 = 1 and 1 ml of culture was resuspended in 500 μl of either PBS, human plasma, or human serum, and incubated rotating at 37 °C for 30 m. Suspensions were washed 3x with PBS supplemented with 500 40% sucrose and 20 mM Sodium Azide. Cells were incubated with immobilized trypsin (ThermoFisher 20230), suspended in PBS supplemented with 500 40% sucrose and 20 mM Sodium Azide, at 37 °C for 2 h. cells were pelleted, and the supernatant containing protein fragments was analyzed by mass spectrometry to determine proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations were determined using the 660 Protein Assay (Pierce).  Equal amounts of protein (200ug) processed for LC-MS/MS using s-traps (Protifi) Briefly, proteins are reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), acidified using phosphoric acid, and combined with s-trap loading buffer (90% MeOH, 100mM TEAB).  Proteins were loaded onto s-traps, washed, and finally digested with Trypsin/Lys-C (1:100, w:w; enzyme:protein) overnight at 37˚C.  Peptides were eluted and dried with a vacuum concentrator.  Peptides were resuspended in H2O/1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were separated using a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 reversed-phase-HPLC column (Thermo Scientific) on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a 120 minute gradient (2-32% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Full MS survey scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution.  The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files are processed in MaxQuant (v 2.1.4, www.maxquant.org) and searched against the current Uniprot Staph aureus protein sequences database with the addition of the ScrA protein sequence.  Search parameters included constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modifications, methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation.  Proteins were identified using the filtering criteria of 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate.  Protein intensity values were normalized using the MaxQuant LFQ function (53).       Label free quantitation analysis was performed using Perseus (v 1.6.14.0), software developed for the analysis of omics data (54). LFQ Intensity values were Log2-transformed, and then filtered to include proteins containing at least 60% valid values (reported LFQ intensities) in at least one experimental group.  Finally, the missing values in the filtered dataset were replaced using the imputation function in Perseus with default parameters . Statistical analyses were carried out using the filtered and imputed protein groups file.  Statistically significant changes in protein abundance are determined using Welch’s t-test p-values and z-scores

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S aureus, Human serum binding, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Ohio University, Biological Sciences Department, Athens Ohio, United States
Ohio University

### Submitter
Marcus Wittekind

### Lab Head
Dr Ronan Carroll
Ohio University, Biological Sciences Department, Athens Ohio, United States


