### Accession
PXD027867

### Title
Proteomics of Mouse Heart Ventricles Reveals Mitochondria and Metabolism as Major Targets of a Post-Infarction  Short-Acting GLP1Ra-Therapy Proteomics of Mouse Heart Ventricles Reveals Mitochondria and Metabolism as Major Targets of a Post-Infarction  Short-Acting GLP1Ra-Therapy

### Description
Cardiovascular disease is the main cause of death worldwide, making it crucial to search for new therapies to mitigate major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) after a cardiac ischemic episode. Drugs in the class of the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP1Ra) have demonstrated benefits for heart function and reduced the incidence of MACE in patients with diabetes. Previously, we demonstrated that a short-acting GLP1Ra known as DMB (2-quinoxalinamine, 6,7-dichloro-N-[1,1-dimethylethyl]-3-[methylsulfonyl]-,6,7-dichloro-2-methylsulfonyl-3-N-tert-butylaminoquinoxaline or compound 2, Sigma) also mitigates adverse postinfarction left ventricular remodeling and cardiac dysfunction in lean mice through activation of parkin-mediated mitophagy following infarction. Here, we combined proteomics with in silico analysis to characterize the range of effects of DMB in vivo throughout the course of early postinfarction remodeling. We demonstrate that the mitochondrion is a key target of DMB and mitochondrial respiration, oxidative phosphorylation and metabolic processes such as glycolysis and fatty acid beta-oxidation are the main biological processes being regulated by this compound in the heart. Moreover, the overexpression of proteins with hub properties identified by protein–protein interaction networks, such as Atp2a2, may also be important to the mechanism of action of DMB.

### Sample Protocol
Ventricular heart tissue of each sample (3 mg) was mixed with 150 µL of lysis buffer (6 M urea and 0.05 M Tris-HCl; pH 8) in a microtube (fluorinated ethylene propylene; cat # MTWS-MT-RK; Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA, USA) with a corresponding microcap (cat # MC150-96; Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA, USA) and lysed by pressure cycling technology using a barocycler (NEP 2320; Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA, USA) for 60 cycles at 45,000 psi. After lysis, the microtube with a content was placed in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, an additional 150 µL of lysis buffer was added to the tissue pellet and the barocycling process was repeated for 30 cycles at 45,000 psi. After the centrifugation, both supernatants were combined in a 1.5 mL LoBind (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) tube and the protein concentration was determined by the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (cat # 23225; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For each sample, the volume corresponding to 150 µg of protein was mixed with a lysis buffer to a total volume of 110 µL and 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (330 µL) was added to dilute the urea in the sample prior to protein reduction/alkylation and trypsin digest. A total of 30 µL of 0.2 M DTT (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (final concentration: 0.012 M) was added and the solution was incubated at 37 °C for 45 min on a shaking platform. For protein alkylation, 30 µL of 0.4 M iodoacetamide (G-Biosciences, Saint Louis, MO, USA) in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (final concentration: 0.024 M) was added and incubated at RT for 45 min in the dark. The proteins in the sample (pH 8) were digested using trypsin (cat # V5111; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 1:50 (trypsin:protein) ratio at 37 °C overnight with shaking. The next day, the sample solution was cooled to room temperature, 10% formic acid (Fisher Chemical, Waltham, MA, USA) was added to pH 2–3 and the sample was desalted using µ-elution HLB 96-well plate 30 µm (Oasis; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The sample eluates were dried in the SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and stored at −80 °C. Mass spectrometry: Each sample with digested peptides was resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid and 1 µL was injected into LC/MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 nano LC connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) via an EasySpray ion source). First, the sample was loaded into a trap column (PepMap100 C18; 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å, cat # TF160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and then separated using a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm i.d. × 25 mm; 2 µm, 100 Å, cat # , Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). With a flow rate of 300 nL/min, the linear gradient 5–35% of B for 90 min was applied followed by 35–95% of B for 3 min, then 95% of B for 7 min and re-equilibration at 5% of B for 25 min at 400 nL/min. The mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Chemical; Optima LC/MS grade; Waltham, MA, USA) and the mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical; Optima LC/MS grade; Waltham, MA, USA). The nanosource capillary was set to 275 °C and the spray voltage was 2 kV. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap Elite at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (400–1700 m/z) with an AGC target of 1 × 106 ions over a maximum of 250 ms. MS2 spectra were obtained for the top 15 ions from each MS1 scan in the CID mode in the ion trap with 30,000 FWHM and a target setting of 1 × 104 ions, with an accumulation time of 100 ms and isolation width of 2 Da. Two mass spectrometry replicates were measured for each sample (total 42 analysis).

### Data Protocol
To search the spectra against the UniProtKB database (UP mouse, reviewed, canonical), the Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® platform (Sage-N Research, Inc., Milpitas, CA, USA) was applied as a protein search engine followed by Scaffold 4.5.3. software for post-search analysis. The search parameters were: semi-enzyme digest using trypsin (after KR/-), up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl C as a static modification, precursor mass range from 400 to 4500 amu, peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm and monoisotopic fragment mass type. In Scaffold, the threshold values for protein and peptide identification probabilities were both set at 95% with a minimum number of peptides to identify the protein as 2.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiovascular disease is the main cause of death worldwide, making it crucial to search for new therapies to mitigate major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) after a cardiac ischemic episode. Drugs in the class of the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP1Ra) have demonstrated benefits for heart function and reduced the incidence of MACE in patients with diabetes. Previously, we demonstrated that a short-acting GLP1Ra known as DMB (2-quinoxalinamine, 6,7-dichloro-N-[1,1-dimethylethyl]-3-[methylsulfonyl]-,6,7-dichloro-2-methylsulfonyl-3-N-tert-butylaminoquinoxaline or compound 2, Sigma) also mitigates adverse postinfarction left ventricular remodeling and cardiac dysfunction in lean mice through activation of parkin-mediated mitophagy following infarction. Here, we combined proteomics with in silico analysis to characterize the range of effects of DMB in vivo throughout the course of early postinfarction remodeling. We demonstrate that the mitochondrion is a key target of DMB and mitochondrial respiration, oxidative phosphorylation and metabolic processes such as glycolysis and fatty acid beta-oxidation are the main biological processes being regulated by this compound in the heart. Moreover, the overexpression of proteins with hub properties identified by protein-protein interaction networks, such as Atp2a2, may also be important to the mechanism of action of DMB. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027867.

### Keywords
Mitochondrion; cellular respiration; metabolism, Proteomics; glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists; dmb; early cardiac remodeling

### Affiliations
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Van Eyk
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute


