### Accession
PXD023890

### Title
Matrix-Bound Growth Factors are Released upon Cartilage Compression by an Aggrecan-Dependent Sodium Flux that is Lost in Osteoarthritis (Proteomics)

### Description
Articular cartilage exhibits regional and depth-dependent biomechanical differences, which influence the transduction of load to chondrocytes and throughout the tissue matrix. One such mechanism is the biophysical release of proteins from the matrix. This study conducted proteomic analysis of rested porcine articular cartilage to assess regional protein abundance throughout distinct depths of porcine knee articular cartilage.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Porcine articular cartilage explants were taken from the pig knee joint by a 4 mm biopsy punch (Stiefel #BI1500). Explants were washed in serum-free DMEM and serum starved for 48 h. Cartilage explants were rested in serum free DMEM for 45 min at 37°C and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Rested porcine knee joint cartilage samples were cut across specified depths for mass spectrometry analysis. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis 4M Gu-HCl tissue extracts of sectioned regions were precipitated with ethanol (9:1) overnight at 4°C and collected after centrifugation at 13,200 g at 4°C for 30 minutes. The precipitate was dissolved in 100 µL of buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), pH:7.8) /0,2% Rapigest (Waters) reduced with 2mM DTT at 56°C for 30 minutes on an orbital shaker and alkylated with 8 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1h in the dark. Trypsin digestion was performed with 2µg of trypsin gold (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C on a shaker for 16h. Subsequently, samples were diluted to 200µl with 1M AmBic and filtered through a 30kDa filter (Pall Life Sciences, Port Washington, NY) by centrifugation at 2060 x g for 8 minutes. The filter was then washed with an additional 100µl 0.5M AmBic buffer to optimize recovery. The filtrates were then desalted using a reversed-phase C18 column (UltraMicro Spin C18, The Nest group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Discovery mass spectrometry  The samples were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Q Exactive™) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, WA) equipped with an Easy nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA). Separation was performed on 75 µm × 25 cm capillary columns (Acclaim Pepmap™ RSLC, C18, 2μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, WA). A spray voltage of +2000 V was used with a heated ion transfer setting of 275°C for desolvation. On-line reversed-phase separation was performed using a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a linear binary gradient from 3% solvent B for 60 min to 35% solvent B, then to 90% solvent B for 5 min and finally isocratic 90% solvent B for 5 min. An MS scan (400–1200 m/z) was recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z, 1×10E6 automatic gain control (AGC) target and 100 ms maximum ion injection time. The MS was followed by data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15,000 on the 15 most intense multiply charged ions at 2 × 10E4 intensity threshold, 2 m/z isolation width and dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free relative quantification was performed using the sus scrofa taxonomy (22,166 sequences) setting of the Uniprot database (Proteome UP000008227) with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (version 2.5.0.400,Thermo Scientific). The processing workflow consisted of the following nodes: Spectrum recalibration; Minora Feature detection; Spectrum Selector for spectra pre-processing (350–5000 Da); Spectrum Properties Filter (S/N Threshold: 1.5); Spectrum Properties (charges 2–6); Sequest-HT search engine (Protein Database: see above; Enzyme: Trypsin; Max. missed cleavage sites: 2; Peptide length range 6–144 amino acids; Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; Static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Dynamic modification: methionine and proline oxidation; INFERYS Rescoring and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR<1% based on peptide q-value). Results were filtered to keep only the Master protein and protein FDR <1%. The quantification workflow was based on protein abundance using top-3 peptide intensities average allowing only unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cartilage, Porcine, Growth factors

### Affiliations
Lund University
BMC-C12, Rheumatology and Molecular Skeletal Biology Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University SE-22184 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Patrik Onnerfjord

### Lab Head
Dr Patrik Onnerfjord
BMC-C12, Rheumatology and Molecular Skeletal Biology Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University SE-22184 Lund, Sweden


