### Accession
PXD036654

### Title
iPSC nanovesicles cardiac cell repair

### Description
Here, we engineered functional EV-like nanovesicles (NVs) from human-induced pluripotent stem cells and highlight their potential as a functional surrogate for natural EVs for tissue repair. Proteome profiling of target cells further identified pathways implicated in angiogenesis (MYH10, AAMP, SLC3A2), cell survival (CCN2, RHEB, IGF2R, MFGE8), and fibroblast activation (CCN2, STAT3, COL1A1/2/4A2/12A1, ACTN1/4, ACTC1). This study demonstrates scalable generation of functional NVs and highlights their potential as a functional surrogate for natural EVs for tissue repair.

### Sample Protocol
Global mass spectrometry-based proteomics of iPSCs, NVs and cell treatment groups (10 ug in 50 uL) was performed using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method. Samples were solubilised in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, incubated at 95 °C for 5 mins and cooled. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 25 °C followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM DTT. Magnetic beads were prepared by mixing SpeedBeads™ magnetic carboxylate modified particles (65152105050250, 45152105050250, Cytiva) at 1:1 (v:v) ratio and washing twice with 200 µL MS-water. Magnetic beads were reconstituted to a final concentration of 100 µg/µl. Magnetic beads were added to the samples at 10:1 beads-to-protein ratio and 100% ethanol (EA043, ChemSupply) added for a final concentration of 50% ethanol (v/v). Protein-bound magnetic beads were washed three times with 200 µl of 80% ethanol and reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio for 16 h at 37 °C with constant shaking (1000 rpm). The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid (pH ~1-2) and centrifuged at 20,000g for 1 min. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex UltiMate NCS-3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with nanospray ion source in positive mode

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) was used to perform peptide identification and quantification. Human-only (UniProt #78,800 entries) sequence database (2021) with a contaminants database was employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications was employed

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from stem cells have shown significant therapeutic potential to repair injured cardiac tissues and regulate pathological fibrosis. However, scalable generation of stem cells and derived EVs for clinical utility remains a huge technical challenge. Here, we report a rapid size-based extrusion strategy to generate EV-like membranous nanovesicles (NVs) from easily sourced human iPSCs in large quantities (yield 900&#xd7; natural EVs). NVs isolated using density-gradient separation (buoyant density 1.13 g/mL) are spherical in shape and morphologically intact and readily internalised by human cardiomyocytes, primary cardiac fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. NVs captured the dynamic proteome of parental cells and include pluripotency markers (LIN28A, OCT4) and regulators of cardiac repair processes, including tissue repair (GJA1, HSP20/27/70, HMGB1), wound healing (FLNA, MYH9, ACTC1, ILK), stress response/translation initiation (eIF2S1/S2/S3/B4), hypoxia response (HMOX2, HSP90, GNB1), and extracellular matrix organization (ITGA6, MFGE8, ITGB1). Functionally, NVs significantly promoted tubule formation of endothelial cells (angiogenesis) (p &lt; 0.05) and survival of cardiomyocytes exposed to low oxygen conditions (hypoxia) (p &lt; 0.0001), as well as attenuated TGF-&#x3b2; mediated activation of cardiac fibroblasts (p &lt; 0.0001). Quantitative proteome profiling of target cell proteome following NV treatments revealed upregulation of angiogenic proteins (MFGE8, MYH10, VDAC2) in endothelial cells and pro-survival proteins (CNN2, THBS1, IGF2R) in cardiomyocytes. In contrast, NVs attenuated TGF-&#x3b2;-driven extracellular matrix remodelling capacity in cardiac fibroblasts (ACTN1, COL1A1/2/4A2/12A1, ITGA1/11, THBS1). This study presents a scalable approach to generating functional NVs for cardiac repair.

### Keywords
Cell reprogramming, Ipsc, Nanovesicles, Proteomics, Cardiac repair

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.


