### Accession
PXD017799

### Title
Human urine proteome in overactive bladder syndorme

### Description
The aim of this study is analysis of urinary proteomic pattern in healthy people and patients suffering from OAB symptoms by means of mass spectrophotometry. Establishing characteristic protein profiles, qualitative and quantitative, for OAB will help to define specific protein marker and will allow to develop new investigative protocol enabling to discover at what stage of post-genetic changes urothelium cells change their proteomic profile causing OAB symptoms.  Patients will be divided into two groups: group A – OAB patients and group B – control group, without any urinary tract symptoms. All participants will be questionnaired with appropriate tools evaluating quality of life of patients with lower urinary tract symptoms and bladder diary. Urine samples will be taken twice with 7 day gap and then prepared for further evaluation with mass spectrophotometry. Mass spectrophotometry will be performed for all labeled samples with QExactive spectrophotometer. In order to provide maximal credibility and reliability of acquired data each sample will be managed in triplicate. Those result will be analyzed with specific statistical methods and final results will be correlated between the groups.  In long-term perspective results of this project will help to understand the underlying pathomechanisms of overactive blabber syndrome. In future those results will be applied for further research in OAB sufferers allowing for precise and objective diagnosis and prognosis. In our opinion it will also serve as a tool for estimations of treatment efficacy of new therapeutic methods. In consequence the project will allow us to create a unique toolkit, combining spectrophotometry, urinary proteomic pattern differences and quality of life correlated with OAB symptoms severity. It will enable to develop new perspectives for overactive bladder pathophysiology research and new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Sixteen Caucasian women aged 32-78 were included to the study. Patients were divided into 2 groups: OAB group (n=8) and control group (n=8). Sample of the urine (40mL) was collected using the 14 Fr sterile catheter and immediately preserved in the bacteriostatic factor (sodium azide) and Pefabloc, protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MI, USA) and frozen in -80oC. Proteins from urine were precipitated with Wessel-Fluegge method [9] and all samples were further processed according to iTRAQ manual (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Forty micrograms of the proteins was taken from each sample and digested with the trypsin in 37°C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Samples were labelled and analyzed in the Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) conjugated with the high efficiency nanoACQUITY UPLC® liquid chromatograph (LC) (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was analyzed using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) to search the SWISS-PROT protein database, limited to the Homo Sapiens taxonomy. After the data arrangement, it was searched again using the DECOY database. Statistical analysis was performed using Diffprot software, resampling-based software tool for statistical analysis of data derived from MS-based proteomic experiments

### Publication Abstract
Overactive bladder (OAB) is defined by International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/ International Continence Society (ICS) as urinary urgency, usually accompanied by frequency and nocturia, with or without urgency urinary incontinence, in the absence of urinary tract infection (UTI) or other obvious pathology. The pathophysiology of OAB is not well understood, however a number of different proteins and cytokines including vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) were found to be important in regulating structural integrity of the bladder wall. Proteome analysis may thus provide significant information with regard to OAB and may help in discovering novel diagnostic disease biomarkers. Sixteen Caucasian women aged 32-78 were included in the study. Patients were placed within 2 groups: OAB group (<i>n</i> = 8) and control group (<i>n</i> = 8). Urine samples were collected, immediately preserved in a protease inhibitor mixture, and frozen at -80 &#x2103;. All samples were then further processed according to the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) manual. Proteins were labeled and analyzed in the mass spectrometer conjugated with liquid chromatograph (data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD017799). There were no statistically significant differences in demographic data between control and OAB groups. VCAM-1 was the only protein that reached statistical significance as a differentiating protein in both of our experiments assessing the proteomic constitution in OAB patients. Studies involving a larger group of patients may provide further information on urinary bladder proteomics.

### Keywords
Urgency urinary incontinence; lower urinary tract symptoms, Overactive bladder

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawińskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
2nd Department of Gynecology, Medical University of Lublin, Poland

### Submitter
Konrad Futyma

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawińskiego 5a, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.


