### Accession
PXD036906

### Title
Proteomic datasets from sacsin knockout human SH-SY5Y and mouse primary cortical neurons

### Description
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a childhood-onset cerebellar ataxia caused by mutations in SACS, which encodes the protein sacsin. Cellular ARSACS phenotypes include mitochondrial dysfunction, intermediate filament disorganization, and the progressive death of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. It is unclear how the loss of sacsin function causes these deficits, or why they manifest as cerebellar ataxia. Here, we performed multi-omic profiling in sacsin knockout (KO) cells, and identified alterations in microtubule dynamics, protein trafficking, and mislocalization of synaptic and focal adhesion proteins, including multiple integrins. Focal adhesion structure, signaling, and function were affected in KO cells, which could be rescued by reducing levels of PTEN, an overabundant negative regulator of focal adhesion signaling. Purkinje neurons in ARSACS mice possessed mislocalization of ITGA1, and disorganization of synaptic structures in the deep cerebellar nucleus (DCN). Interactome analysis revealed that sacsin regulates protein-protein interactions between structural and synaptic adhesion proteins. Our findings suggest that disrupted trafficking of synaptic adhesion proteins is a causal molecular deficit underlying ARSACS.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y proteome phosphoproteome: Cell lysates from WT and sacsin KO cells (n=3) were acetone precipitated, then the next day reconstituted in 8M urea. Samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30min at 56C, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark, then digested overnight with trypsin at 1:100 ratio. 500ug of each sample was individually labeled with a TMT6 reagent (Thermo), then mixed. A 100ug aliquot was set aside for global proteome analysis, and was fractionated into 4 fractions using a High pH reversed phase fractionation spin column (Pierce). The rest of the sample (~3mg) was enriched for phosphopeptides using Ti-MAC magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences). The Ti-MAC eluate was fractionated into 3 fractions using High pH reversed phase fractionation spin column. Global proteome and phosphoproteome fractions were dried down via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80C until LC/MS/MS analysis. Each of the proteome and phosphoproteome fractions were analyzed in duplicate using a Thermo Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF. Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) using a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–50% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. SH-SY5Y kinome: Cell lysates from WT and sacsin KO cells (n=3) were enriched for kinases using the established multiplex inhibitor beads (MIBs) enrichment. Kinases were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin then desalted and dried down via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80C until LC/MS/MS analysis. Each sample was analyzed by LC/MS/MS – same instrument as above. SH-SY5Y surfaceome: WT and sacsin KO cells (n=3) were labeled with 10mM Aniline + 1mM Biocytin hydrazide then cell surface proteins were enriched using neutravidin high-capacity resin. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin then desalted. Each sample was analyzed by LC/MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a Fusion Lumos. Samples were injected onto a Thermo PepMap C18 trap column, washed, then loaded onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 analytical column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (ThermoFisher). The samples were separated over a 120 min method, where the gradient for separation consisted of 5–45% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate; mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. Primary neurons proteome: Cell lysates from WT and sacsin KO cells (n=3) were acetone precipitated, then the next day reconstituted in 8M urea. Samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30min at 56C, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark, then digested overnight with trypsin at 1:100 ratio. 300ug of each sample was individually labeled with a TMT6 reagent (Thermo), then mixed. The TMT sample was HPLC fractionated using high pH reversed phased chromatography (Agilent). The 96 resulting fractions were then concatenated in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions, dried down via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis. For the primary cortical culture TMT proteome fractions (24 total), the Lumos was operated in SPS-MS3 mode, with a 3s cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Kinome, proteome and phosphoproteome raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 and searched against the reviewed human database (downloaded Feb 2017, containing 20,162 entries), using Andromeda within MaxQuant. Primary cortical cultures were reviewed against the mouse database (downloaded May 2019, containing 17457 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of M and acetyl of N-term were set as variable modifications. For phosphoproteome samples, phosphorylation of S,T,Y was set as a variable modification. For proteome and phosphoproteome samples, TMT6plex of peptide N-termini & K was set as a fixed modification and the quantitation type was set to reporter ion MS2. and for For kinome label-free quantitation, match between runs was enabled. A 1% FDR was used to filter all data. For kinome data, a minimum of two peptides was required for label-free quantitation using the LFQ intensities.  Cell surface proteome raw data files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.15.0 and searched against the reviewed human database (downloaded Feb 2020, containing 20,350 entries), using Andromeda within MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of M and acetyl of N-term were set as variable modifications. A 1% FDR was used to filter all data and match between runs was enabled. A minimum of two peptides was required for label-free quantitation using the LFQ intensities.  For all proteomic datasets, proteins with a missing value in one replicate were imputed using the KNN imputation method, proteins with two or more missing values were removed from analysis. Linear Models for Microarray Data (LIMMA) was used to calculate log2 fold change of LFQ intensity and perform statistical analysis (Ritchie et al., 2015). FDR was calculated using Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-values. For proteins identified in the surfaceome, we annotated them as ‘Membrane” or ‘Exosome’ based on DAVID bioinformatics database. Proteins which were identified in unlabeled controls (no biotin) were removed from further analysis. Proteins with p<0.05 and log2 fold change of KO/WT -/+>0.4 were included in downstream analyses. The Kinome tree was generated on CORAL (Metz et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arscacs, Kinome, Neurobiology, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Surfaceome

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC Neuroscience Center, Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Wolter
UNC Neuroscience Center, Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


