### Accession
PXD015068

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of mouse cardiomyocytes reveals signalling pathways triggered by a vasodilator cryptide

### Description
Animal venoms are natural sources of bioactive molecules such as cryptides that consist in biological active peptides released after proteolytic cleavage of a peptide or protein precursor. The KPP is a cryptided derived from the c-terminal of an hypotensin (TsHpI) a peptide isolated from the venom of Tityus serrulatus scorpion. Previous studies of our group in rodent model demonstrated that KPP maintained the cardioprotective properties of its precursor. Nonetheless, the molecular machinery involved in the cellular response is poorly described to date. Thus, in order to characterize the signalling pathways triggered by KPP we incubate mouse cardiomyocytes with KPP during 5 or 30 min and explore the cell proteome and phosphoproteome by dimethyl labelling quantitation.

### Sample Protocol
Cardiomyocytes were prepared for proteomic analysis as described before. Briefly, cardiomyocytes were resuspended in the lysis buffer and after 2 h incubation at 25 oC, samples were diluted 10-times. Proteins were quantified using the Qubit assay (Thermo). The protein digestion was performed by adding modified trypsin (Promega) in 1:50 enzyme/protein ratio during 18 h at 25oC. The trypsin reaction was quenched by addition of TFA 0.5% (v/v) (final concentration). Thereafter, samples were centrifuged and vaccum-dried after the dimethyl labelling protocol.

### Data Protocol
Raw espectra data were analyzed in Max Quant v. 1.5.5.2 searching against the Uniprot Mus musculus database (downloaded version July 2019, ).  Parameters included carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, up to 2 missed cleavages for trypsin and   match between runs was enabled. Only proteins with FDR < 1% and at least 1 unique peptide per protein were used in this study. For phosphoproteomic analysis the phospho (STY) was selected as a variable modification.   Protein intensities were log2 transformed and normalized by median subtract.  Data visualization (histograms, QQ-plots, box plot, PCA and volcano plots) and statistical analysis one-way ANOVA (p-value < 0.05) to identify differential regulated proteins among the experimental groups were made in DanteR package. Functional analysis of regulated proteins was conducted in MetaCore™ platform v. 6.8

### Publication Abstract
Cryptic peptides (cryptides) are biologically active peptides formed after proteolysis of native precursors present in animal venoms, for example. Proteolysis is an overlooked post-translational modification that increases venom complexity. The tripeptide KPP (Lys-Pro-Pro) is a peptide encrypted in the C-terminus of Ts14-a 25-mer peptide from the venom of the <i>Tityus serrulatus</i> scorpion that has a positive impact on the cardiovascular system, inducing vasodilation and reducing arterial blood pressure of hypertensive rats among other beneficial effects. A previous study reported that KPP and its native peptide Ts14 act via activation of the bradykinin receptor B2 (B2R). However, the cellular events underlying the activation of B2R by KPP are unknown. To study the cell signaling triggered by the Ts14 cryptide KPP, we incubated cardiac myocytes isolated from C57BL/6 mice with KPP (10<sup>-7</sup> mol&#xb7;L<sup>-1</sup>) for 0, 5, or 30 min and explored the proteome and phosphoproteome. Our results showed that KPP regulated cardiomyocyte proteins associated with, but not limited to, apoptosis, muscle contraction, protein turnover, and the respiratory chain. We also reported that KPP led to AKT phosphorylation, activating AKT and its downstream target nitric oxide synthase. We also observed that KPP led to dephosphorylation of phospholamban (PLN) at its activation sites (S16 and T17), leading to reduced contractility of treated cardiomyocytes. Some cellular targets reported here for KPP (e.g., AKT, PLN, and ERK) have already been reported to protect the cardiac tissue from hypoxia-induced injury. Hence, this study suggests potential beneficial effects of this scorpion cryptide that needs to be further investigated, for example, as a drug lead for cardiac infarction.

### Keywords
Phosphopreteomics, Scorpion, Cardiomyocytes, Venome, Hipotensins, Cryptide

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofisica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Thiago Verano-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Thiago Verano-Braga
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofisica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais


