### Accession
PXD000871

### Title
Cell-Specific Labeling Enzymes For Analysis of Cell-Cell Communication in Continuous Co-Culture, Part 2 / 2

### Description
We report the orthologous screening, engineering and optimization of amino acid conversion enzymes for cell-specific proteomic labeling.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 / C3H10T1/2 co-cultures were seeded at 5x105 cells/cell type in a 10 cm dish, grown for 5-days (with or without daily media exchange (+0.5 % dFBS)), lysed in 6M urea, pooled, sonicated, centrifuged to clear cell debris and digested with Lys-C/trypsin using the FASP method [10]. Phosphopeptides were enriched by adding either 1 mg magnetic TiO2 (ReSyn Bio MR-TID010) or Ti-IMAC (ReSyn Bio MR-TIM010) beads to 200 μg tryptic peptides (following manufacturers protocol) and desalted using OLIGO™-R3 resin (Life Technologies). Each biological replicate contained x3 TiO2 and x3 Ti-IMAC enrichments (x6 LC-MS/MS technical replicates per biological replicate). All samples were run on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a NanoLC-Ultra 2D (Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files produced in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against SwissProt human and mouse database using Macsot (2.2). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine / glutamine, isotopomeric labeled lysine (+4 and +8) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Peptides were further filtered using a mascot significance threshold <0.05, a peptide ion score >20 and a FDR <0.01 (evaluated by Percolator). Phospho-site localization probabilities were calculated with phosphoRS 3.1. For relative phosphopeptide quantification, “Heavy” / “Medium” ratios were calculated by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (normalized to protein median). Only lysine containing peptides were included in the quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
We report the orthologous screening, engineering, and optimization of amino acid conversion enzymes for cell-specific proteomic labeling. Intracellular endoplasmic-reticulum-anchored Mycobacterium tuberculosis diaminopimelate decarboxylase (DDC(M.tub-KDEL)) confers cell-specific meso-2,6-diaminopimelate-dependent proliferation to multiple eukaryotic cell types. Optimized lysine racemase (Lyr(M37-KDEL)) supports D-lysine specific proliferation and efficient cell-specific isotopic labeling. When ectopically expressed in discrete cell types, these enzymes confer 90% cell-specific isotopic labeling efficiency after 10 days of co-culture. Moreover, DDC(M.tub-KDEL) and Lyr(M37-KDEL) facilitate equally high cell-specific labeling fidelity without daily media exchange. Consequently, the reported novel enzyme pairing can be used to study cell-specific signaling in uninterrupted, continuous co-cultures. Demonstrating the importance of increased labeling stability for addressing novel biological questions, we compare the cell-specific phosphoproteome of fibroblasts in direct co-culture with epithelial tumor cells in both interrupted (daily media exchange) and continuous (no media exchange) co-cultures. This analysis identified multiple cell-specific phosphorylation sites specifically regulated in the continuous co-culture. Given their applicability to multiple cell types, continuous co-culture labeling fidelity, and suitability for long-term cell-cell phospho-signaling experiments, we propose DDC(M.tub-KDEL) and Lyr(M37-KDEL) as excellent enzymes for cell-specific labeling with amino acid precursors.

### Keywords
Ctap

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Christopher Tape

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute


