### Accession
PXD004670

### Title
Insight into enzymatic degradation of corn, wheat, and soybean cell wall cellulose using quantitative secretome analysis of Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus, a saprophytic filamentous fungus, is known to harbor 263 glycoside hydrolase (GH) encoding genes, suggesting that A. fumigatus is an efficient lignocellulose degrader. Hence the present study uses corn, wheat or soybean as a sole carbon source to culture A. fumigatus under animal physiological condition as to understand how cellulolytic enzymes work together to achieve an efficient degradation of lignocellulose. Using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) approach, total of ~600 extracellular proteins were identified and quantified, in which ~50 proteins were involved in lignocellulolysis, including cellulases, hemicellulases, lignin-degrading enzymes and some hypothetical proteins.Functional classification of identified proteins showed 15% cellulases, 14 % hydrolases acting on glycosyl bond, and 22% hemicellulases。The approach of highly sensitive quantitative analysis of proteome and transcriptome respond to the probable enzyme combination required in agro industries and animal feeding purpose towards more efficient cellulose degradation and therefore better digestion of intracellular starch. Furthermore, number of important GH family protein, some CBM and polysaccharide lyase family proteins have been identified, which could attribute towards better degradation of lignocelluloses to release starch.

### Sample Protocol
The secreted protein from each of the samples were lysed in iTRAQ lysis buffer containing 25 mM Triethylammonium  bicarbonate  (TEAB),  8  M urea, 50 µg/ml DNase I, 50 µg/ml RNase A, 0.1% SDS, 2% Triton X-100, and 1×Halt  protease  inhibitor  cocktail  (Pierce,  Rockford,  IL),  and  centrifuged  at 18,000 × g for 1 h at 15 °C. The supernatant was collected and quantified by Bradford protein assay method (BIO-RAD, USA) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. The concentration of each sample was adjusted to the same concentration and used for protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling.  200 μg of each lysate were reduced with 4 μl of reducing agent [Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)] for 1 h at 37 °C and then alkylated with cysteine blocking reagent (AB SCIEX) for 20 min at room temperature. The samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Roche) (1:40) overnight at 37 °C and peptides were collected in a new microfuge tube, dried and then labeled with iTRAQ reagents (8-plex) (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. iTRAQ reagents were resuspended in 150µl isopropanol, transferred to the samples and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The reaction was quenched by adding deionised water. The samples were individually labeled by the following replicate reporters: CT: 113 and 117 m/z; CCC: 114 and 118 m/z; WCC: 115 and 119 m/z and SCC: 116 and 121 m/z. Based on experimental design, the reporter designated as CT is selected as reference ion channel. The labeled peptides were pooled together for the first dimensional fractionation by high pH reversed phase liquid chromatography.For peptide fractionation, 8 PlexiTRAQ reagent labeled peptide mixtures were separated with a Gemini 3µm-C18 column (4.6 x 250 mm; Phenomenex) on a LC-20A HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan). Briefly, the dried peptides were reconstituted in Buffer A (0.1% (w/v) ammonium hydroxide), injected onto the column and washed for 40 min at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min with 2% Buffer B (Acetonitrile, 0.1% (w/v) ammonium hydroxide). Peptides were eluted using a non-linear gradient (5-25 % B over 45 minutes, 25-40% B over 15 minutes, 80% B for additional 10 minute) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min.  Fractions were collected from the beginning of the gradient at 1 tube /min for 60 minute, dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20°C.The 60 itraq-labeled peptide fractions from the first dimensional separation were combined into 23 peptide samples for further nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Nano-LC separation was conducted using a Thermo Scientific™ EASY-nLC™ 1000 HPLC system. Mobile phases were composed of [A] water (0.1% formic acid) and [B] acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were directly loaded onto a homemade C18 column (75 μm ID x 15 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å).The analytical gradient was from 6-25% B in 55 min followed by 25-35% B in 15min, then 80% B for extra 10 min. Flow rate for analytical gradients was 300 nL/min. All the separated peptide fractions were then analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Data were acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion MS using Data dependent mode: Top Speed, Precursor priority: Most intense, and Scan time: 3s/cycle. Mass window for precursor ion selection of 1.6m/z, Intensity threshold for precursor ion selection of 5.0e4, Charge state screening parameters of 2-7 and Mass resolution of 15000 for MS2 was used. MS Scan Properties is Orbitrap Detector Type, Orbitrap Resolution 120000, Scan Range of 400-1500 m/z, RF Lens 60 %, AGC Target 2.0e5 and Max Injection (ms) 50. Data-dependent MS/MS Properties is Quadrupole isolation mode followed by HCD activation type with 35% HCD collision energy, Orbitrap Detector Type; AGC Target 5.0e4 and Max Injection (ms) 60 and Dynamic Exclusion (sec) 60

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 database (20061 entries) download from the NCBI assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Methylthio of cysteine and iTRAQ 8plex of lysine and the N-terminus were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ8plex of tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for peptide and protein identifications and statistical analysis of proteins based on iTRAQ-labeled. Peptide identifications were accepted if FDR is less than 1.0%. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted with less than 1% FDR and contained atleast 2 unique peptides per protein.  Modified or non-tryptic peptides were subjected to separate statistical filters to limit false discovery. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize data. Differentially expressed proteins (p values<0.05) were determined using Kruskal-wallis test analysis. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins and those missing a reference value, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Lignocelluloses contained in animal forage cannot be digested by pigs or poultry with 100% efficiency. On contrary, Aspergillus fumigatus, a saprophytic filamentous fungus, is known to harbor 263 glycoside hydrolase encoding genes, suggesting that A. fumigatus is an efficient lignocellulose degrader. Hence the present study uses corn, wheat, or soybean as a sole carbon source to culture A. fumigatus under animal physiological condition to understand how cellulolytic enzymes work together to achieve an efficient degradation of lignocellulose. Our results showed that A. fumigatus produced different sets of enzymes to degrade lignocelluloses derived from corn, wheat, or soybean cell wall. In addition, the cellulolytic enzymes produced by A. fumigatus were stable under acidic condition or at higher temperatures. Using isobaric tags for a relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) approach, a total of &#x223c;600 extracellular proteins were identified and quantified, in which &#x223c;50 proteins were involved in lignocellulolysis, including cellulases, hemicellulases, lignin-degrading enzymes, and some hypothetical proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004670. On the basis of quantitative iTRAQ results, 14 genes were selected for further confirmation by RT-PCR. Taken together, our results indicated that the expression and regulation of lignocellulolytic proteins in the secretome of A. fumigatus were dependent on both nature and complexity of cellulose, thus suggesting that a different enzyme system is required for degradation of different lignocelluloses derived from plant cells. Although A. fumigatus is a pathogenic fungus and cannot be directly used as an enzyme source, as an efficient lignocellulose degrader its strategy to synergistically degrade various lignocelluloses with different enzymes can be used to design enzyme combination for optimal digestion and absorption of corn, wheat, or soybean that are used as forage of pig and poultry.

### Keywords
Forage, Lignocelluloses, Itraq，secretome, Lignocellulolytic proteins, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Prakriti Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng Jin
State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


