### Accession
PXD006136

### Title
SWATH-based quantitative proteomics reveals the mechanism of enhanced Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus-resistance in silkworm reared on UV-B treated mulberry leaves

### Description
Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) is one of the most acute infectious diseases in silkworm, which has caused great economic loss in sericulture. Previous study showed that the content of components in mulberry leaves, particularly for moracin N, was increased after UV-B irradiation. In this study, the BmNPV resistance of silkworms reared on UV-B treated and moracin N spreaded mulberry leaves was improved. To uncover the mechanism of enhanced BmNPV resistance, silkworm midguts from UV-B treated mulberry leaves (BUM) and moracin N (BNM) groups were analyzed by SWATH-based proteomic technique. Of note, the abundance of ribosomal proteins in BUM and BNM groups was significantly changed to maintain the synthesis of total protein levels and cell survival. While, cytochrome c oxidase subunit II, calcium ATPase and programmed cell death 4 involved in apoptotic process were up-regulated in BNM group. Expressions of lipase-1, serine protease precursor, Rab1 protein, and histone genes were increased significantly in BNM group. These results suggest that moracin N might be the main active components in UV-B treated mulberry leaves to affect the BmNPV-resistance of silkworm, which could promote apoptotic cell death, enhance the organism immunity, and regulate the intercellular environment of cells in silkworm. It also presents an innovative process to reduce the mortality rate of silkworm infected with BmNPV.

### Sample Protocol
Silkworm midguts were ground in liquid nitrogen and lysed in Lysis Buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, 2 mM tributylphosphine) and vortexed for 1 hour at 25°C. The lysate suspension was centrifuged at 25°C for 20 minutes at 20,000×g. The supernatant was collected as the total midgut protein sample. Finally, protein concentration of the samples was determined by a Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as the standard. Protein (100 µg) was purified using methanol and chloroform to remove detergent and contaminants. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, and reduced using 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 56 °C. Samples were then alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at 37 °C, protected from light. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin using a 1:100 enzyme:protein concentration ratio for 16 hours at 37°C. The resulting peptide solutions were desalted using SPEC-Tip (Nikkyo Technos) and subjected to nanoliquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS).A Triple-TOFTM 5600 mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystem, USA) coupled to an Eksigent nano LC operating in high-sensitivity mode was used to analyze all samples. Liquid chromatography was carried out using a trap column (10 mm×100 μm, 5 μm C18 resin) and an in-house packed analytical column (100 mm×75 μm, C18-AQ 3 μm C18 resin, Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany). Two solvents were used, solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 98% acetonitrile). All samples were loaded in 100% solvent A, and eluted from the analytical column with a linear gradient of solvent B (5-30% over 97 min) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in SWATH-MS mode with a survey scan mass range of 350-1500 m/z. The acquisition method was set using the following parameters: 2300 V ion spray voltage, an isolation width of 26 Da (including 1 Da for the window overlap), and a set of 32 overlapping windows was constructed to cover the precursor mass range of 400-1250 Da. The collision energy for each window was determined based on the appropriate collision energy for a charge 2+ ion centered upon the window with a spread of 10 eV.

### Data Protocol
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) is a technique, in which data-independent acquisition is coupled with peptide spectral library match. SWATH method has higher quantification accuracy and precision, which can provide precise label-free quantification on proteome scale. The identified peptides and their corresponding fragment ions are matched to a spectral library in SWATH peak extraction. The peaks were extracted using the PeakView software (AB SCIEX, USA). ProteinPilot (V4.5.1, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) was used with an extensive analysis to identify the peptides and proteins present in samples during the protein-grouping process. A table of precursor masses and fragment ions was generated. For each selected transition ion, the extracted-ion chromatograms (XICs) were generated. Chromatographic and spectra components were used to compute XICs Scores. Once all the peptides were scored, an FDR analysis was performed. The following parameter settings were used: ion library mass tolerance: 50 ppm; number of peptides: 6; number of transitions: 6; peptide confidence: 99 %. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was designated as the specific enzyme, with two missed cleavages allowed. The protein ratio calculation was carried out in relation to peptides with unique sequences (not shared with other proteins) and free of mis-cleavages or variable modifications. Protein ratios in specific fiber samples versus reference samples were normalized using the median protein ratio, derived from a minimum of two unique quantified peptides. For confidence results, proteins with a minimum of two peptides were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) is one of the most acute infectious diseases in silkworm, which has led to great economic loss in sericulture. Previous study showed that the content of secondary metabolites in mulberry leaves, particularly for moracin N, was increased after UV-B irradiation. In this study, the BmNPV resistance of silkworms reared on UV-B treated and moracin N spread mulberry leaves was improved. To uncover the mechanism of enhanced BmNPV resistance, silkworm midguts from UV-B treated mulberry leaves (BUM) and moracin N (BNM) groups were analyzed by SWATH-based proteomic technique. Of note, the abundance of ribosomal proteins in BUM and BNM groups was significantly changed to maintain the synthesis of total protein levels and cell survival. While, cytochrome c oxidase subunit II, calcium ATPase and programmed cell death 4 involved in apoptotic process were up-regulated in BNM group. Expressions of lipase-1, serine protease precursor, Rab1 protein, and histone genes were increased significantly in BNM group. These results suggest that moracin N might be the main active component in UV-B treated mulberry leaves which could improve the BmNPV-resistance of silkworm through promoting apoptotic cell death, enhancing the organism immunity, and regulating the intercellular environment of cells in silkworm. It also presents an innovative process to reduce the mortality rate of silkworms infected with BmNPV.

### Keywords
Silkworm (bombyx mori); proteomics; uv-b treated mulberry leaves; moracin n;

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer, Chinese Academy of Sciences
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science,Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Wei Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Jingkui Tian
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science,Zhejiang University


