### Accession
PXD005256

### Title
Quantitative analysis of differential proteome expression in wild-type and mutants strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium

### Description
The ability to adapt quickly to changing environmental conditions is crucial for growth and survival of bacteria in their natural environment. The common strategy that bacteria utilize to increase their survival under stressful conditions, including antibiotic treatment, is the entry into a non-actively growing state (quiescence). In the wide host-range pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) and other Gram negative bacteria, this temporary arrest of proliferation induces the expression of the alternative sigma subunit σS/RpoS of RNA polymerase (RNAP) which remodels global gene expression to reshape the cell physiology and ensure survival in various stress conditions and nutritional deficiencies (i.e. general stress resistance) and long-term cell persistence. σS is also required for virulence and biofilm formation. Our work aims at understanding key molecular and physiological determinants responsible for persistence of non-growing bacteria, using the ubiquitous pathogen S. Typhimurium as a working system. We expect to identify novel functional proteins that are both physiologically important and of wide biological significance. One approach to characterize those proteins is to compare mutant proteome to that of the wild-type strain to unravel potential effects of the mutations on the expression and/or stability of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were sonicated and the reduced and alkylated. Liquid digestion of the samples was performed and the peptides were clean-up. A Q Exactive HF was used for data acquisition in Data Dependent Acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant with the Andromeda search engine Perseus for data processing and statistical analysis

### Publication Abstract
The RpoS/&#x3c3;<sup>S</sup> sigma subunit of RNA polymerase is the master regulator of the general stress response in many Gram-negative bacteria. Extensive studies have been conducted on &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup>-regulated gene expression at the transcriptional level. In contrast, very limited information regarding the impact of &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup> on global protein production is available. In this study, we used a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to explore the wide &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup>-dependent proteome of the human pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Our present goals were twofold: (1) to survey the protein changes associated with the &#x394;rpoS mutation and (2) to assess the coding capacity of &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup>-dependent small RNAs. Our proteomics data, and complementary assays, unravelled the large impact of &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup> on the Salmonella proteome, and validated expression and &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup> regulation of twenty uncharacterized small proteins of 27 to 96 amino acids. Furthermore, a large number of genes regulated at the protein level only were identified, suggesting that post-transcriptional regulation is an important component of the &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup> response. Novel aspects of &#x3c3;<sup>S</sup> in the control of important catabolic pathways such as myo-inositol, L-fucose, propanediol, and ethanolamine were illuminated by this work, providing new insights into the physiological remodelling involved in bacterial adaptation to a non-actively growing state.

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, Maxquant, Perseus, Q exactive hf, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Department of microbiology, Macromolecular systems and signaling Lab, Persistence of non-proliferating bacteria Group, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. ( lab head )

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Françoise Norel
Department of microbiology, Macromolecular systems and signaling Lab, Persistence of non-proliferating bacteria Group, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. ( lab head )


