### Accession
PXD018945

### Title
Nuclear moonlighting of cytosolic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase regulates Arabidopsis response to heat stress

### Description
Various stress conditions induce the nuclear translocation of cytosolic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPC), but its nuclear function in plant stress responses remains elusive. Here we show that GAPC interacts with a transcription factor to increase the expression of heat-inducible genes and heat tolerance in Arabidopsis. GAPC accumulates in the nucleus in a heat stress-dependent manner. Screening of Arabidopsis transcription factors identifies nuclear factor Y subunit C10 (NF-YC10) as a GAPC-binding protein. Heat tolerance of seedlings and the expression of heat-inducible genes are enhanced by overexpression of GAPC and reduced in gapc. The effects of GAPC overexpression are abolished when NF-YC10 is deficient or GAPC nuclear accumulation is suppressed. Genetic complementation fails to recover the heat responses of gapc when GAPC-NF-YC10 interaction is disrupted. GAPC overexpression also enhances the binding ability of NF-YC10 to its target promoter. The results reveal a cellular and molecular mechanism for the nuclear moonlighting of a glycolytic enzyme in plant response to environmental changes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C overnight, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The digested peptides were run on the LC-tandem MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). The samples were dried down to concentrate and resuspended in 10 mL of 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid mixture. 5 mL was injected for LC-MS/MS on 2-hour gradient separation and data acquisition. Peptides were resolved using 75 mm × 50 cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The database search was performed with peptide mass fingerprint data using Mascot (v2.5.1.0) database search engine (Matrix Science) against the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database (Uniprot.org). Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. The criteria for a significant protein identification were both at least two unique peptides per protein identified and each peptide showing a probability >99%.

### Publication Abstract
Various stress conditions induce the nuclear translocation of cytosolic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPC), but its nuclear function in plant stress responses remains elusive. Here we show that GAPC interacts with a transcription factor to promote the expression of heat-inducible genes and heat tolerance in Arabidopsis. GAPC accumulates in the nucleus under heat stress. Overexpression of GAPC enhances heat tolerance of seedlings and the expression of heat-inducible genes whereas knockout of GAPCs has opposite effects. Screening of Arabidopsis transcription factors identifies nuclear factor Y subunit C10 (NF-YC10) as a GAPC-binding protein. The effects of GAPC overexpression are abolished when NF-YC10 is deficient, the heat-induced nuclear accumulation of GAPC is suppressed, or the GAPC-NF-YC10 interaction is disrupted. GAPC overexpression also enhances the binding ability of NF-YC10 to its target promoter. The results reveal a cellular and molecular mechanism for the nuclear moonlighting of a glycolytic enzyme in plant response to environmental changes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Heat stress, Gapc

### Affiliations
University of Missouri-St. Louis

### Submitter
Sangchul Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Xuemin Wang
University of Missouri-St. Louis


