### Accession
PXD023520

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of  monkey brains with PINK1 depletion

### Description
PINK1 protein is highly expressed in primate brains. CRISPR-Cas9-mediated depletion of PINK1in fetal and adult monkey brains causes severe neurodegeneration without affecting mitochondrial proteins and morphology.

### Sample Protocol
Monkey brains were lysed in urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5, with protease and phosphatase inhibitors). For TMT labeling, 330 μg protein lysate per sample were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 55°C for 30 min, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min, precipitated with six volumes of pre-chilled acetone overnight, and digested with trypsin (1:100, Promega) overnight at 37°C in 100 mM TEAB. Peptides from the six conditions were labeled with 0.8 mg of TMT sixplex (Thermo Scientific, #90066) respectively, and combined afterward following the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 1.98 mg tryptic peptides were separated into 60 fractions using high-pH RPLC (Waters XBridge C18 column 5 μm, 250 mm × 4.6 mm; mobile phase A (5 mM NH4COOH, 2% acetonitrile, pH = 10.0) and B (5 mM NH4COOH, 98% acetonitrile, pH = 10.0) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using the following linear gradient: 0-6% phase B for 6 min, 6%-28.5% phase B for 30 min, 28.5%-34% phase B for 5 min, 34%-60% phase B for 10 min, 60% phase B for 9 min. The eluate was collected 1 minute into vials (1 ml/tube). Finally, 60 fractions were combined into 12 components in zigzag fashion. We took 5% of each fraction for the proteome analysis. The rest of the proteins were vacuum dried for phosphoproteome analysis. Samples were further enriched for phosphopeptides with titanium dioxide beads (TiO2, 5 μm titansphere, GL Sciences Japan). TiO2 beads were pre-incubated in 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (20 mg/mL) in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% acetic acid (DHB solution) for 20 min. Prior to addition of the beads, the peptide was brought to 80% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 0.2 g/ml phthalic acid. TiO2 beads (0.13 milligram in 4 μl of DHB solution) were added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 15 min while rotating, and the supernatant was then removed to a new tube for a repeat enrichment. The beads were combined in 100 μl wash buffer 1 (5 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN, 350 mM KCl), followed by 100 μl wash buffer 2 (40% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, 0.05% TFA) and 200 μl wash buffer 3 (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid). The phosphorylated peptides were then eluted first with 40 μL of 5% NH4OH followed by 40 μl of 10% NH4OH with 25% ACN. Eluted peptides were concentrated in a speed Vac, loaded onto C18 STAGE-tips and primed for LC−MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nLC1000 LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled on line with the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed C18-column (15 cm, 75 μm I.D., 3 μm p.s.) with a 120-minutes gradient from 12% to 32% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. One full scan MS from 400 to 1600 m/z followed by 12 MS/MS scan were continuously acquired. The resolution for MS was set to 70000 and for data-dependent MS/MS was set to 35000. The nano-electrospray source conditions were: spray voltage, 1.8 KV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 275°C. For HCD, the isolation window was set to 2 m/z and the normalized collision energy of 32 was applied.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) software was used to analyze the MS/MS raw data. For the database searching parameters, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm. Trypsin/P was set as the protease, accounting for in-source fragmentation of lysine or arginine residues followed by proline. Two missed cleavages were allowed. All data were searching against with the UniPort human database (sequences) including oxidation (+15.9949 Daltons) of methionine and phosphorylation (+79.9663 Daltons) of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as dynamic modifications, and TMT ten plex (+229.1629 Daltons) on lysine and peptide N termini andcarbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Daltons) of cysteine as static modifications

### Publication Abstract
In vitro studies have established the prevalent theory that the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 protects neurodegeneration by removing damaged mitochondria in Parkinson's disease (PD). However, difficulty in detecting endogenous PINK1 protein in rodent brains and cell lines has prevented the rigorous investigation of the in vivo role of PINK1. Here we report that PINK1 kinase form is selectively expressed in the human and monkey brains. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deficiency of PINK1 causes similar neurodegeneration in the brains of fetal and adult monkeys as well as cultured monkey neurons without affecting mitochondrial protein expression and morphology. Importantly, PINK1 mutations in the primate brain and human cells reduce protein phosphorylation that is important for neuronal function and survival. Our findings suggest that PINK1 kinase activity rather than its mitochondrial function is essential for the neuronal survival in the primate brains and that its kinase dysfunction could be involved in the pathogenesis of PD.

### Keywords
Pink1 monkey proteome phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
ECNU
Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 100021, China

### Submitter
Yunpeng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liao Lujian
Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 100021, China


