### Accession
PXD030382

### Title
Mapping of a N-terminal alpha-helix domain required for human PINK1 stabilisation, Serine228 autophosphorylation and activation in cells

### Description
Comparative hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry of WT and I507A mutant for above titled manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
5 µL of 5 µM of wild type PhcPINK1 (residues 108-575) was equilibrated in 50 mM potassium phosphate, 300 mM sodium chloride, 5 mM  TCEP, pH7.2. Sample was mixed with 95 µl deuterated buffer (50 mM potassium  phosphate, 300 mM sodium chloride, 5 mM TCEP pD 6.8), and was then incubated  at 4 °C for the specified times (0.25 min, 2 min, 10 min and 30 min). At the end of the labelling time  100 µL of the reaction mixture was added to 100 µL of the quench buffer at 0 °C  (10 mM potassium phosphate, 5 mM TCEP, 0.1% DDM. The quench buffer pH was  adjusted so the final mixture was at pH 2.5 ). 50 µl of the quenched sample was  passed through an immobilised pepsin column (Affipro, Prague, Czech Republic)  at 150 µl/min at 20 °C and the resulting peptides were trapped by a VanGuard  Acquity UPLC BEH C18 pre-column for 3 min. The peptides were then transferred  to a C18 column (75 µm × 150 mm, Waters Ltd., Wilmslow, Manchester, UK) and  separated by gradient elution of 5-40% MeCN in water and 0.1% formic acid over  7 min at 40 µl/min. Trapping and gradient elution of peptides was performed at 0  °C. The HDX system was interfaced to a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters Ltd.,  Wilmslow, Manchester, UK). HDMSE and dynamic range extension modes (Data  Independent Analysis (DIA) coupled with IMS separation) were used to separate  peptides prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using PLGS(V3.0.2) and DynamX(v3.0.0) software

### Publication Abstract
Autosomal recessive mutations in the <i>PINK1</i> gene are causal for Parkinson's disease (PD). PINK1 encodes a mitochondrial localized protein kinase that is a master-regulator of mitochondrial quality control pathways. Structural studies to date have elaborated the mechanism of how mutations located within the kinase domain disrupt PINK1 function; however, the molecular mechanism of PINK1 mutations located upstream and downstream of the kinase domain is unknown. We have employed mutagenesis studies to define the minimal region of human PINK1 required for optimal ubiquitin phosphorylation, beginning at residue Ile111. Inspection of the AlphaFold human PINK1 structure model predicts a conserved N-terminal &#x3b1;-helical extension (NTE) domain forming an intramolecular interaction with the C-terminal extension (CTE), which we corroborate using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry of recombinant insect PINK1 protein. Cell-based analysis of human PINK1 reveals that PD-associated mutations (e.g. Q126P), located within the NTE : CTE interface, markedly inhibit stabilization of PINK1; autophosphorylation at Serine228 (Ser228) and Ubiquitin Serine65 (Ser65) phosphorylation. Furthermore, we provide evidence that NTE and CTE domain mutants disrupt PINK1 stabilization at the mitochondrial Translocase of outer membrane complex. The clinical relevance of our findings is supported by the demonstration of defective stabilization and activation of endogenous PINK1 in human fibroblasts of a patient with early-onset PD due to homozygous PINK1 Q126P mutations. Overall, we define a functional role of the NTE : CTE interface towards PINK1 stabilization and activation and show that loss of NTE : CTE interactions is a major mechanism of PINK1-associated mutations linked to PD.

### Keywords
Human, Pink1, Hydrogen deuterium exchange

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences,  University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK

### Submitter
James Ault

### Lab Head
Dr Miratul Muqit
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences,  University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK


