### Accession
PXD012357

### Title
Deep protein methylation profiling by combined chemical and immunoaffinity approaches reveals novel PRMT1 targets

### Description
Protein methylation has been implicated in many important biological contexts including signaling, metabolism, and transcriptional control. Despite the importance of this post- translational modification, the global analysis of protein methylation by mass spectrometry-based proteomics has not been extensively studied due to the lack of robust, well-characterized techniques for methyl-peptidemethyl peptide enrichment. Here, to better investigate protein methylation, we optimized and compared two methods for methyl-peptidemethyl peptide enrichment: immunoaffinity purification (IAP) and high pH strong cation exchange (SCX). Comparison of these methods revealed that they are largely orthogonal for monomethyl arginine (MMA), suggesting that the usage of both techniques is required to provide a global view of protein methylation. Using both IAP and SCX, we investigated changes in protein methylation downstream of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1). Together, these techniques allowed us to quantify over ~1,000 arginine methylation sites on 407 proteins. Of these methylation sites, PRMT1 knockdown resulted in significant changes to 110 arginine methylation sites on 59 proteins. In contrast, zero lysine methylation sites were significantly changed upon PRMT1 knockdown. In PRMT1 knockdown cells, 24 MMA sites exhibited both significant downregulation (ie, putative PRMT1-mediated MMA targets) and 63 significant upregulation (ie, putative PRMT1-mediated ADMA targets). PRMT1 knockdown induced significant changes in asymmetric dimethyl arginine (ADMA), consistent with being PRMT1 targets. Additionally, We also observed that PRMT1 knockdown induced significant increases in symmetric dimethyl arginine (SDMA) methylation, suggesting that loss of PRMT1 activity allows scavenging of PRMT1 substrates by Type II PRMTs. Analysis of the subcellular localization and protein function of the significantly changing methyl-proteins revealed that the majority of PRMT1 substrates are localized to the nucleus and involved in RNA and DNA binding. Taken together, our results suggest that deep protein methylation profiling by mass spectrometry requires orthogonal enrichment techniques, identify novel PRMT1 methylation targets, and highlight in order to understand the dynamic interplay between methyltransferases in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysate Preparation — Cells were washed with PBS, scraped, and lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 8M urea, 1 mM activated sodium vanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β- glycerophosphate, and 100 mM sodium phosphate. Protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic assay. Lysates were sonicated and cleared by high speed centrifugation and then filtered through 0.22 um filter. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol, 25 mM iodoacetimide, 10 mM dithiothreitol, respectively. Lysates were four-fold diluted in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin at a 1:100 ratio and then quenched with addition of trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2. Peptides were purified using reverse-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted with 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and then dried by vacuum. Dried peptides were subjected to high pH strong cation exchange or antibody immunoaffinity purification. High pH Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) — As described previously [23] , in brief, 1 mg of digested protein was resuspended in loading buffer (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB (5 mM phosphoric acid, 5 mM boric acid, 5 mM acetic acid, pH 2.5) and incubated with high pH SCX beads (Sepax) for 30 minutes, washed with washing buffer (80% acetonitrile, 20% BRUB, pH 9), and eluted into five fractions using elution buffer 1 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 9), elution buffer 2 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 10), elution buffer 3 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 11), elution buffer 4 (30% acetonitrile, 70% BRUB, pH 12), and elution buffer 5(100% BRUB, 1M NaCl, pH 12). Eluates were dried, resuspended in 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on STAGE tips with 2 mg of HLB material (Waters) loaded onto 300 uL tip with a C8 plug (Empore, Sigma).  Immunoaffinity Purification (IAP) — 10 mg of digested proteins were dissolved in 1X immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2, Cell Signaling). Modified symmetric dimethyl arginine peptides, asymmetric dimethyl arginine peptides, and monomethyl arginine peptides were immunoprecipitated by addition of 40 uL of PTMScan Symmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (13563, Cell Signaling), PTMScan Asymmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (13474, Cell Signaling), and PTMScan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (12235, Cell Signaling), respectively. Modified methyl lysine peptides were enriched with PTMScan Pan-Methyl Lysine Kit (14809). Lysates were incubated for with PTMScan motif kits for 2 hours at 4 o C on a rotator. Beads were centrifuged and washed two times in 1X immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water, and modified peptides were eluted with 2 x 50 uL of 0.15% TFA and desalted on STAGE tips with C18 cores (Empore, Sigma). Enriched peptides were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and digested with trypsin for 2 hours, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2 and desalted on STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Analysis — All LC-MS experiments were performed on a nanoscale UHPLC system (EASY-nLC1200, Thermo Scientific) connected to an Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a reversed-phase analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm X 25 cm) (Thermo Scientific). For high pH SCX fractions a “Short” gradient was used where flow rate was set to 300 nl/min at a gradient starting with 0% buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% acetonitrile) to 29% B in 142 minutes, then washed by 90% B in 10 minutes, and held at 90% B for 3. The maximum pressure was set to 1,180 bar and column temperature was constant at 50 o C. For IAP samples a “Slow” gradient was used where flow rate was set to 300 nl/min at a gradient starting with 0% buffer B to 25% B in 132 minutes, then washed by 90% B in 10 minutes. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Peptides separated by the column were ionized at 2.0 kV in the positive ion mode. MS1 survey scans for DDA were acquired at resolution of 70k from 350 to 1800 m/z, with maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target of 1e6. MS/MS fragmentation of the 10 most abundant ions were analyzed at a resolution of 17.5k, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms for IAP samples, 240 ms for SCX samples, and normalized collision energy 26. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charge 1 and >6 were excluded. Identification and Quantitation of Peptides — MS/MS fragmentation spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) against the in-silico tryptic digested Uniprot H. sapiens database with all reviewed with isoforms (release Jun 2017, 42,140 entries). The maximum missed cleavage rate was set to 5. Dynamic modifications were set to include mono-methylation of arginine or lysine (R/K, +14.01565), di-methylation of arginine or lysine (R/K, +28.0313), tri-methylation of lysine (K, +42.04695), oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da, and acetylation on protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C, +57.021 Da). The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptides with sequence of six to fifty amino acids were considered. Methylation site localization was determined by ptm-RS node in Proteome Discoverer, and only sites with localization probability greater or equal to 75% were considered. The False Discovery Rate threshold was set strictly to 0.01 using Percolator node validated by q-value. Relative abundances of parental peptides were calculated by integration of area-under-the-curve of the MS1 peaks using Minora LFQ node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Only spectra with an Xcorr greater than 1.5 were used for quantification of modified arginine peptides. The Proteome Discoverer export peptide groups abundance values were log 2 transformed, normalized to the corresponding samples median values, and significance was determined using a permutation-based FDR approach in the Perseus environment (release 1.6.2.3) with a q-value FDR of 0.05 and S 0 value of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Protein methylation has been implicated in many important biological contexts including signaling, metabolism, and transcriptional control. Despite the importance of this post-translational modification, the global analysis of protein methylation by mass spectrometry-based proteomics has not been extensively studied because of the lack of robust, well-characterized techniques for methyl peptide enrichment. Here, to better investigate protein methylation, we compared two methods for methyl peptide enrichment: immunoaffinity purification (IAP) and high pH strong cation exchange (SCX). Using both methods, we identified 1720 methylation sites on 778 proteins. Comparison of these methods revealed that they are largely orthogonal, suggesting that the usage of both techniques is required to provide a global view of protein methylation. Using both IAP and SCX, we then investigated changes in protein methylation downstream of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1). PRMT1 knockdown resulted in significant changes to 127 arginine methylation sites on 78 proteins. In contrast, only a single lysine methylation site was significantly changed upon PRMT1 knockdown. In PRMT1 knockdown cells, we found 114 MMA sites that were either significantly downregulated or upregulated on proteins enriched for mRNA metabolic processes. PRMT1 knockdown also induced significant changes in both asymmetric dimethyl arginine (ADMA) and symmetric dimethyl arginine (SDMA). Using characteristic neutral loss fragmentation ions, we annotated dimethylarginines as either ADMA or SDMA. Through integrative analysis of methyl forms, we identified 18 high confidence PRMT1 substrates and 12 methylation sites that are scavenged by other non-PRMT1 arginine methyltransferases in the absence of PRMT1 activity. We also identified one methylation site, HNRNPA1 R206, which switched from ADMA to SDMA upon PRMT1 knockdown. Taken together, our results suggest that deep protein methylation profiling by mass spectrometry requires orthogonal enrichment techniques to identify novel PRMT1 methylation targets and highlight the dynamic interplay between methyltransferases in mammalian cells.

### Keywords
Mma, Dimethyl, Sdma, Ptm, Adma, Liquid chromatography, Q exactive plus, Prmt, Posttranslational modification, Prmt1, Arginine, Lysine, Proteomics, Lcms, Methylation, Mass spectrometry, Monomethyl

### Affiliations
USC
USC Viterbi School of Engineering, Mork Family Dept. of Chemical Engineering

### Submitter
Nicolas Hartel

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Graham
USC Viterbi School of Engineering, Mork Family Dept. of Chemical Engineering


