### Accession
PXD002862

### Title
Semi-quantitative proteomics of mammalian cells exposed to non-ionizing electromagnetic fields

### Description
Unbiased SILAC-based proteomics of human and mouse cells exposed to non-ionizing electromagnetic fields (EMFs) such as those emitted by power-lines (ELF), mobile cellular systems (UMTS) and wireless networking devices (WiFi).

### Sample Protocol
Human osteosarcomas (U2OS), human fibroblasts (VH10) and mouse embryonic stem cells (IB10) were exposed to extremely low frequency (ELF, 50 Hz power-transmission signal, 15 hrs) and radio frequency (WiFi, 5.8 GHz; and UMTS, 2.1 GHz; 24 hrs) electromagnetic fields with sham-exposed cultures as controls, and were processed for MS analysis immediately following the (sham) exposure. Specifically, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, harvested and lysed in 250 µl lysis buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 7M urea, 2M thiourea (Sigma Aldrich) and cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) at the recommended concentration in ultrapure water (Baxter Healthcare). DNA was sheared by passing the lysate 20 times through a 25G needle. The lysate was cleared by centrifuging for 10 minutes at 14,000g in an Eppendorf centrifuge. Total protein concentrations were determined using the NITM protein assay kit (G-Biosciences). Equal amounts of protein (150 µg ) of the differentially labeled lysates (L/M/H) were mixed for MS analysis as follows: unexposed “Light” and “Medium” lysates were mixed with exposed “Heavy” lysates (L0+M0+H1); exposed “Light” and “Medium” lysates were mixed with unexposed “Heavy” lysate (L1+M1+H0). The resulting protein lysates were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as described previously (Sap et al., 2015). Peptides were fractionated by HILIC chromatography and  the fractions were collected for MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nLC system coupled with a Q ExactiveTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 2 cm × 100 μm, packed in-house) at a flow rate of 8 μl/min. Peptide separation was performed on ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 75 μm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 50% B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 120 min (for IP samples) or 180 min (for SILAC global proteome samples) and at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min (using a splitter for the 1100 system). The column eluent was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode by HCD using the top 15 selection. Additional settings for the mass spectrometer operation were as follows: MS resolution at 70,000; MS AGC target 3E6; MS maximum injection time of 100 ms; MS scan range of 375-1,400 m/z; MS/MS resolution at 17,500; MS/MS AGC target 1E5; MS/MS maximum injection time of 200 ms; and intensity threshold 5E3.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Xcalibur RAW files (423 GB in total) were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) integrated with the Andromeda peptide search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched with trypsin specificity, with legitimate cleavages before proline (Trypsin/P), against the corresponding species-specific library of protein sequences (89796 human proteins and 53213 mouse proteins from the UniProtKB database release 2015_02 (UniProt Consortium, 2015)) including reverse sequences and common contaminants in the FASTA format (http://maxquant.org/contaminants.zip, 247 proteins). Peptides were at least 7 amino acids long and were allowed to contain up to two missed cleavages and five modifications per tryptic peptide. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cystein was set as fixed modification. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 6 ppm and at 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide and protein identifications were obtained with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds. Protein quantitations required at least two razor and/or unique peptides, including those with the variable modifications. MaxQuant result files, such as the peptide (evidence.txt) and protein lists (proteinGroups.txt), and the searched human/mouse protein sequence library (*.fasta) were uploaded to and integrated by the PIQMIe proteomics server (Kuzniar and Kanaar, 2014). Specifically, the server transformed each EMF exposure data set into a relational database for efficient data access and downstream analyses such as the detection of differentially regulated proteins and of potentially perturbed cellular processes (pathways) upon EMF exposures. We implemented an array of established statistical methods for differential expression analysis in R and Python. This analysis relied on SILAC protein ratios corrected for unequal protein loading (referred to as normalized ratios) and fully quantitated protein groups associated with six normalized ratios from reciprocal SILAC experiments: i) four 'treated' ratios from exposed versus unexposed (sham) samples, and ii) two 'control' ratios from exposed versus exposed samples and sham versus sham samples. The significance of protein fold-changes (FC) was assessed using three outlier detection approaches namely the peak intensity-based significance B of fold-changes (denoted as FC+sigB) (Cox and Mann, 2008), standard Z-score and its robust version called M-score (Iglewicz and Hoaglin, 1993; Colaert et al., 2010). In addition, we used two rank-based (non-parametric) methods implemented in the fcros (version 1.2; Dembélé and Kastner, 2014) and RankProd (version 2.38.0; Breitling and Herzyk, 2005; Hong et al., 2006) R packages as well as one linear modeling approach with empirical Bayes estimation implemented in the limma R package (version 3.22.1; Smyth et al., 2005; McCarthy and Smyth, 2009). Furthermore, each method used a series of fold-change (FC) and/or p-value thresholds to detect differentially regulated proteins at increasing levels of stringency. The p-values were adjusted by the Benjamini–Hochberg method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) to control the FDR of the analysis. Importantly, our experimental design based on triplex SILAC with two label-swap experiments was explicitely taken into account in the differential  expression analysis by defining a contrast/design matrix in limma or using a composite FC-based filter in the other methods. Both approaches ensured that only proteins with consistent changes in the 'treated' SILAC ratios but with relatively smaller or no changes in the 'control' ratios were selected as potential candidates. Finally, all differentially regulated proteins detected in the mammalian cell lines were subjected to an improved model-based protein set analysis using the mgsa R package (version 1.14.2; Bauer et al., 2011) to infer potentially perturbed biological processes (as defined by the UniProt Gene Ontology Annotation database (UniProt-GOA) release 142 for human and release 128 for mouse, March 2015 (Huntley et al., 2014)) and cellular pathways (as defined by two curated pathway databases: the KEGG PATHWAY release 73.0+/03-10, March 2015 (Kanehisa et al., 2012); and the Reactome version 52, March 2015 (Croft et al., 2014)). In the resulting Bayesian networks, the marginal posterior probabilities were estimated using a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method with 20 independent runs of the MCMC sampler, each with 10^6 iterations. A cellular process or pathway was inferred as perturbed only if its marginal posterior probablity was greater than 0.5. Note that a higher posterior indicates stronger support in the Bayesian framework, which is in contrary to the standard hypothesis-based approaches – wherein a lower p-value indicates a higher level of confidence.

### Publication Abstract
The potential effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic fields (EMFs), such as those emitted by power-lines (in extremely low frequency range), mobile cellular systems and wireless networking devices (in radio frequency range) on human health have been intensively researched and debated. However, how exposure to these EMFs may lead to biological changes underlying possible health effects is still unclear. To reveal EMF-induced molecular changes, unbiased experiments (without a priori focusing on specific biological processes) with sensitive readouts are required. We present the first proteome-wide semi-quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of human fibroblasts, osteosarcomas and mouse embryonic stem cells exposed to three types of non-ionizing EMFs (ELF 50 Hz, UMTS 2.1 GHz and WiFi 5.8 GHz). We performed controlled in vitro EMF exposures of metabolically labeled mammalian cells followed by reliable statistical analyses of differential protein- and pathway-level regulations using an array of established bioinformatics methods. Our results indicate that less than 1% of the quantitated human or mouse proteome responds to the EMFs by small changes in protein abundance. Further network-based analysis of the differentially regulated proteins did not detect significantly perturbed cellular processes or pathways in human and mouse cells in response to ELF, UMTS or WiFi exposure. In conclusion, our extensive bioinformatics analyses of semi-quantitative mass spectrometry data do not support the notion that the short-time exposures to non-ionizing EMFs have a consistent biologically significant bearing on mammalian cells in culture.

### Keywords
Radio frequency, Human, Mouse, Inverse metabolic labeling, Extremely low frequency, Fibroblasts, Exposure, Silac, Embryonic stem cells, Non-ionizing electromagnetic fields, Osteosarcomas

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Erasmus Medical Center Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Netherlands eScience Center, Amsterdam

### Submitter
Arnold Kuzniar

### Lab Head
Dr Roland Kanaar
Department of Genetics, Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Erasmus Medical Center Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


