### Accession
PXD033421

### Title
DPF3 and SNIP1 IP-MS in 786-O cells

### Description
In this project, we performed DPF3 and SNIP1 immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry analysis to identify their interacting partners.

### Sample Protocol
786-O cells expressing HA-tagged DPF3a were washed with ice-cold PBS and homogenized in lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The DPF3a-associated proteins were immunoprecipitated with anti-HA beads (Thermo) for 2 hours. After three times washing with TBST, an on-beads digestion with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was carried out. Afterwards, the samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer system (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
IP-MS data was processed by MaxQuant for label-free quantification with “match between run” function activated and database searching was against the UniProt human database.

### Publication Abstract
DPF3, a component of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, has been associated with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) in a genome-wide association study. However, the functional role of DPF3 in ccRCC development and progression remains unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that DPF3a, the short isoform of DPF3, promotes kidney cancer cell migration both in vitro and in vivo, consistent with the clinical observation that DPF3a is significantly upregulated in ccRCC patients with metastases. Mechanistically, DPF3a specifically interacts with SNIP1, via which it forms a complex with SMAD4 and p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT), the major transcriptional regulators of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling pathway. Moreover, the binding of DPF3a releases the repressive effect of SNIP1 on p300 HAT activity, leading to the increase in local histone acetylation and the activation of cell movement related genes. Overall, our findings reveal a metastasis-promoting function of DPF3, and further establish the link between SWI/SNF components and ccRCC.

### Keywords
Dpf3, Snip1

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Systems Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518005, China
1. Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Systems Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518005, China
2. Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518005, China
3. Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518005, China

### Submitter
Huanhuan Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Chen
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Systems Biology, School of Life Sciences, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518005, China


