### Accession
PXD020152

### Title
Proteome of gamma-butyrobetaine-grown Eubacterium limosum ATCC 8486

### Description
Eubacterium limosum ATCC 8486 makes acetate and butyrate from various substrates and is found in the human intestine. The proteome of gamma-butyrobetaine -grown Eubacterium limosum was obtained in order to identify enzymes required for growth on gamma-butyrobetaine, in particular to identify components that are unique to growth on gamma-butyrobetaine in comparison to other substrates for acetogenesis, such as lactic acid, L-carnitine, or proline betaine. Gamma-butyrobetaine is converted to trimethylamine (TMA) by certain members of the gut microbiome. Subsequent liver metabolism of TMA is now tied to progression of cardiovascular disease. Demethylation of gamma-butyrobetaine is observed during growth of Eubacterium limosum on this substrate, and does not produce TMA. Gamma-butyrobetaine demethylation by organisms like Eubacterium limosum  could lessen TMA production in the gut, thereby lessening the propensity towards atherosclerosis caused by metabolism of TMA in the body. This proteome led to discovery of gamma-butyrobetaine:tetrahydrofolate methyltransferase system. The key gamma-butyrobetaine demethylating enzyme is a member of the widespread TMA methyltransferase protein superfamily.

### Sample Protocol
A set of 4 replicate cultures (10 ml) grown on defined medium with 50 mM gamma-butyrobetaine was anaerobically harvested at OD600  0.56) by centrifugation. The pellets were washed with 22 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, frozen in liquid N2, and stored at -80 C. An aliquot of each cell pellet was lyophilized then cryoground with the subsequent addition of RIPA Buffer [50mM Tris-HCl 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Roche Protease inhibitor cocktail, 1x HALT Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA), 25U/ml Benzonase nuclease (Novagen, Madison, WI)] at a ratio of 12 ul/mg cell pellet (original wet weight). The suspension was sonicated on ice twice for 10 seconds with a 10 second interval between pulses, then centrifuged at 13,000 RPM, the supernatant retained, and lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS in 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) added to the remaining pellet at a ratio of 2.5 ul/mg cell pellet (original wet weight). The resuspended pellet was subjected to two five-second sonication bursts on ice, then centrifuged at 13,000 RPM. The combined supernatants were assayed by Bradford assay using BSA as standard, then protein precipitated with TCA (20% v/v) and centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 20 min. The pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 50 ul of 0.1% Rapigest (Waters Corp.) dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. DTT (5 ul of 5ug/ul in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the sample incubated at 56°C for 15 min. Iodoacetamide (5 ul of 15 mg/ml in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the sample kept in dark at room temperature for 30 min. Sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added at an estimated ratio of 1:50 trypsin-substrate and incubated at 37°C overnight. After digestion, a final concentration of 0.1% TFA was added prior to incubation at 37°C for 30 min to precipitate Rapigest. The sample was centrifuged, the supernatant dried, then resuspended with 50 mM acetic acid for peptide concentration assay using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to MS/MS, samples were subjected to online 2-D liquid chromatography (LC) separation using either an Acquity UPLC M-Class LC (Water’s Corp) or a Thermo Scientific 2D RSLC HPLC system. Peptides were separated using the same basic protocol on either instrument.  Samples (6 ug) were separated on a 5 mm x 300 μm BEH C18 column with 3 micrometer particles with 130 Å pores.  Solvent A was composed of 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 and solvent B was 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from column in 8 successive fractions using 9.5, 12.4, 14.3, 16.0, 17.8, 19.7, 22.6 and 50% solvent B. Each eluted fraction was then online trapped, diluted, neutralized, and desalted on a u-Precolumn Cartridge (Thermo Fisher) for the second dimensional separations performed with a 15 cm x 75 um PepMap C18 column (ThermoFisher) with 3 um particle size and 100 Å pore size. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  For M-Class LC, the flow rate for the analytical column was 500 uL/min. The gradient was: for 0 to 3 min, 3% solvent B; for 3 to 45min, 55% solvent B; for 45 to 47 min, 85% solvent B; and finally solvent B was kept at 85% for another 2 min before bought back to 3% for 10 min to re-equilibrate the column. For the Thermo Scientific 2D RSLC HPLC system, the flow rate for the analytical column was 500 ul/min eluted from 0 to 5 min, 2% solvent B; from 5 to 38 min, 35% solvent B; from 38 to 46 min, 35-55% solvent B; and for 46 to 47 min, 55-90% solvent B. Solvent B was then kept at 90% for 1 min before being returned to 2% solvent B. The system was equilibrated for 11 min before each separation. MS/MS data was acquired with a spray voltage of 1.7 KV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. The scan sequence of the mass spectrometer was based on the preview mode data dependent TopSpeed™ method: the analysis was programmed for a full scan recorded between m/z 400 – 1600 and a MS/MS scan to generate product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in consecutive scans starting from the most abundant peaks in the spectrum in the next 3 seconds. For high mass accuracy determination, the full scan was performed at FT mode and the resolution was set at 120,000. The AGC Target ion number for FT full scan was 2 x 105 ions, maximum ion injection time was 50 ms and micro scan number was 1. MS/MS was performed using ion trap mode to ensure the highest signal intensity of MS2 spectra using both CID (for 2+ and 3+ charges) and ETD (for 4+ to 7+ charges) methods. The AGC Target ion number for ion trap MS2 scan was set at 1000 ions, maximum ion injection time was set at 100 ms and micro scan number was set at 1. The CID fragmentation energy was 35%. Dynamic exclusion is enabled with a repeat count of 1 within 60s and a low mass width and high mass width of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Sequence information from the MS/MS data was processed by converting raw files into a mgf files using MSConvert version 3.0.8738 (ProteoWizard) and then mgf files from each of the fractions was merged into a single merged file (mgf) using an in-house program, RAW2MZXML_n_MGF_batch (merge.pl, a Perl script). The resulting mgf files were searched using Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1) by Matrix Science (Boston, MA) and searched against the set of 3998 proteins encoded in genome of E. limosum ATTC8486 (GenBank assembly accession GCA_000807675.2) maintained at the National Center for Biotechnology Information. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and an allowance for selection of one 13C peak for each identified peptide was also included into the search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Considered variable modifications were oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn and Gln) and carbamidomethylation (Cys). Four missed cleavages for the enzyme were permitted.  A decoy database was also searched to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and peptides were filtered according to the FDR. The significance threshold for peptide identification was set at p<0.05, Only proteins identified with <1% FDR as well as a minimal of 2 peptides are accepted for quantitation. Label free quantitation was performed using the spectral count approach, in which the relative protein quantitation is measured by comparing the number of MS/MS spectra identified from the same protein in each of the multiple LC/MSMS datasets. Scaffold (Proteomic Software, Inc., Portland OR) was used for data analysis and calculation of emPAI values to estimate the mol% of each identified protein within the total set of identified proteins. Student’s T-test was performed using Scaffold to evaluate if the fold change for certain proteins between growth conditions is significant (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Butyrobetaine, Eubacterium limosum, Acetogen, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus OH

### Submitter
Joseph Krzycki

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph A. Krzycki
Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus OH


