### Accession
PXD016475

### Title
Integrating phenotypic search and phosphoproteomic profiling of active kinases for optimization of drug mixtures for renal cell carcinoma treatment

### Description
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is one of the ten most common malignancies. Even though recent paradigm changes led to inclusion of immune checkpoint inhibitor combination therapy in treatment of naive metastatic RCC, insight in the biology and management of RCC would still favour the use of a combination of kinase inhibitors to target multiple pathways, presenting the possibility of enhanced efficacy and reduced development of resistance. We have used the streamlined-feedback system control (s-FSC) technique, a phenotypic approach, to identify optimized drug combinations (ODC) in 5 different human RCC lines. This approach requires no a priori mechanistic information on drug mechanism of action, and uses statistical modelling circumventing the need to experimentally screen large numbers of combinations. Different ODC with up to 90% effectivity were obtained for the 5 cell lines, importantly, by combining drug at doses that individually only inhibit 5-25% cell viability. Cell viability was reduced and apoptosis induced, accompanied by a general inhibition of downstream survival and growth promoting effector kinase RPS6. Global phosphoproteomics analysis of the cell lines revealed that in all cases where the ODC showed >50% efficacy, the most active kinases were targets of the selected drugs in the ODC. Interestingly, we observed considerable overlap in the top 20 most active kinases in all 5 cell lines, suggesting a universal ODC might be effective in all cells. Indeed, a combination of erlotinib and dasatinib, targeting EGFR and EPHA2/SRC signaling respectively, combined with AZD4547 or axitinib (targeting VEGFR and FGFR signaling), displayed excellent activity. The effect of the 786-O cell-line specific ODC was analysed in more detail using phosphoproteomics coupled to kinase activity analysis using the INKA pipeline.approaches. As expected, the activity of the main targets of erlotinib and dasatinib was reduced, but the activity of several untargeted kinases, including AXL, PTK2 and MET, remained high or increased, having potential implications for the development of resistance. Addition of crizotinib, targeting MET and PTK2, to the 3-drug ODC but not exchange with axitinib, further enhanced drug combination efficacy. In conclusion, we show that the phenotypic s-FSC method is highly effective in selecting optimized combinations of drugs, and that phosphoproteomics analysis can help further refine the selection of drugs included in the screen or final drug mixture.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured to near-confluence and left untreated or were exposed (786-O) to drugs 2 hours. Cells were washed once in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) prior to lysis in lysisbuffer (9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and phosphatase inhibitors). Cells were scraped and sonicated on ice using a Soniprep 150 tip sonicator. Subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 6 cc HLB Oasis cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA before elution to glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized to dryness for 48 hours and stored at -80 ºC until further use. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, 5 mg lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After sequential washes in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips (1mm 3M SDB-XC membrane) using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac at 45°C and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. For all pTyr samples corresponding lysate (1 µg on column) were also analysed for global protein expression.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF (or QE for lysates 786-O)  mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a MaxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide and protein identification and quantification MS/MS spectra were searched against Swissprot human proteome (cannonical_and_isoforms, downloaded September 2015,  42122 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.4.1 (786-O) or (cannonical_and_isoforms, downloaded January 2018,  42258 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (other cell lines). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples with the match between runs option checked.  Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For pTyr IP data for each sample the phosphopeptides/and site intensities were normalized on the corresponding lysate summed spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is characterized by high histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity triggering both cell motility and the development of metastasis. Therefore, there is an unmet need to establish innovative strategies to advance the use of HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs). We selected a set of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and HDACIs to test them in combination, using the validated therapeutically guided multidrug optimization (TGMO) technique based on experimental testing and in silico data modeling. We determined a synergistic low-dose three-drug combination decreasing the cell metabolic activity in metastatic ccRCC cells, Caki-1, by over 80%. This drug combination induced apoptosis and showed anti-angiogenic activity, both in original Caki-1 and in sunitinib-resistant Caki-1 cells. Through phosphoproteomic analysis, we revealed additional targets to improve the translation of this combination in 3-D (co-)culture systems. Cell-cell and cell-environment interactions increased, reverting the invasive and metastatic phenotype of Caki-1 cells. Our data suggest that our optimized low-dose drug combination is highly effective in complex in vitro settings and promotes the activity of HDACIs.

### Keywords
Human, Drug selection, Phosphoproteomics, Renal cell carcinoma, Combination therapy, Phosphokinase ranking, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


