### Accession
PXD025078

### Title
Sequential N/O-glycosylation analysis of heavily glycosylated HIV-1 gp120 by combination of electron-transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation and stepped collision energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD-sceHCD)

### Description
The envelope (Env) glycoprotein on the surface of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) which decorated with a dense array of glycans is a determinant for viral invasion and host immune response of HIV-1 and a major target for a preventive HIV-1 vaccine. Improved vaccine design requires an understanding of the detailed information about the glycan type on each glycosite. Here, we used our well-established sequential glycoproteomic workflow to characterize the N/O-glycosylation of HIV-1 gp120 at the level of native intact glycopeptides based on a stepped collision energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD) mass spectrometry (sceHCD-MS/MS), and a combined electron transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD) and sceHCD mass spectrometry (EThcD-sceHCD-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
The recombinant HIV-1 gp120 protein was proteolyzed using a FASP digestion protocol. Briefly, 50 μg of protein in a tube was diluted with 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4CO3) and denatured for 10 min at 95 °C. After reduction by DTT (20 mM) for 45 min at 56 °C and alkylating with IAA (50 mM) for 1 h at 25 °C in the dark, the mixture was transferred to a 30-kDa filter tube. After centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min, the protein was washed with 200 μL of 50 mM NH4CO3 two times. Then, 2 μg of trypsin or trypsin/Glu-C (w:w=1:1) was added to the filter and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The peptides were obtained by washing twice with 100 μL of water and centrifuging at 13,000 g for 15 min. The peptide concentration was determined using a peptide assay kit. The peptide mixtures (intact N-glycopeptides before enrichment) were freeze-dried for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched against the recombinant HIV-1 gp120 protein sequence using Byonic software (version 3.6.0, Protein Metrics, Inc.), with the mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions set at ±10 ppm and ±20 ppm, respectively. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin or/and Glu-C digestion. HCD or EThcD-HCD was chosen as fragmentation type. The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), and deamidation (N). In addition, 182 human N-glycans were specified as N-glycan modifications for intact N-glycopeptides before or after enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ethcd-scehcd-ms/ms, Human immunodeficiency virus, Envelope glycoprotein, N/o-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Sichuan University
Sichuan University, West China Hospital

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
Sichuan University, West China Hospital


