### Accession
PXD025361

### Title
PTPN23 ubiquitination by WDR4 suppresses EGFR and c-MET degradation to define a lung cancer therapeutic target

### Description
Aberrant overexpression or activation of EGFR drives the development of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) by secondary EGFR mutations or c-MET amplification/activation remains as a major hurdle for NSCLC treatment. We previously identified WDR4 as a substrate adaptor of Cullin 4 ubiquitin ligase and an association of WDR4 high expression with poor prognosis of lung cancer. Here, using an unbiased ubiquitylome analysis, we uncover PTPN23, a component of the ESCRT complex, as a substrate of WDR4- based ubiquitin ligase. WDR4-mediated PTPN23 ubiquitination leads to its proteasomal degradation, thereby suppressing lysosome trafficking and degradation of wild type EGFR, EGFR mutant, and c-MET. Through this mechanism, WDR4 sustains EGFR and c-MET signaling to promote NSCLC proliferation, migration, invasion, stemness, and metastasis. Clinically, PTPN23 is downregulated in lung cancer and its low expression correlates with WDR4 high expression and poor prognosis. Targeting WDR4-mediated PTPN23 ubiquitination by a peptide that competes with PTPN23 for binding WDR4 promotes EGFR and c-MET degradation to block the growth and progression of EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC. These findings identify a central role of WDR4/PTPN23 axis in EGFR and c-MET trafficking and a potential therapeutic target for treating EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC.

### Sample Protocol
NSCLC cells were incubated in SILAC medium containing Heavy (13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6 15N4 L-Arginine-HCl) and Light (12C6 L-Lysine-2HCl, 12C6 14N4 L-Arginine-HCl) amino acids respectively. Cells were treated with MG132 for 2 hours in order to block proteasomal degradation. 8M urea was used for cell lysis and followed by trypsin digestion and desalting. Lysates were separated into 8 equal amounts by using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation to yield the highest target amounts. On the other hand, we utilized KEGG antibody for KEGG peptide enrichment. LC-MS/MS was performed before we carried out proteomic analysis. Mass spectrometry was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 2 Da with the quadrupole, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 50 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2-6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles; the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. For K--GG proteome analysis the survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 60K resolution with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Precursor were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 30, and analyzed using the Orbitrap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5 × 104 and the max injection time was 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The K--GG peptides were identified with SEQUEST database search algorithm implemented in the Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The database was downloaded from Uniprot and consists of 20187 human target sequences. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (full) allowing for two missed cleavages and precursor mass tolerances were 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.2 Da for fragment ions. Dynamic modifications were set for heavy lysine (13C6) (+ 6.02013), heavy arginine (13C615N4) (+ 10.00827), methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), lysine ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da/+383.22810), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98402 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670). A maximum of 3 dynamic modifications was allowed per peptide and a static modification of +57.02147 Da was set for carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Percolator node within Proteome Discoverer was used to filter the peptide spectral match (PSM) false discovery rate to 1% and peptide areas were calculated using the Precursor Ions Quantifier node. The unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantitation. Datasets were normalized on total peptide amount and precursor intensity abundances were subsequently used to compare the protein and peptides across the replicates and datasets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lung

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan.

### Submitter
Nai-Yang Yeat

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan.


