### Accession
PXD020942

### Title
Context-enriched interactome powered by proteomics helps the identification of novel regulators of macrophage activation

### Description
Abstract: The role of pro-inflammatory macrophage activation in cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a complex one amenable to network approaches. While an indispensible tool for elucidating the molecular underpinnings of complex diseases including CVD, the interactome is limited in its utility as it is not specific to any cell type, experimental condition or disease state. We introduced context-specificity to the interactome by combining it with co-abundance networks derived from unbiased proteomics measurements from activated macrophage-like cells. Each macrophage phenotype contributed to certain regions of the interactome. Using a network proximity-based prioritization method on the combined network, we predicted potential regulators of macrophage activation. Prediction performance significantly increased with the addition of co-abundance edges, and the prioritized candidates captured inflammation, immunity and CVD signatures. Integrating the novel network topology with transcriptomics and proteomics revealed top candidate drivers of inflammation. In vitro loss-of-function experiments demonstrated the regulatory role of these proteins in pro-inflammatory signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Original data were collected from  Nat Commun. 2016;7:12849 - PMID: 27796300 We used human IFN 10 ng/ml and IL-4 10 ng/ml (R&D systems) as stimuli for macrophage activation, respectively. THP-1 was purchased from ATCC and maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium in 10 % FBS with penicillin and streptomycin at 37 °C in humidified 5 % CO2. The macrophage-like state was obtained by treating the THP-1 monocytes for 48 hours with PMA (200 ng/ml, Sigma). Mycoplasma contamination test was routinely performed (once a month). Each cell culture experiment, unstimulated, INF and IL-4, was prepared for isobaric labeling using the 6-plex TMTTM strategy (Pierce). For sample preparation the cells were lysed and proteolysed (Lys-C, Wako Chemicals) using the in-solution urea+ RapiGest (Waters) strategy. Tryptic peptides were labeled with TMT 6-plex reagent (Pierce), combined and desalted using Oasis Hlb 1cc (10mg) columns (Waters). The peptides were then fractionated into 24 fractions based on their isoelectric focusing point (pH range of 3 to 10) using the OFF-gel system (Agilent). The fractions were dried using a tabletop speed vacuum (Fisher Scientific), cleaned with the Oasis columns, and resuspended in 40 μL of 5 % acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific), 5 % formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) for subsequent analysis by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS).

### Data Protocol
The high resolution/accuracy LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) analyzed TMT peptide samples. The mass spectrometer was fronted with a Nanospray FLEX ion source, and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 um X 20 cm; and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column 75 um X 250 mm (Thermo Scientific). For TMT analysis the analytical gradient was run at 250 nl/min from 10 to 30 % Solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid) for 90 minutes, followed by five minutes of 95 % Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid. The LTQ-Orbitrap was set to 120 K resolution, and the top 20 precursor ions (within a scan range of 380-2000 m/z) were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD, collision energy 40%, isolation width 3 m/z, dynamic exclusion enabled, starting m/z fixed at 120 m/z, and resolution set to 30 K) for peptide sequencing (MS/MS).  The MS/MS data were queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on March 27, 2012) using the SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific)2, using a 10 ppm tolerance window in the MS1 search space, and a 0.02 Da fragment tolerance window for HCD. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and 6-plex TMT tags (Thermo Scientific) were set as fixed modifications. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD: the FDR was determined based on the number of MS/MS spectral hits when searched against the reverse, decoy mouse or human database.  Peptides were filtered based on a 1 % FDR.  Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature). Master proteins with two or more unique peptides were used for TMT reporter ratio quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the global impact of macrophage activation in vascular disease, the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Here we show, with global proteomic analysis of macrophage cell lines treated with either IFN&#x3b3; or IL-4, that PARP9 and PARP14 regulate macrophage activation. In primary macrophages, PARP9 and PARP14 have opposing roles in macrophage activation. PARP14 silencing induces pro-inflammatory genes and STAT1 phosphorylation in M(IFN&#x3b3;) cells, whereas it suppresses anti-inflammatory gene expression and STAT6 phosphorylation in M(IL-4) cells. PARP9 silencing suppresses pro-inflammatory genes and STAT1 phosphorylation in M(IFN&#x3b3;) cells. PARP14 induces ADP-ribosylation of STAT1, which is suppressed by PARP9. Mutations at these ADP-ribosylation sites lead to increased phosphorylation. Network analysis links PARP9-PARP14 with human coronary artery disease. PARP14 deficiency in haematopoietic cells accelerates the development and inflammatory burden of acute and chronic arterial lesions in mice. These findings suggest that PARP9 and PARP14 cross-regulate macrophage activation.

### Keywords
Thp-1 cells, Tmt, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Masanori Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital


