### Accession
PXD010409

### Title
Development of chemical proteomics for the folateome and analysis of the kinetoplastid folateome - Part 5

### Description
In this current study, we aimed to produce and develop an affinity matrix for enzymes involved in the folate metabolism of kinetoplastids, effectively the “folateome”folateome of these parasites. This information will then be used to determine the molecular targets of compounds targeting folate metabolism, and to correlate this to phenotypic responses. To achieve this, a small library of clinical and literature anti-folate compounds were immobilized onto resins and used in “pull-down” experiments with and without test compound present, to ascertain proteins binding specifically to particular resins.8,10-11 While the initial focus of this project was to establish the kinetoplastid folateome, the approach has the potential to be extended to other organisms.

### Sample Protocol
MS/MS data for profiling of MTX on MTX, Folic acid, compound 4 and 10 mixed beads in Trypanosoma brucei extract: 6 samples were analyzed in parallel to generate values for the affinity of the beads to the bound proteins (“depletion” values, 4 samples) and to generate single compound concentration competition values (samples 5 and 6) in a single experiment. Samples 1 and 2 represent the vehicle control, samples 3 and 4 were done in the same way, but while the beads were discarded after the first incubation step the extract was incubated with fresh beads to measure how much protein could rebind to the fresh beads (was depleted from the extract by first bead-binding). Apparent dissociation constants were determined by taking into account the protein depletion by the beads.

### Data Protocol
Proteins captured by the beads were quantified following tryptic digestion, isobaric peptide tagging, and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The folate pathway has been extensively studied in a number of organisms, with its essentiality exploited by a number of drugs. However, there has been little success in developing drugs that target folate metabolism in the kinetoplastids. Despite compounds being identified which show significant inhibition of the parasite enzymes, this activity does not translate well into cellular and animal models of disease. Understanding to which enzymes antifolates bind under physiological conditions and how this corresponds to the phenotypic response could provide insight on how to target the folate pathway in these organisms. To facilitate this, we have adopted a chemical proteomics approach to study binding of compounds to enzymes of folate metabolism. Clinical and literature antifolate compounds were immobilized onto resins to allow for "pull down" of the proteins in the "folateome". Using competition studies, proteins, which bind the beads specifically and nonspecifically, were identified in parasite lysate ( Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania major) for each antifolate compound. Proteins were identified through tryptic digest, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling of peptides followed by LC-MS/MS. This approach was further exploited by creating a combined folate resin (folate beads). The resin could pull down up to 9 proteins from the folateome. This information could be exploited in gaining a better understanding of folate metabolism in kinetoplastids and other organisms.

### Keywords
Folateome folate kinetoplastids trypanosoma leishmania

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery Unit Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery University of Dundee Dundee, DD1 5EH. UK
Dundee University

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Gilbert
Drug Discovery Unit Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery University of Dundee Dundee, DD1 5EH. UK


