### Accession
PXD036826

### Title
Deep Phosphoproteomic Elucidation of Metformin-Signaling in Heterogenous Colorectal Cancer Cells

### Description
The biguanide drug metformin is a safe and widely prescribed drug for type 2 diabetes. Interestingly, hundreds of clinical trials were set to evaluate the potential role of metformin in the prevention and treatment of cancer including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the metformin-induced cell signaling remains controversial. To interrogate cell signaling events and networks in CRC and explore the druggability of the metformin-rewired phosphorylation network, we performed a proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis on a panel of 12 molecularly heterogeneous CRC cell lines. Using in-depth data-independent analysis mass spectrometry (DIA-MS), we profiled a total of 10,142 proteins and 56,080 phosphosites (P-sites) in CRC cells treated with metformin for 30 minutes and 24 hours. Our results indicate that metformin tends to not trigger or inhibit significant immediate phosphorylation events. Instead, it primarily remodels cell signaling in the long-term. Strikingly, the phosphorylation response to metformin was highly heterogeneous in the CRC panel. We further performed a network analysis to systematically estimate kinase/phosphatase activities and reconstruct signaling cascades in each cell line. We created a “MetScore” which catalogs the most consistently perturbed P-sites among CRC cells for future studies. Finally, we leveraged the metformin P-site signature to identify pharmacodynamic interactions, revealing and confirming a number of candidate metformin-interacting drugs, including navitoclax, a BCL-2/BCL-xL inhibitor. Together, we provide a state-of-the-art phosphoproteomic resource to explore the metformin-induced cell signaling for potential cancer therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
The following 12 colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines were used in this study: C2BBe1, COLO 205, HT115, LoVo, MDST8, NCI-H747, RKO, SNU-61, SW48, SW837, SW848, and T84. The cells were cultured on 10 cm dishes at 37 °C, humidified 5% CO2 in a complete medium containing L-glutamine, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, #26140079) and penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, #P0781). The following cell culture media were used: Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Corning, #10-013-CV) was used for C2BBe1, HT115, and MDST8; RPMI-1640 (Thermo Scientific, #11875-093) was used for COLO 205, LoVo, NCI-H747, RKO, SNU-61, and SW48; Leibovitz’s L-15 Medium (Cytiva, #SH0525.01) was used for SW837 and SW948; DMEM/F12 (Thermo Scientific, #11330-032) was used for T84. 2 x 10e6 – 4 x 10e6 cells were seeded in a 10 cm dish, cultured for 24 h, and then treated with 10 mM metformin as described in a previous metformin phosphoproteomic study (Sacco et al., 2016). The following samples were harvested in three replicates: control samples at time points 0 and 24 h and metformin-treated samples at time points 30 min and 24 h. The 30-min time point was skipped for the total proteome analysis. After washing twice in PBS, the dishes were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for 2 min, and the cells were scraped into 200 µL of cell lysis buffer containing 10 M urea/ 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, #11697498001) and the Halt phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Scientific, #78428). Cells were scraped using a cell scraper into a 2 mL Eppendorf tube. Tubes were vortexed for 30 s, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and transferred to store at -80 °C until further sample processing. Triplicate dishes per cell line and condition were used as three whole process replicates for the analysis.Cell pellets in lysis buffer were thawed and sonicated twice at 4 °C for 1 min using the VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) (Liu et al., 2019) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 1 hour to remove insoluble material. Protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using the Bio-Rad protein assay dye (Bio-Rad, #5000006). The protein samples (800 µg of protein per sample) were diluted in 6 M urea/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to 400 µl (final concentration = 2 µg/ µl), reduced by 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56 °C, and alkylated by 20 mM IAA in dark for 1 hour at room temperature (RT). The reduced and alkylated proteins were then subjected to a precipitation-based digestion as described previously (Collins et al., 2017). Briefly, five volumes of precooled precipitation solution containing 50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid were added to the protein mixture and kept at -20 °C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 40 min. The precipitated proteins were washed with precooled 100% acetone and centrifuged at 20,000 x g, 4 °C for 40 min. After acetone aspiration, the remaining acetone was evaporated in a SpeedVac. Next, 300 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1: 20 were added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified with formic acid and then desalted with a C18 column (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC.) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The amount of the final peptides was determined by a nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, #A32992) according to the kit instructions, as described previously (Gao et al., 2019). Briefly, the peptide-resin mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature while gently shaking and then transferred into a filter tip (TF-20-L-R-S, Axygen) to remove the supernatant (flow-through) by centrifugation. The resins were washed three times with 200 µL of washing buffer (80% I, 0.1% TFA) and twice with 200 µL of H2O. The phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 100 µL of elution buffer (50% ACN, 5% NH3•H2O) and dried in SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The amount of the final phosphopeptides was determined by a nanodrop (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For the LC-MS analysis, 1 µg of peptide and phosphopeptide mixture was used as described previously (Liu et al., 2019; Mehnert et al., 2019). The LC separation was using an EASY‐nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific) using a self-packed PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA; 75 µm × 50 cm length) self‐packed with ReproSil‐Pur 120A C18‐Q 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). A 150-min measurement with buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 37% and corresponding buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) during the gradient was used to elute peptides from the LC. The flow rate was set to300 nL/ min with the temperature controlled at 60 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was coupled with a NanoFlex ion source keeping the spray voltage at 2000 V and heating capillary at 275 °C. The DIA-MS method consisted of a MS1 survey scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable windows as described previously (Bruderer et al., 2017; Bruderer et al., 2019). The MS1 scan range is 350–1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution was 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E6 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200, and normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 1.5E6 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both of MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in a profile mode. DIA-MS data analyses for proteomics and phosphoproteomics were performed using Spectronaut v14 (Bruderer et al., 2015; Bruderer et al., 2017) using the library-free DirectDIA pipeline (Bruderer et al., 2017; Tsou et al., 2015) as described in detail in our previous study (Gao et al., 2021). The DIA runs were all directly searched against the Swiss-Prot protein database (September 2020, 20,375 entries). For the total proteome dataset, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, where carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Additionally, for the searching of the phosphoproteomic dataset, phosphorylation at serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) was enabled as a variable modification. Both peptide- and protein-FDR were controlled at 1%, and the resulting data matrix was filtered by “Qvalue”. The PTM localization function in Spectronaut v14 was enabled to localize and filter the phosphorylation sites using a PTM score > 0.75 (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020; Rosenberger et al., 2017). All the other Spectronaut settings were kept as default, e.g., the ‘‘Interference Correction’’ was enabled, the ‘‘Global Normalization’’ (‘‘Median’’) was used, the quantification was performed at the MS2 level using peak areas, and the Top 3 peptide precursors (‘‘Min: 1 and Max: 3’’) were averaged (mean) for representing protein quantities in all DIA analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Colorectal cancer, Dia-ms, Metformin

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine


