### Accession
PXD003154

### Title
Proteomics of Tomato Trichome Metabolism

### Description
Glandular trichomes (GT) are specialized cell factories that have the capacity to produce large amounts of metabolites which can amount to over 10% of the leaf dry weight. The specific expression of secondary metabolite pathways in glandular trichomes has facilitated their elucidation. However, little is known about the connection between central carbon and specialized metabolism in these cells. To address this question, we used the type VI glandular trichomes from a cultivated (Solanum lycopersicum LA4024) and a wild tomato accession (Solanum habrochaites LA1777) as a model. Our study is based on metabolomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and 13C-labeling datasets of trichome and leaves samples. This comparative analysis allowed us to identify specific features of trichomes in comparison to leaves. Tomato type VI trichomes are photosynthetic but acquire their carbon essentially from the leaves in the form of sucrose. Relatively high expression levels of photosystem genes and comparatively low expression of Calvin-cycle and photorespiration genes indicate that photosynthesis is used primarily to produce energy and reducing power to drive the high metabolic activity. High levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids, oxylipins, and of oxidized glutathione and high transcript and protein levels of associated enzymes further indicate a distinct capacity of GT to cope with oxidative stress. Enzymes which are involved in the supply of key precursors for the production of terpenoids both from the cytosol and in the chloroplasts are markedly increased. Finally, some enzymes that are typically associated with C4-photosynthesis are highly expressed in trichomes, suggesting that CO2 recycling processes may increase the efficiency of C usage in these cells. Based on this information we propose a model on how the glandular trichomes achieve high metabolic efficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Approxiamtely 100 mg of frozen, powdered tomato trichomes were washed with 10% TCA in acetone followed by acetone both at -20°C. The tissue pellet was suspended in approximately 400 µl of extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1% (w/v) SDS, 25% (w/v) Sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% (v/v) ß-Mercaptoethanol and 1% Plant protease inhibitor cocktail both added fresh) and the suspension was mixed vigorously for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT). An equal volume of water saturated phenol was added and the homogenate was further mixed for 30 minutes. The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 minutes at RT. An equal volume of reextraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 20 mM KCl, 25% (w/v) Sucrose, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% (v/v) ß-Mercaptoethanol added fresh) was added to the top phenol phase. The homogenate was mixed vigorously for 15 minutes at RT and centrifuged as described. Proteins were precipitated from the phenol phase with 5 volumes of -20°C 100 mM ammoniumacetate in methanol over night. Proteins were collected by centrifugation, washed two times with 20% 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate, 80% acetone and dissolved in 8M Urea, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. The concentration of the protein solution was measured using the 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 mM Tris-HCl and alkylated with an excess of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 100 mM Tris-HCl. Proteins were digested with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) at 37°C over night. The peptide solution was desalted with C18 reverse phase batch chromatography in STAGE tips. The C18 matrix was conditioned with 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in ddH2O, equilibrated with 0.1% FA in ddH2O and retained peptides were washed with 0.1%FA in ddH2O and eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in ddH2O. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Four micrograms of peptides were injected into an EASY nLC1000 liquid chromatography system form Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptides were separated using C18 reverse phase chemistry on an EASY-column SC001 pre-column (length 2cm, inner diameter 100 µm, particle diameter 5 µm) in-line with an EASY-Spray ES803 column (length 50 cm, inner diameter 75 µm, particle diameter 2 µm) both from Thermo Fisher Scientific with a gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile in 9 hours and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column temperature was set to 40°C. Peptide ions were electrosprayed on-line into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer via an EASY Spray ion source both from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The spray voltage was 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature was 275°C, the S-lens RF level was 50%, the multipole offset was -7 V. Full MS survey scans of the total ion population were carried out with a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 1e06; the maximum injection time (maxIT) was 500 msec, 1 microscan was acquired. Full scans were followed by up to 20 data dependent (DDA) MS/MS scans of the most abundant precursor ions with a minimum signal threshold of 500 fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ mass analyzer. The AGC target value was 1e04; the maxIT was 200 msec, 1 micoscan was acquired. The dynamic exclusion repeat count was 1 and the repeat duration was 30 sec, the exclusion duration was 240 sec, the exclusion mass width was +/- 10 ppm.Mass spectra were calibrated internally in real time using the m/z 445.120024.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were generated with the Mascot software v2.5.0 from Matrix Science linked to Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (PD) from Thermo Fisher Scientific. A signal to noise threshold of 1.5 was used to filter ion signal peaks from MS full scans. The International Tomato Annotation Group (ITAG) release 2.3 of the tomato proteome database amended with common contaminants (34727 sequences, 11956401 residues) was searched with a precursor ion tolerance of 7 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da, enzyme setting trypsin, 2 tolerated missed cleavages and carbamidomethylation of cystein as a fixed modification. The family wise PSM error rate was controlled via the false discovery rate (FDR/q-values) using the target/decoy database model for estimating false positive PSMs with the target decoy PSM validator module in PD. Peptides and Proteins were identified using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms in Scaffold v.4.0.5. A 95% peptide threshold and an 80% protein threshold was equivalent to a 0.01% peptide FDR and a 0.2% protein FDR. Proteins were quantified using the “Quantitative Value (Normalized Total Spectra)” option in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Glandular trichomes are metabolic cell factories with the capacity to produce large quantities of secondary metabolites. Little is known about the connection between central carbon metabolism and metabolic productivity for secondary metabolites in glandular trichomes. To address this gap in our knowledge, we performed comparative metabolomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and <sup>13</sup>C-labeling of type VI glandular trichomes and leaves from a cultivated (<i>Solanum lycopersicum</i> LA4024) and a wild (<i>Solanum habrochaites</i> LA1777) tomato accession. Specific features of glandular trichomes that drive the formation of secondary metabolites could be identified. Tomato type VI trichomes are photosynthetic but acquire their carbon essentially from leaf sucrose. The energy and reducing power from photosynthesis are used to support the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, while the comparatively reduced Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle activity may be involved in recycling metabolic CO<sub>2</sub> Glandular trichomes cope with oxidative stress by producing high levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids, oxylipins, and glutathione. Finally, distinct mechanisms are present in glandular trichomes to increase the supply of precursors for the isoprenoid pathways. Particularly, the citrate-malate shuttle supplies cytosolic acetyl-CoA and plastidic glycolysis and malic enzyme support the formation of plastidic pyruvate. A model is proposed on how glandular trichomes achieve high metabolic productivity.

### Keywords
Trichomes, Tomato

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Wolfgang Hoehenwarter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry


