### Accession
PXD021853

### Title
Whole Lung Proteome in N. brasiliensis Infection in IL-13 deficient mice.

### Description
IL-13 plays a key role during protective type 2 immune responses at mucosal sites, such as during infection with nematodes. However, dysregulation of IL-13 can also contribute to the pathogenesis of allergic and fibrotic diseases. Matrix remodelling is an important component of repair processes in the lung but is also a hallmark of chronic diseases such as asthma. Since IL-13 shares receptors and signalling pathways with IL-4, disentangling the relative contributions of these two type 2 cytokines has been challenging. Additionally, little is known about the singular role of IL-13 in more acute settings of tissue injury/repair and whether IL-13 regulates remodelling of the extracellular matrix following tissue injury. In this study, we used Nippostrongylus brasiliensis infection as model of acute lung tissue damage and repair by comparing responses between WT and IL-13-deficient mice, in which IL-4 signalling is intact.

### Sample Protocol
Reference (Laser capture microdissection coupled mass spectrometry (Herrera et al. LCM-MS for spatially resolved analysis of formalin-fixed and stained human lung tissues. Clin. Proteomics 17: 24.)  FFPE (formalin fixed paraffin embedded) lung sections were scraped and resuspended in 25 μL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 5% SDS (pH 7.5) and subjected to 95 °C for 20 min, then 60 °C for 2 h while shaking at 1400 RPM. We then added 75 μL of a 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS, 10 M urea, 13.3 mM DTT (pH 7.5) solution to the 25 μL sample, after it had cooled to room temperature to avoid deamination. Samples were then placed into a Covaris microtube and sheared using an Ultrasonicator. After shearing, samples were alkylated by the addition of 8 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Samples were then acidified by the addition of 12 μL of 12% aqueous phosphoric acid and centrifuged at 12000 RPM for 5 min. The supernatant was collected and resuspended with 600 µL of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.10). The sample was then bound to a micro S-Trap column and washed nine times by adding 150 μL of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.10) and centrifuging at 2000 RPM. In-column Trypsin digestion was performed at 47 °C for 1 h without shaking. Samples were then eluted by centrifugation with 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) followed by elution with 40 μL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and centrifuging, and finally with 40 μL 50% aqueous acetonitrile. Eluted fractions were combined then lyophilised using a speed-vac. Desalting of samples was performed using Oligo R3 resin beads. Briefly, Oligo R3 resin beads in aqueous 50% acetonitrile was placed into a 96-well 0.2 µm PVDF filter plate and washed with 100 μL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile. Then the beads were washed with 100 μL of aqueous 0.1% formic acid. Samples were then resuspended in 100 µl of aqueous 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic and mixed with the now washed Oligo R3 Resin and allowed to shake on a plate shaker for 5 min at 800 RPM followed by ten washes with 100 µL of aqueous 0.1% formic acid. These were then eluted twice with 50 µL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile for 2 min at 800 RPM. Desalted peptides were lyophilized in a speed-vac and stored at 4 °C until needed. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 10 μL of a 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid solution and evaluated by liquid chromatography (LC) coupled tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). To maximize the sensitivity of the system, it was configured to directly inject onto the analytical column (temperature set at 35 °C) without a trap. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and the column used was a 75 mm × 250 μm i.d. 1.7 µM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). The analytical method used was as follows: a 1 μL aliquot of the sample (i.e. 10% of the total peptides) was transferred to a 5 μL injection loop to increase the amount of sample analyzed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 5 min at 5% B. The loop was then taken out of line and the peptides were separated using a gradient that went from 5% to 7% B at 200 nL/min in 1 min, followed by a shallow gradient from 7% to 18% B in 64 min, then from 18% to 27% B in 8 min, and finally from 27% to 60% B in minute. At 85 min, the flow is increased to 300 nL/min until the end of the run at 90 min. Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data directed manner for 90 min in positive mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis on a basis of the top 12 peptides with m/z between 300 and 1750Th and a charge state of 2, 3 or 4 with a dynamic exclusion set at 15 s. The MS Resolution was set at 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time set at 20 ms. The MS2 Resolution was set to 30,000, with an AGC target of 2e5, a maximum fill time of 45 ms, isolation window of 1.3Th and a collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were aligned using MAXQuant software v1.6.17.0 using default settings with the variable modifications of proline and methionine oxidation in addition to “matched between runs” being enabled. Peptide and Protein data was exported in .csv files for further analysis. Raw data was then imported into R for differential analysis with the MSqRob pipeline with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helminth, Mouse, Lung, Parasite, Il-13

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Manchester Centre University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
James Parkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Judi Allen
Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Manchester Centre University of Manchester, United Kingdom


