### Accession
PXD012642

### Title
Proteomic analysis of E. coli K-12 LE392, P. putida KT2440 under exposure of six non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals

### Description
The goals of this study are to use SWATH-MS to detect bacterial proteomic profiles of E. coli K-12 LE392 with conjugative RP4 plasmid, P. putida KT2440, and their protein response under the exposure of six kinds of non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, i.e., ibuprofen (ibu), naproxen (nap), gemfibrozil (gem), iopromide (iop), diclofenac (dic), propanolol (pro). Each treatment condition was conducted in triplicate. By comparing the proteomic profiles of experimental groups and control group, the effects of these non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals on translational levels can be revealed.

### Sample Protocol
5 mL of bacteria E. coli K-12 LE392 (108 cfu/mL) and 5 mL of bacteria P. putida KT2440 (108 cfu/mL) were mixed together, with the dosage of six non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, respectively. After 8 hours, bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min. Total bacterial protein was extracted from these cell pellets using the B-PER method, followed by reduction, alkylation, digestion and ziptip clean-up procedures. Afterwards, 5 μg aliquot of the purified protein from each triplicate sample were applied for mass spectrometry analysis and for construction of protein libraries by information dependent analysis (IDA). Another 5μg aliquot of the purified protein from each triplicate sample were used for SWATH-MS analysis. Samples were pooled into a Triple-T of 5600 instrument (ABSciex, USA) equipped with a Nanospray III interface.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from IDA were combined and searched using ProteinPilot software (ABSciex, Forster City CA). The searched databases were the combination of E. coli SP only, and P. putida KT2440. The search setting for enzyme digestion was set to Trypsin and alkylation was set to iodoacetamide. Afterwards, the constructed IDA library and SWATH-MS data were loaded into PeakView v2.1 for further processing, with the peptide confidence threshold of 99%, number of peptides per protein of 5, and number of transitions per peptide of 3. A minimum of 2 peptides and 3 transitions was used for quantitative analysis. A stringency cut-off of q value less than 0.01 was used to identify the proteins with significant different expression levels. Afterwards, R-based package MSstats was applied to compare the difference of translational levels in each group.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance is a global threat to public health. The use of antibiotics at sub-inhibitory concentrations has been recognized as an important factor in disseminating antibiotic resistance via horizontal gene transfer. Although non-antibiotic, human-targeted pharmaceuticals are widely used by society (95% of the pharmaceuticals market), the potential contribution to the spread of antibiotic resistance is not clear. Here, we report that commonly consumed, non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (ibuprofen, naproxen, diclofenac), a lipid-lowering drug (gemfibrozil), and a &#x3b2;-blocker (propranolol), at clinically and environmentally relevant concentrations, significantly accelerated the dissemination of antibiotic resistance via plasmid-borne bacterial conjugation. Various indicators were used to study the bacterial response to these drugs, including monitoring reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cell membrane permeability by flow cytometry, cell arrangement, and whole-genome RNA and protein sequencing. Enhanced conjugation correlated well with increased production of ROS and cell membrane permeability. Additionally, these non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals induced responses similar to those detected when bacteria are exposed to antibiotics, such as inducing the SOS response and enhancing efflux pumps. The findings advance understanding of the transfer of antibiotic resistance genes, emphasizing the concern that non-antibiotic, human-targeted pharmaceuticals enhance the spread of antibiotic resistance among bacterial populations.

### Keywords
Non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, P. putida, Swath-ms, E. coli

### Affiliations
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Jianhua Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Guo
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland


