### Accession
PXD017474

### Title
PCNA has specific functions in regulation of metabolism in haematological cells

### Description
PCNA´s essential roles in DNA replication and repair are well established, while it’s recently discovered non-canonical roles in cellular signalling and regulation of metabolism are less explored. Recent data has indicated that PCNA has a specific non-canonical role in cells of haematological origin. In the present study we have explored this further at the system level by extensive protein-, gene expression, and metabolite profiling combined with integrated pathway analysis and by 13C label experimentation,  Here we show that impairing PCNA´s scaffold functions led to massive changes in cellular signalling, but more importantly, a strong reduction in glycolytic metabolites and nucleoside phosphate pools in haematological cancer cell lines was detected, including multiple myeloma cells and acute myelogen leukaemia cells. This was not observed in cell lines from solid tissues such as kidney, bladder and prostate, nor in primary monocytes. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated monocytes on the other hand, responded to treatment similarly to the haematological cancer cells, suggesting that cellular stress is an important factor for the response to the APIM-peptide in haematological cells. Integrated Pathway analysis of the metabolite and protein datasets revealed that protein ubiquitination and antigen presentation pathways are affected in haematopoietic cancer cells upon treatment. Focusing on one multiple myeloma cell line we further verified these trends by gene-expression  and show that the consequences of reduced central carbon metabolite pools and energy charge is impaired redox and HIF1A regulation. Altogether, our data suggests that PCNA has an important role in regulation of cytoplasmic stress via regulation of central carbon metabolism in haematological cells that can be targeted in cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
JJN3 (Müller et al., 2013) and RPMI 8226 (ATCC CCL-155) (MM), HL60 (ATCC  CCL-240) and NB4 (kind gift from professor Stein Døskeland, University of Bergen, Norway) (AML), and DU145 (ATCC HBT-81, prostate cancer) cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich),  MC/CAR (ATTC® CRL-8083) (MM) were cultured in IMDM (Sigma-Aldrich), and Hek293 (ATCC CRL-1573, embryonic kidney) were cultured in DMEM high glucose (Sigma-Aldrich), all supplemented with 2mM glutamine (Biochrome), 100 µg/mL gentamicin (Sigma-Aldrich), 2.5 µg/mL amphotericin (Sigma-Aldrich), and fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich); 10% in DMEM high glucose and RPMI 1640, and 20% in IMDM.  Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cell densities were optimized for each individual assay corresponding sampling time points, and peptide doses were adjusted to cell density to obtain the same number of annexin-positive cells in all experiments (Table 1).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification values were log2 transformed and transformed control values were subtracted. The resulting values reflecting the change relative to control for each condition were subjected to two sided non-parametric Wilcoxon Sign Rank Test(Gibbons and Chakraborti, 2010) as implemented in MATLAB R2015a (MathWorks Inc.). Three biological replicates were analysed for each of the treatments. Proteins with p-value <0.25 were considered significant. R script https://github.com/animesh/scripts/blob/master/diffExprPlots.rmd was used for further downstream processing and plotting.

### Publication Abstract
The essential roles of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) as a scaffold protein in DNA replication and repair are well established, while its cytosolic roles are less explored. Two metabolic enzymes, alpha-enolase (ENO1) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD), both contain PCNA interacting motifs. Mutation of the PCNA interacting motif APIM in ENO1 (F423A) impaired its binding to PCNA and resulted in reduced cellular levels of ENO1 protein, reduced growth rate, reduced glucose consumption, and reduced activation of AKT. Metabolome and signalome analysis reveal large consequences of impairing the direct interaction between PCNA and ENO1. Metabolites above ENO1 in glycolysis accumulated while lower glycolytic and TCA cycle metabolite pools decreased in the APIM-mutated cells; however, their overall energetic status were similar to parental cells. Treating haematological cancer cells or activated primary monocytes with a PCNA targeting peptide drug containing APIM (ATX-101) also lead to a metabolic shift characterized by reduced glycolytic rate. In addition, we show that ATX-101 treatments reduced the ENO1 - PCNA interaction, the ENO1, GAPDH and 6PGD protein levels, as well as the 6PGD activity. Here we report for the first time that PCNA acts as a scaffold for metabolic enzymes, and thereby act as a direct regulator of primary metabolism.

### Keywords
Cell signalling, Metabolomics, Kinome, Signalome, Redox metabolism, Systems-level study, Central carbon metabolism, Apim, Pi3k/akt pathway

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), PO Box 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway Phone: +47 72573075, Fax: +47 72576400

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), PO Box 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway Phone: +47 72573075, Fax: +47 72576400


