### Accession
PXD011886

### Title
Biochemical and Molecular characterization of Super oxide dismutase enzyme purified from Ajwain (Trachyspermum  ammi)

### Description
Superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1) (SOD) is a standout amongst the most critical metal containing enzymes that can act as a main line of defense against oxidative stress. There has always been an increased interest globally to identify new plant sources with high SOD activity that are pharmacologically potent and have minimum side effects for their use as preventive medicine and in food industry. Trachyspermum  ammi  showed  high SOD activity and the enzyme was purified to homogeneity using various downstream processing techniques like; Salt precipitation, dialysis, IEX, Gel permeation, NATIVE- and  SDS-PAGE. Biochemical characterization with respect to optimum operational parameters viz., pH, Temperature, Stability, Concentration etc., was done. Kinetic studies for determination of Km, Vmax, Temperature coefficient, Activation energy have also been accomplished.

### Sample Protocol
Sample purified from the crude extract was processed for In-gel digestion stained with CBB. The spots/ bands from the PAGE were undergone for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data will be processed further to analyse different structural and functional parameters like domain, motif and cleavage site etc.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ajwain, Biochemical characterization, Superoxide dismutase, Molecular analysis, Trachyspermum  ammi

### Affiliations
PhD scholar
Center for Biotechnology & Biochemical Engineering  Amity Institute of Biotechnology  Amity University Uttar Pradesh Sector-125, Noida-201313 (U.P.) India

### Submitter
KANAGARETHINAM S

### Lab Head
Dr Nidhee chaudhary
Center for Biotechnology & Biochemical Engineering  Amity Institute of Biotechnology  Amity University Uttar Pradesh Sector-125, Noida-201313 (U.P.) India


