### Accession
PXD016832

### Title
Elongator complex deficiency in sonic hedgehog medulloblastoma

### Description
Cancer genomics has illuminated a wide spectrum of genes and core molecular processes contributing to human malignancy. Still, the genetic and molecular basis of many cancers remains only partially explained. Genetic predisposition accounts for 5-10% of cancer diagnoses and genetic events cooperating with known somatic driver events are poorly understood. Analyzing established cancer predisposition genes in medulloblastoma (MB), a malignant childhood brain tumor, we recently identified pathogenic germline variants that account for 5% of all MB patients. Here, by extending our previous analysis to include all protein-coding genes, we discovered and replicated rare germline loss-of-function (LoF) variants across Elongator Complex Protein 1 (ELP1) on 9q31.3 in 15% of pediatric MBSHH cases, thus implicating ELP1 as the most common MB predisposition gene and increasing genetic predisposition to 40% for pediatric MBSHH. Inheritance was verified based on parent-offspring and pedigree analysis, which identified two families with a history of pediatric MB. ELP1-associated MBs were restricted to the molecular SHH subtype and were characterized by universal biallelic inactivation of ELP1 due to somatic loss of chromosome 9q. The majority of ELP1-associated MBs exhibited co-occurring somatic PTCH1 (9q22.32) alterations, suggesting that ELP1-deficiency predisposes to tumor development in combination with constitutive activation of SHH signaling. ELP1 is an essential subunit of the evolutionary conserved Elongator complex, whose primary function is to enable efficient translational elongation through tRNAs modifications at the wobble (U34) position. Biochemical, transcriptional, and proteomic analyses revealed that ELP1-associated MBSHH are characterized by a destabilized core Elongator complex, loss of Elongator-dependent tRNA modifications, codon-dependent translational reprogramming, and induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR), consistent with deregulation of protein homeostasis due to Elongator-deficiency in model systems. Our findings suggest that genetic predisposition to proteome instability is a previously underappreciated determinant in the pathogenesis of pediatric brain cancer. These results provide strong rationale for further investigating the role of protein homeostasis in other pediatric and adult cancer types and potential opportunities for novel therapeutic interference.

### Sample Protocol
Primary medulloblastoma samples were lysed in 8M urea before reduction and alkylation. After trypsin/LysC digestion at 37°C overnight, peptides were desalted using C18 columns. For building a comprehensive spectral library, peptide pre-fractionation was carried out for a mix of eight medulloblastoma primary samples (two of each major medulloblastoma subgroups according as previously described2). The peptide mix of this reference was resolved on a XBridge BEH130 C18 4.6x250mm Column (Waters, 186003581) into 96 fractions and concatenated into 24 final fractions as described by Zhang et al. Peptide samples from isogenic uveal melanoma cells Mel202 and Human hepatocellular carcinoma cells HepG2 were also added to complete the spectral library. This 8M urea cell lysate were diluted with 25 mM NH4HCO3 to a concentration of 1 M urea and reduced by incubating with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 57°C for one hour before alkylation with 9 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added at 1:100 (wt:wt) enzyme:substrate. Digestion was proceeded overnight at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted from beads by incubation with 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid.  The peptides were dried in a Speedvac and reconstituted in 2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.  DDA analysis and database search For generation of spectral library, DDA analysis was performed on an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped on a C18 column (75-μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific), with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 2.5 l/min over 4 min. Separation was then performed on a C18 column (75-μm inner diameter × 50 cm; nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 50 °C with a linear gradient of 2% to 35% buffer B (100 % MeCN and 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 211 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent TOP20 mode. MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer at range m/z 375–1500 with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time (MIT) at 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) at 3 × 106. MS/MS scan was performed at a resolution of 15 000 with an isolation window of 1.6 Da, intensity threshold kept at 3.2 × 105 and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. For each scan, we selected ions with charge state from 2+ to 6+, AGC was set at 1 × 105, the MIT was 25 ms and the dynamic exclusion of 40s.  DIA sample acquisition and analysis DIA analysis was performed with the same mass spectrometer and LC system as DDA. The same analytical column, flow rate, buffers and gradient were used. DIA method was set as follow: A full scan from m/z 375–1500 at a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200;  MIT: 100 ms; AGC:  3 × 106; 40 DIA scan of 15 Da isolation window with resolution 30 000; NCE: 27%; AGC target: 5e5 and MIT: auto.

### Data Protocol
DDA analysis and database search The raw data were searched against the UniProt human canonical database (20211 entries, downloaded on June 21, 2016), appended with the concatenated iRT peptide sequences, using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.0) and XTandem! included in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software (TPP version 4.8.0 [1]). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks.  Spectral library generation Spectral library from DDA analysis was generated with TPP included in myProMS (version 3.6.0) (Poullet et al, 2007[2]). The consensus library used for DIA analysis was built by SpectraST, with the following filter criteria applied: 3 to 6 fragments per peptide and fragment m/z range of 350-2,000 m/z. The combined library contained 465287 precursors (397333 peptides) from 29334 unique proteins.  DIA sample acquisition and analysis The DIA .raw files were converted in mzXML using MSConvert. Through myProMS, the resulting DIA mzXML files were treated by OpenSWATH [3] with default settings (version 2.2.0). The data was processed as described in Wenguang Shao et al. (Nat. Commun., 2019 [4]), except from the following TRIC parameters: “method: best_overall , realign_method: dIRT, dscore_cutoff: 1, target_fdr: 0.01”.  For quantification purposes, eight medulloblastoma samples acquired independently and representing the four main medulloblastoma subgroups were used as a reference to generate tumor-to-reference ratios. The label free quantification was performed by MSstat in myProMS [5]. Proteotypic peptides were used, with missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl cysteine allowed. A median-based normalization was applied on the total signal to correct XICs between each tumor and the reference.  Proteins with at least three measured peptide ratios and with no more than 25% missing values across the cohort were considered. Differential protein abundance analysis was performed using limma (R package, v3.32.10), fitting linear models (lmFit function), and computing moderated t-statistics with empirical Bayes statistics (eBayes function). P values were adjusted for multiple testing using qvalue (R package, v2.12). Enrichment scores for Reactome UPR pathways and the Elongator protein complex (ELP1-6) were caculated for samples based on gene set enrichment analysis (fgsea v1.2.1 R package). The relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) index for all protein-coding genes was calculated using the uco function in seqinr (R package, v3.4). Differences in codon usage bias between two gene sets were calculated using Mann-Whitney U tests (wilcox.test function in R). The strength of codon usage bias (RSCU) was calculated as median difference in RSCU values between two gene sets. The RSCU value is in the absence of any codon usage bias between two gene sets zero. The log2 AA:AG codon usage ratio was calculated by dividing the proportion of AA-ending to AG-ending codons. A pseudocount of one was added to AA and AG codon counts to avoid infinite values.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer genomics has revealed many genes and core molecular processes that contribute to human malignancies, but the genetic and molecular bases of many rare cancers remains unclear. Genetic predisposition accounts for 5 to 10% of cancer diagnoses in children<sup>1,2</sup>, and genetic events that cooperate with known somatic driver events are poorly understood. Pathogenic germline variants in established cancer predisposition genes have been recently identified in 5% of patients with the malignant brain tumour medulloblastoma<sup>3</sup>. Here, by analysing all protein-coding genes, we identify and replicate rare germline loss-of-function variants across ELP1 in 14% of paediatric patients with the medulloblastoma subgroup Sonic Hedgehog (MB<sub>SHH</sub>)<sub>.</sub> ELP1 was the most common medulloblastoma predisposition gene and increased the prevalence of genetic predisposition to 40% among paediatric patients with MB<sub>SHH</sub>. Parent-offspring and pedigree analyses identified two families with a history of paediatric medulloblastoma. ELP1-associated medulloblastomas were restricted to the molecular SHH&#x3b1; subtype<sup>4</sup> and characterized by universal biallelic inactivation of ELP1 owing to somatic loss of chromosome arm 9q. Most ELP1-associated medulloblastomas also exhibited somatic alterations in PTCH1, which suggests that germline ELP1 loss-of-function variants predispose individuals to tumour development in combination with constitutive activation of SHH signalling. ELP1 is the largest subunit of the evolutionarily conserved Elongator complex, which catalyses translational elongation through tRNA modifications at the wobble (U<sub>34</sub>) position<sup>5,6</sup>. Tumours from patients with ELP1-associated MB<sub>SHH</sub> were characterized by a destabilized Elongator complex, loss of Elongator-dependent tRNA modifications, codon-dependent translational reprogramming, and induction of the unfolded protein response, consistent with loss of protein homeostasis due to Elongator deficiency in model systems<sup>7-9</sup>. Thus, genetic predisposition to proteome instability may be a determinant in the pathogenesis of paediatric brain cancers. These results support investigation of the role of protein homeostasis in other cancer types and potential for therapeutic interference.

### Keywords
Shh, Meduloblastoma, Elp1, Elongator complex

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


