### Accession
PXD018347

### Title
Triclocarban vs Triclosan: A look into the protein targets of chlorinated biphenyl antimicrobials

### Description
Triclocarban (TCC), a formerly used disinfectant, kills bacteria via an unknown mechanism of action. A structural hallmark is its N,N'-diaryl urea motif which is also present in other antibiotics including the recently reported small molecule PK150. Like PK150, TCC exhibited a similar inhibitory effect on menaquinone metabolism via inhibition of the biosynthesis protein MenG, suggesting a contribution of this pathway to its mode of action. However, the activity spectrum (MIC90) of TCC across a broad range of resistant staphylococci and enterococci strains was much narrower compared to PK150. Accordingly, TCC did not cause an overactivation of signal peptidase SpsB, a hallmark of the PK150 scaffold. Furthermore, we were able to rule out inhibition of FabI, a confirmed target of the diaryl ether antibiotic triclosan (TCS). Differences in the target profile of TCC and TCS were further investigated by proteomic analysis, showing complex, but rather distinct changes in the protein expression profile of the bacteria. Additional evidence for an effect on bacterial energy metabolism was provided for TCC. Taken together, this study shows that N,N'-diaryl urea motifs exhibit shared and distinct molecular targets and for the first time highlights MenG as a target of TCC.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus NCTC 8325 overnight cultures were diluted into B medium to give a final OD600 of 0.1 (40 mL per biological replicate) and then grown (37°C, 200 rpm) for 5 h. Cells were harvested (6,000 x g, 4°C, 10 min), washed with PBS and resuspended in B medium to give a final cell density of 1.5 · 10^9 CFU/mL. 10 mL portions were aliquoted into polypropylene plastic tubes and incubated with TCC (0.5 μM, 0.5 x MIC), TCS (0.15 μM, 0.5 x MIC) or DMSO at 37°C, 200 rpm for 1.5 h. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation (6,000 x g, 4°C, 10 min) and washed with PBS. Cells were stored at -80°C for at least 16 h and then lysed. For cell lysis, bacterial cell pellets were resuspended in 200 μL 100 mM Tris pH 7.4 and lysed by sonication (5 x 20 s, 65% int. with 30 s rest on ice in between, Sonopuls HD 2070 ultrasonic rod, Bandelin electronic GmbH). 80 µL of 10% (w/v) SDS and 1.25% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate was added and samples heated for 10 min at 90°C. Lysates were sonicated for 10 s at 10% intensity to shear nucleic acids and centrifuged (13000 x g, RT, 10 min) to pellet debris. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pierce Biotechnology) and full proteome samples were adjusted to equal protein amounts. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (4 volumes) at -20°C overnight, centrifuged (16,900 x g, 4°C, 15 min) and the pellets washed twice with ice-cold methanol (1 mL). Protein pellets were air dried and dissolved in denaturation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM pH 7.5 HEPES buffer), then reduced with TCEP (10 mM; 37°C, 1,200 rpm, 1 h) and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (12.5 mM; 25°C, 1,200 rpm, 30 min). Alkylation was quenched by the addition of dithiothreitol (12.5 mM) and subsequent incubation (RT, 1,200 rpm, 30 min). For digestion, LysC (1:200 enzyme:protein ratio; 0.5 μg/μL) was added to each sample and the samples incubated at RT with shaking at 700 rpm for 2 h. Following dilution with 50 mM TEAB buffer (1:5), samples were further digested with trypsin (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio; 0.5 μg/μL) at 37°C overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding FA to a final pH of 2–3. Peptides were desalted on-column using 50 mg SepPak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters): SepPak C18 cartridges were equilibrated with ACN (1 mL), elution buffer (1 mL; 80% ACN, 0.5% FA) and three times with aqueous 0.5% FA solution (1 mL). Subsequently the samples were loaded by gravity flow, washed three times with aqueous 0.5% FA solution (1 mL), eluted with elution buffer (0.5 mL, 80% ACN, 0.5% FA) and lyophilized using a vacuum centrifuge.  Prior to mass spectrometry peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% (v/v) FA and filtered through 0.22 μm PVDF filters (Millipore). Samples were analyzed via HPLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) equipped with Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75μm ID x 2cm trap and Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC, 75μM ID x 50cm separation columns coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on the trap column at a flow rate of 5 μL/min with aqueous 0.1% TFA and then transferred onto the separation column at 0.4 μL/min. Buffers for the nano-chromatography pump were aqueous 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (buffer B). Samples were separated using a gradient raising buffer B from 5 to 22% in 112 min, followed by a buffer B increase to 32% within 10 min. Buffer B content was further raised to 90% within the next 10 min and held another 10 min at 90%. Subsequently buffer B was decreased to 5% and held until end of the run (total: 152 min). The MS instrument was operated in a TOP12 data dependent mode. MS full scans were performed at a resolution of 140,000 in the orbitrap and the scan range was set from 300 to 1,500 m/z. The AGC target was set to 3.0e6, the maximum ion injection time was 50 ms and internal calibration was performed using the lock mass option. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states of >1 and intensities greater than 1.6e4 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z and an AGC target to 1.0e5 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) and detected in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) with Andromeda as search engine using following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC 8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 19.08.2019). Quantification was performed using MaxQuant's LFQ algorithm.[27] The ”I = L“, ”requantify“ and ”match between runs“ (default settings) options were used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. For statistics with Perseus (version 1.6.0.0) four biological replicates were analyzed. Putative contaminants, reverse hits and proteins, identified by side only, were removed. LFQ intensities were log2(x) transformed and filtered to contain minimum three valid values in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed on the basis of a normal distribution (width = 0.3, down-shift = 1.8). P-values were obtained by a two-sided two sample t-test over the four biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Triclocarban, Antibacterials, Lfq, Full proteome analysis, Q exactive plus, Triclosan

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Department of Chemistry Chair of Organic Chemistry II Technical University of Munich Germany

### Submitter
Robert Macsics

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Department of Chemistry Chair of Organic Chemistry II Technical University of Munich Germany


