### Accession
PXD012608

### Title
A synthetic non-histone substrate to study substrate targeting by the Gcn5 HAT and sirtuin HDACs

### Description
Gcn5 and sirtuins are conserved HAT and HDAC enzymes that were first characterised as regulators of gene expression via histone acetylation. Although histone tails are important substrates of these enzymes, they also target non-histone proteins in diverse processes. Previously, we used SILAC-based mass spectrometry to identify novel non-histone substrates of Gcn5 and sirtuins in yeast. We found a shared target consensus sequence. In our latest work we used a synthetic biology approach to demonstrate that this consensus sequence can direct acetylation and deacetylation targeting by these enzymes in vivo. We used the synthetic substrate as a tool to prioritize SILAC-based acetylome analyses of SAGA mutants. Presented here are analyses of ada3∆ mutants analyzed in this work versus wild-type control.  The strains and labels used are described in the BioRxiv report linked in the methods sections below.

### Sample Protocol
Methods are as described in https://doi.org/10.1101/345637 and are repeated here for simplicity.  SILAC labeling for paired WT and ada3∆ mutant cells, cell lysis, chemical treatments, trypsin digestion, anti-AcK IP, elution, and peptide purification prior to mass spectrometry analysis were as previously described. High-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESIMS/MS) for yeast acetylome analyses was completed using the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Conditions used were similar to those described elsewhere. Briefly, the Q Exactive instrument was operated in positive ion mode. Peptides immunoprecipitated with anti-acetyllysine antibody were first resuspended in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid and injected onto a 75µM internal diameter analytical column packed with 1.9µm C18 resin. Peptides were eluted using a 200nL/min flow rate. A 120 minute gradient was used with increasing acetonitrile concentration (5-30% (v/v), 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The MS scan employed ranged from 300 to 1800 m/z with subsequent selection of the 12 most intense ions for data-dependent MS/MS scan. A dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2 and repeat exclusion duration of 30 seconds were used.

### Data Protocol
Methods are as described in https://doi.org/10.1101/345637 and are repeated here for simplicity.  Xcalibur software was used to acquire data. Following acquisition, a search was performed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 against a Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (downloaded from Uniprot 2017/02/09). Parameters used were: multiplicity of two (heavy label: Lys8); trypsin digest, a maximum of two missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications of methionine oxidation, acetyllysine and N-terminal acetylation; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; 0.5 Da for ion mass tolerance; peptide and protein false discovery rate fixed at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Gcn5 and sirtuins are highly conserved histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes that were first characterized as regulators of gene expression. Although histone tails are important substrates of these enzymes, they also target many nonhistone proteins that function in diverse biological processes. However, the mechanisms used by these enzymes to choose their nonhistone substrates are unknown. Previously, we used SILAC-based MS to identify novel nonhistone substrates of Gcn5 and sirtuins in yeast and found a shared target consensus sequence. Here, we use a synthetic biology approach to demonstrate that this consensus sequence can direct acetylation and deacetylation targeting by these enzymes <i>in vivo</i> Remarkably, fusion of the sequence to a nonsubstrate confers <i>de novo</i> acetylation that is regulated by both Gcn5 and sirtuins. We exploit this synthetic fusion substrate as a tool to define subunits of the Gcn5-containing SAGA and ADA complexes required for nonhistone protein acetylation. In particular, we find a key role for the Ada2 and Ada3 subunits in regulating acetylations on our fusion substrate. In contrast, other subunits tested were largely dispensable, including those required for SAGA stability. In an extended analysis, defects in proteome-wide acetylation observed in <i>ada3</i>&#x394; mutants mirror those in <i>ada2</i>&#x394; mutants. Altogether, our work argues that nonhistone protein acetylation by Gcn5 is determined in part by specific amino acids surrounding target lysines but that even optimal sequences require both Ada2 and Ada3 for robust acetylation. The synthetic fusion substrate we describe can serve as a tool to further dissect the regulation of both Gcn5 and sirtuin activities <i>in vivo</i>.

### Keywords
Gcn5, Consensus sequence, Synthetic biology, Ada3, Acetylation, Sirtuin, Saga

### Affiliations
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Ottawa, ON, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Michael Downey

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Downey
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Ottawa, ON, Canada


