### Accession
PXD017983

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of PTEN coupled Nano-LC−ESI-MS/MS

### Description
Nuclear localization of PTEN is essential for its tumor suppressive role, and loss of nuclear PTEN is more prominent than cytoplasmic PTEN in many kinds of cancers. However, nuclear PTEN-specific regulatory mechanisms were rarely reported. Based on the finding that nuclear PTEN is more unstable than cytoplasmic PTEN. Thus, 293T cells were transiently transfected with plasmid encoding Flag-tagged PTEN along with empty vector, followed by affinity purification using an anti-Flag antibody, and the bound proteins were analyzed by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS). Here we identify that F-box only protein 22 (FBXO22) induces ubiquitylation of nuclear but not cytoplasmic PTEN at lysine 221, which is responsible for the degradation of nuclear PTEN.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation samples were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and visualized with colloidal Coomassie blue. The lane from gels was cut into 1 mm slices, and each slice was washed twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50% acetontrile (ACN) and dehydrated with ACN. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. After washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, proteins were digested in gel with trypsin (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 60% ACN and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The peptide extracts were vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Dried peptides were dissolved to 10 μl of 2% ACN and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were desalted and preconcentrated through a Michrom peptide CapTrap (MW 0.5-50 kDa, 0.5 × 2 mm; Michrom BioResources, Inc.). The eluent was vacuum centrifuged to dryness then reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. For LC−MS/MS analysis, 10 μl samples were introduced from an autosampler (HTS-PAL, CTC Analytics) at a flow of 1 μl/min for 15 min onto a reverse-phase microcapillary column (0.1 × 150 mm, packed with 5 μm 100 Å Magic C18 resin; Michrom Bioresources) using a HPLC (Paragram MS4, Michrom Bioresources). The reverse-phase separation of peptides was performed at a flow of 0.5 μl/min using the following buffers: 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 98% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (buffer B) using a 90 min gradient (0-35% B for 90 min, 80% B for 8 min, 95% B for 12 min and 0% B for 20 min). The eluate was introduced directly onto a hybrid linear ion trap (LTQ) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFinnigan) equipped with ADVANCE Spray Source (Michrom Bioresources).

### Data Protocol
A high-resolution MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z 350–1800, R = 100,000 (at m/z 400) and ion accumulation to a target value of 106. Siloxane (m/z 445.120025) was used as an internal standard. MS/MS spectra were acquired using data-dependent scan from the 10 most intense ions with charge states 2 in the survey scan (as determined by the Xcalibur mass spectrometer software in real time). Only MS signals exceeding 500 ion counts triggered a MS/MS attempt and 5000 ions were acquired for a MS/MS scan. Dynamic mass exclusion windows of 27 s were used. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from triggering MS/MS scans. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. All MS/MS ion spectra were extracted by ProteoWizard msConvert and were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the uniprot_human database (88,625 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme semiTrypsin allowed for two missed tryptic cleavages with full mass from 600 to 4600. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the N terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins with quantitative values (normalized total spectra) in experimental group more than 3 times higher than control group were considered as potential interacting proteins. Other proteins identified were considered as non-specific binding.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear localization of PTEN is essential for its tumor suppressive role, and loss of nuclear PTEN is more prominent than cytoplasmic PTEN in many kinds of cancers. However, nuclear PTEN-specific regulatory mechanisms were rarely reported. Based on the finding that nuclear PTEN is more unstable than cytoplasmic PTEN, here we identify that F-box only protein 22 (FBXO22) induces ubiquitylation of nuclear but not cytoplasmic PTEN at lysine 221, which is responsible for the degradation of nuclear PTEN. FBXO22 plays a tumor-promoting role by ubiquitylating and degrading nuclear PTEN. In accordance, FBXO22 is overexpressed in various cancer types, and contributes to nuclear PTEN downregulation in colorectal cancer tissues. Cumulatively, our study reports the mechanism to specifically regulate the stability of nuclear PTEN, which would provide the opportunity for developing therapeutic strategies aiming to achieve complete reactivation of PTEN as a tumor suppressor.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Nano-lc−esi-ms/ms, Pten, 293t

### Affiliations
Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Rui-Jin Hospital, and State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Research Unit (NO.2019RU043), Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
SJTU

### Submitter
ge mengkai

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Guo-Qiang
Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Rui-Jin Hospital, and State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Research Unit (NO.2019RU043), Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.


