### Accession
PXD028550

### Title
ProMetIS: deep phenotyping of mouse models by proteomics and metabolomics

### Description
The ProMetIS dataset corresponds to the proteomic and metabolomic analysis of mouse lines lacking the LAT (linker for activation of T cells; OMIM: 602354) or MX2 gene (MX dynamin-like GTPase 2; OMIM: 147890), as well as the control (WT) line. Besides its role in T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling (Roncagalli et al., 2010), LAT has been shown to be involved in neurodevelopmental diseases (Loviglio et al., 2017). The systematic generation of mouse models is part of the functional characterization of the genome by the IMPC consortium (Brown et al., 2018). This characterization is currently based on a battery of animal phenotypic tests (anatomy, behaviour, histology, haematology, physiology), the results of which feed the IMPC database (https://www.mousephenotype.org). In particular, gene knockouts associated to metabolic diseases have been identified (Rozman et al., 2018). To further characterize these models, global molecular approaches are required, such as the metabolomics analysis of plasma samples which has been described recently (Barupal et al., 2019). The originality of ProMetIS is to provide, in addition to the clinical data, the proteomics and metabolomics analysis of the LAT, MX2 and WT mouse models in liver and plasma. ProMetIS provides access to unique molecular functional information on the LAT and MX2 genes. In addition, the dataset has been generated by the four national infrastructures for mouse phenogenomics (PHENOMIN-ICS), proteomics (ProFI), metabolomics (MetaboHUB) and bioinformatics (IFB) for optimal quality, reproducibility and accessibility. The protocols and computational workflows provided here can be easily extended to a larger number of individuals and tissues. Finally, ProMetIS will be of great interest to develop and evaluate bioinformatics and biostatistical methods for the processing and integration of proteomic and metabolomic data.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of plasma proteins, filter-aided sample preparation was performed using Amicon Ultra devices (0,5 mL, cutoff 10 kDa, Merck Millipore). Three microliters of each plasma sample were diluted with 350µL of 4M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and centrifuged in the device at 14000g and 4°C, to a concentrated volume of 50µL. For reduction of cysteine residues, 350µL of 10mM TCEP in 4M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer were added on the device, and the samples were incubated 10min at room temperature. Sample volume was reduced again down to 50µL by centrifugation at 14000g and 4°C. Alkylation of cysteine residues was performed by addition of 350µL of 55mM iodoacetamide in 4M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, followed by 15min incubation in the dark, and concentration of the samples by centrifugation of the filter device. Two additional washes of the samples were performed with 4M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Proteins were digested with 1:30 enzyme:protein ratio of Trypsin / Lys-C Mix (Promega) in 4M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, for 2h at 37°C. The concentration of urea was then reduced to 1M by dilution with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the samples were further incubated for 3h at 37°C. Resulting peptides were collected by centrifugation of the 10kDa filter, which was further rinsed with 100µL of 0.5M NaCl. Peptides were desalted on C18 spin columns (Pierce), dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and re-suspended in 180µL of a water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Before LC-MS analysis, a set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all samples. For quality control of the mass spectrometry analysis sequence, a standard was constituted by pooling 1 µl of each sample, either for the liver tissue samples or for the plasma samples serie. The samples were stored at 4°C and analysed within a week.

### Data Protocol
Spectra Identification: Raw files were converted to mzDB files and after in mgf peaklists using a Java library for reading and querying mzDB files (https://github.com/mzdb/mzdb-access) and were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.6.2, MatrixScience, London, UK) against a murine protein sequences database downloaded SwissProt website (2018_08_20), common contaminants, IRT and decoy sequences were added. The concatenated database contains 33986 protein entries. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm in MS mode and 20 mmu in MS/MS mode. Two trypsin missed cleavages were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein n-termini were set as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/; Bouyssié et al., 2020) for validation. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using Mascot Adjusted E-value and below 1% at Protein Level using Mascot Mudpit score. Label Free Quantification: Peptides Abundances were extracted thanks to Proline software version 1.6 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/; Bouyssié et al., 2020) using a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm. Alignment of the LC-MS runs was performed using Loess smoothing. Cross assignment of peptide ions abundances was performed among the samples using a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 42 s. Protein Abundances were computed using the median ratio fitting of the unique peptides abundances normalized at the peptide level using median. Statistical post-processing. Protein Abundances were loaded into Prostar software version 1.16 (http://www.prostar-proteomics.org/, Wieczorek et al., 2017) and associated to their conditions (WT, LAT or MX2). Proteins with at least 80% of present values in at least one condition of the one vs one comparison were kept for further statistical analysis. Contaminants were filtered out. Residual missing values were imputed according to their nature (Lazar et al., 2016): partially observed values were imputed according to the measured values (SLSA algorithm), whereas values missing in the entire condition were imputed in a conservative way (approximation of the lower limit of quantification by the 2.5% lower quantile of each replicate intensity distribution).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteiomics metebolomics

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
Toulouse proteomics infrastucture UMR5089 CNRS  Universite de Toulouse IPBS France

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Gonzalez de Peredo
Toulouse proteomics infrastucture UMR5089 CNRS  Universite de Toulouse IPBS France


