### Accession
PXD023703

### Title
Phosphoproteome upon Salmonella infection

### Description
HCT116 cells were grown in SILAC-DMEM (arginine and lysine-free medium), supplemented with dialyzed FCS (10%) and lysine [74µg/ml] and arginine [42µg/ml] as “light K0, R0”, “medium K4, R6” or “heavy K8, R10”. Cells were left uninfected or infected with Salmonella and lysed 30 min or 2h post-infection.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were grown in SILAC-DMEM (arginine and lysine-free medium), supplemented with dialyzed FCS (10%) and lysine [74µg/ml] and arginine [42µg/ml] as “light K0, R0”, “medium K4, R6” or “heavy K8, R10”. Cells were lysed in 6M Guanidinhydrochlorid buffer (100mM Tris HCL pH 8.5, 5mM TCEP, 10mM chloracetamide), heated at 95°C for 15 min and sonicated with Sonics Vibra-Cell (1 s ON/ 1 s OFF pulse for 30 sec using 30% amplitude). The cell lysates were diluted to 2M Guanidium Hydrochloride with 50mM HEPES buffer at pH 8.5 and incubated with Lys-C (1ug for 100ug protein lysate) for 2 hours followed by, further dilution to 1M Guanidium Hydrochloride and overnight digestion with Trypsin (1ug for 100ug protein lysate). Peptides were desalted and quantified using BCA. Equal peptide amounts from the 3 SILAC states were mixed at 1:1:1 ratio and dried down. This was followed by fractionation on a high-pH gradient into a total of 12 fractions. TiO2 based phospho-enrichment was performed, followed by data acquisition on a Q-Exactive HF instrument. Enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF instrument coupled to nLC-1200. A 15 cm column was used as described above. For SILAC phosphoproteome analysis, the MS parameters are as follows; MS1: 60,000 resolution, AGC: 3e6, injection time: 20 ms and MS2: resolution: 30,000, AGC: 1e5, injection time: 110 ms, TOP N : 12.

### Data Protocol
For SILAC phosphoproteomics data MaxQuant was used with default SILAC parameters. Methionine Oxidation, n-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (pSTY) were used as the variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Salmonella</i> is an intracellular pathogen of a substantial global health concern. In order to identify key players involved in <i>Salmonella</i> infection, we performed a global host phosphoproteome analysis subsequent to bacterial infection. Thereby, we identified the kinase SIK2 as a central component of the host defense machinery upon <i>Salmonella</i> infection. SIK2 depletion favors the escape of bacteria from the <i>Salmonella</i>-containing vacuole (SCV) and impairs Xenophagy, resulting in a hyperproliferative phenotype. Mechanistically, SIK2 associates with actin filaments under basal conditions; however, during bacterial infection, SIK2 is recruited to the SCV together with the elements of the actin polymerization machinery (Arp2/3 complex and Formins). Notably, SIK2 depletion results in a severe pathological cellular actin nucleation and polymerization defect upon <i>Salmonella</i> infection. We propose that SIK2 controls the formation of a protective SCV actin shield shortly after invasion and orchestrates the actin cytoskeleton architecture in its entirety to control an acute <i>Salmonella</i> infection after bacterial invasion.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Marcel Hahn

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University School of Medicine, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


