### Accession
PXD027813

### Title
Comparative LC-MS analysis of two metronidazole resistant (M1,M2) and one revertant (M1NR) Giardia intestinalis strains with their parental strain (WB-C6)

### Description
I this study we analyzed three lines, two of which were created by UV- directed mutagenesis and showed increased levels of metronidazole tolerance (M1 and M2) and the third being a line that reverted spontanously to sensitive after several passages (M1NR) of M1 without metronidazole in the media. On the physiological side we analyzed the ability of these lines to reists metronidazole exposure and to encyst as well as their respective doublings times. At the same time we conducted a trasncriptomics and proteomics analysis to understand which exact changes lead to M1 and M2 being resistant while M1NR shows wildtype levels of metrondiazole sensitivty.  We than compared these datasets to already existing datasets of other metrondiazole resistant lines and managed to identify a few core changes which are shared between all lines. In all lines proteins that are activating the drug are downregulated while proteins that are part of the oxidative stress response are found in higher abundance. On the other side these core changes are accompanied by a line specific set of changes, showing that there is more than one way for Giardia intestinalis to become resistant to metronidazole.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicates of WB, WB-M1, WB-M1NR and WB-M2 were grown to 80% confluence in TYI-S-33 medium according to Keister (Keister 1983) without metronidazole. WB-M1 was also grown in four replicates in TYI-S-33 with 20µM added metronidazole. All samples were harvested by cooling on ice for 15mins, agitation against a hard surface to deattach cells from the tube wall and subsequent pelleting at 2000xg and 4°C for 5min. The pellets were than washed three times in PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at -80°C until processed by the Uppsala University proteomics facility. Here samples were lysed in 1% β-octyl glucopyranoside and 6M urea containing lysis buffer, reduced, alkylated and on-filter digested with trypsin. They were than centrifuged to dryness before resolving in 30µl 0.1% formic acid diluting four times before MS. Peptides were separated on a 150min gradient in a C18-column (reverse-phase) before analysis on a Q Exactive  Plus  Orbitrap  mass  spectrometer  (Thermo  Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the raw files was done with MetaMorpheus version 00.313 (Solntsev et al. 2018) using following strategy: Search- calibration- post-translational modification discovery- search. The final search was done with following settings:  Max missed cleavages: 2; Min peptide length: 7; one peptide was enough to identify a protein; matching between the two runs was used, the quantification results were normalized and a 1% FDR was set as cut-off. The version 50 from GiardiaDB for strain WB was used as annotated protein file (https://giardiadb.org/giardiadb/app/downloads/release-50/GintestinalisAssemblageAWB/fasta/data/). Result files for all samples containing LFQ values, unique peptide numbers and modification for each protein found were used to carry out DE analysis and modification analysis in R. LFQ values were normalized using the normalization approach from edgeR to account for differences in total protein levels. 3. DE analysis was done using the DEqMS(Zhu et al. 2020) workflow for label free proteomics and a DEqMS p-value of 0.05 or less was deemed significant. Welch´s t-test values for comparison were calculated with the base R t.test function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Metronidazole resistance, Giardia intestinalis

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Microbiology and Immunology, Uppsala University, Sweden

### Submitter
Sascha Krakovka

### Lab Head
Dr Staffan Svärd
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Microbiology and Immunology, Uppsala University, Sweden


### SDRF
- organism: Giardia intestinalis
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: Trophozoite
- disease: Giardiasis
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive Plus

