### Accession
PXD016167

### Title
LC-MS/MS of baicalein-regulated human lung fibroblast

### Description
Here, we showed that baicalein suppressed transforming growth factor β1 (TGF β1)-stimulated the production of type I collagen in lung fibroblast MRC-5 cells. By applying SILAC-based proteomic technology, 158 proteins were identified as baicalein-modulated proteins in TGF β1-stimulated the accumulation of type I collagen in MRC-5 cells. Our proteomic and biochemical analysis demonstrated that baicalein could decrease the expression levels of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in TGF β1-stimulated MRC-5 cells. In addition, CTGF overexpression elevated the levels of type I collagen in baicalein-treated fibroblasts. Moreover, our results demonstrated that baicalein-downregulated CTGF expression might be related with the decrease of Smad2 phosphorylation, but not SP1.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, equal amounts of protein samples from light and heavy cell lysates were mixed. Approximately 100 μg of protein samples was digested by using trypsin solution for approximately 20 hours, Then, the resultant samples were desalted, lyophilized, and redissolved in 0.1% formic acid for proteomic analysis, and the analysis was performed on Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectrum data were matched against UniProt human protein database by using MaxQuant analysis software (version 1.6.1.1). False discovery rate for peptides was set to 1%. The SILAC experiment was performed with three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Although we have reported that baicalein ameliorated bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats and inhibited fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation, the mechanisms of the capability of baicalein to suppress the production of type I collagen in fibroblasts remains unclear. Here, we showed that baicalein suppressed transforming growth factor &#x3b2;1 (TGF &#x3b2;1)-stimulated the production of type I collagen in lung fibroblast MRC-5 cells. By applying SILAC-based proteomic technology, 158 proteins were identified as baicalein-modulated proteins in TGF &#x3b2;1-stimulated the accumulation of type I collagen in MRC-5 cells. Our proteomic and biochemical analysis demonstrated that baicalein decreased the expression levels of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in TGF &#x3b2;1-stimulated MRC-5 cells. In addition, CTGF overexpression elevated the levels of type I collagen in baicalein-treated fibroblasts. Moreover, our results demonstrated that baicalein-downregulated CTGF expression might be related with the decrease of Smad2 phosphorylation, but not SP1. This work not only linked CTGF to TGF &#x3b2;1-stimulated the production of type I collagen in its attribution to the effects of baicalein, but also might provide valuable information for enhancing the knowledge of the pharmacological inhibition of collagen production, which might represent a promising strategy for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.

### Keywords
Human; lung fibroblast; baicalein; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Soochow University
Department of Pharmacology, Soochow University

### Submitter
Xiaogang Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaogang Jiang
Department of Pharmacology, Soochow University


