### Accession
PXD001499

### Title
1D-DDA of human diploid fibroblasts, TIG-3 cells

### Description
One-dimensional LC-MS/MS analysis of total proteome expression in TIG-3 human embryonic lung diploid fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed with PBS, digested with trypsin for 2 min at 37̊C, resuspended in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, and collected by centrifugation (800  g for 5 min). The cells (pellet) were then washed twice with PBS, resuspended in 2 to 5 ml of PBS, and counted with the use of an automated cell counter (MoxiZ, Orflo). Portions (2 × 106 cells) of the cell suspension were then transferred to 1.5-ml tubes, pelleted by centrifugation, and stored at –80C until use.Frozen cells (2 ×  10^6 cells) were lysed with 200 l of a solution containing 2% SDS, 7 M urea, and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8) and then  and were then subjected to ultrasonic treatment (five times for 30 s with intervals of 30 s) with a Bioruptor (Diagenode). The samples were diluted with an equal volume of water and then again subjected to ultrasonic treatment. The protein concentration was determined with the BCA assay (Bio-Rad), after which portions (200 × g of protein) of the samples were subjected to methanol-chloroform precipitation.The resulting pellet was dissolved in 28 microl of digestion buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate containing 7 M guanidine hydroxide), and heated at 56̊C for 30 min. Each sample was diluted with an equal volume of water, after which portions (2 microl) of the dilution were subjected to the BCA assay (in triplicate) in order to estimate the amount of remaining protein. The remaining solution (50 microl) was diluted with 50 microl of water and subjected to digestion with Lysyl-endopeptidaseLys-C (2 microg, Wako) for 4 h at 37̊C. After the addition of 100 microl of water, the samples were further digested with trypsin (2 microg, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 14 h at 37̊C. To block cysteine/cystine residues, we treated the digest with 0.625 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochlorideTCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min at 37̊C followed by alkylation with 3.125 mM 2-iodoacetoamide (SIGMA) for 30 min at room temperature and quenching with 2.5 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (mgf) generated by the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter were searched using MASCOT algorism (Matrix Science) against a database IPI human 3.1.6  with decoy sequences (124,656 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Med. Inst. Bioregulation, Kyshu Univ.
1Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan

### Submitter
Masaki Matsumoto

### Lab Head
Dr Keiichi I. Nakayama
1Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan


