### Accession
PXD025166

### Title
Lrrc23 WT and KO whole sperm proteomic analysis

### Description
LRRC23 is required for stablizing the sperm axonemal structure. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out to compare the proteome of Lrrc23 WT and KO sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm were lysed in 6 M urea. The protein samples were then precipitated by methanol-chloroform addition, then dissolved into 0.1% Rapigest(Waters).The proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and digested in-solution by treatment with trypsin and purified with C18 tip (GL-Science, Tokyo, Japan). The resultant peptides were subjected to nanocapillary reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analysis using a C18 column (10 cm x 75 um, 1.9 µm, Bruker Daltoniks, Bremen, Germany) on a nanoLC system (Bruker Daltoniks, Bremen, Germany) connected to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltoniks) and a nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltoniks).  The column temperature was set to 50.0 oC. The mobile phase consisted of water containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). Linear gradient elution was carried out from 5% to 30% solvent B for 18 min at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The ion spray voltage was set at 1.6 kV in the positive ion mode and nitrogen gas was used as collision gas.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data was processed using DataAnalysis (Bruker Daltoniks), and proteins were identified using MASCOT Sever (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the SwissProt database. Precursor and fragment searching mass tolerancewas was set to 15ppm and 0.05Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification and Oxidation of methionine, acetyl of protein N-term, deamination of N,Q were set as variable modification. Quantitative value and fold exchange were calculated by Scaffold4 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Cilia and flagella are ancient structures that achieve controlled motor functions through the coordinated interaction based on microtubules and some attached projections. Radial spokes (RSs) facilitate the beating motion of these organelles by mediating signal transduction between dyneins and a central pair (CP) of singlet microtubules. RS complex isolation from Chlamydomonas axonemes enabled the detection of 23 radial spoke proteins (RSP1-RSP23), although the roles of some radial spoke proteins remain unknown. Recently, RSP15 has been reported to be bound to the stalk of RS2, but its homolog in mammals has not been identified. Herein, we show that Lrrc23 is an evolutionarily conserved testis-enriched gene encoding an RSP15 homolog in mice. We found that LRRC23 localizes to the RS complex within murine sperm flagella and interacts with RSPH3A and RSPH3B. The knockout of Lrrc23 resulted in male infertility due to RS disorganization and impaired motility in murine spermatozoa, whereas the ciliary beating was not significantly affected. These data indicate that LRRC23 is a key regulator that underpins the integrity of the RS complex within the flagella of mammalian spermatozoa, whereas it is dispensable in cilia. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Sperm flagella, Lrrc23

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, 565-0871 Osaka, Japan
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University

### Submitter
Yonggang Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Masahito Ikawa
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, 565-0871 Osaka, Japan


