### Accession
PXD014090

### Title
New Insights into Heat Responses in Grape Leaves through Combined Phosphoproteomic and Acetylproteomic Analyses

### Description
Heat stress is a serious and widespread threat to the quality and yield of many crops, including grape (Vitis vinifera), which is cultivated worldwide. Here, we conducted phosphoproteomic and acetylproteomic analyses of leaves from grape cultivated in four distinct temperature regimes. The phosphorylation or acetylation of a total of 1,011 phosphoproteins with 1,828 phosphosites, and 96 acetylproteins with 148 acetylsites, changed when plants were grown at 35°C, 40°C and 45°C in comparison with the proteome profiles of plants grown at 25°C. The greatest number of changes were observed at higher temperatures. Functional classification and enrichment analysis indicated that phosphorylation, rather than acetylation, of serine/arginine-rich splicing factors was involved in the responses to high temperatures. This is congruent with previous observations that alternative splicing events occurred more frequently in grapevine under high temperature. Changes in acetylation patterns were more common than changes in phosphorylation patterns in photosynthesis-related proteins at high temperatures, while heat shock proteins were more associated with modifications in phosphorylation than in acetylation. Nineteen proteins were identified with changes in both phosphorylation and acetylation, consistent with crosstalk between these post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and heat treatments The materials and treatment were identical to our previous study6. One-year-old ‘Jingxiangyu’ grapevine cuttings (Vitis vinifera L.) were planted in pots, then grown in a greenhouse at 70% to 80% relative humidity at 18°C to 25°C. When the sixth leaves (from base to apex) of grapevines became mature, all grapevines were divided into four groups and acclimated for 2 d in a controlled-environment room (70% average relative humidity, 25°C/18°C [12-h/12-h] day/night cycle. On day 3, the grapevines were subjected to the following treatments: (1) the plants of the control group were maintained at the optimal day/night temperature (25°C/18°C) in the above growth room; (2) the plants of the treatment groups were exposed to 35°C, 40°C, or 45°C from 11:30 AM to 1:30 PM (the conditions were the same as the control, except for temperature). The fourth to sixth leaves (from base to apex) of each plant were detached at 1:30 PM (the end of the heat stress treatment). Each biological replicate included three plants, and two replicates were used for both the three treatments and the control. Leaves were frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately and stored at 280°C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Enrichment of acetylpeptides A mixture of iTRAQ labeled samples corresponding to the four temperature treatments was desalted using an ep-Pak tC18 cartridge (Varian, CA). Acetylpeptides were enriched using a PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) antibody (#13416, Cell Signaling technology, MA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were desalted with an Empore 3M C18 (2215) StageTip, dried and solubilized in 0.1% TFA/5% acetonitrile prior to nanoLC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry identification Enriched phosphopeptides or acetylated peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS with a RSLC system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded onto a self-packed 100 µm × 2 cm trap packed with Magic C18AQ, 5µm 200 A (Michrom Bioresources Inc, Auburn, CA) and washed with Buffer A (0.2% formic acid) for 5 min at a flow rate of 10 µL min-1. The trap was switched in-line with a homemade analytical column (Magic C18AQ, 3µm 200 A, 75 µm × 50 cm) and peptides were fractionated at 300 nL min-1 with a multi-stepped gradient (proteome: 4 to 15% Buffer B (0.16% formic acid 80% acetonitrile) in 30 min and 15-25% B in 40 min and 25-50% B in 45 min; acetylome: 4 to 25% Buffer B in 35 min and 25-50%B in 65 min). Mass spectrometry data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher) in data-dependent acquisition mode with a cyclic series of a full scan acquired with a resolution of 120,000 followed by MS/MS scans (30% of collision energy in the HCD cell) with a resolution of 30,000 of the 20 most intense ions, and a dynamic exclusion duration of 30 sec.   Phosphoproteomic and actylproteomic data analysis All data were analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow (version 1.6.0.1.) using the Andromeda search engine 91,92.  The type of LC-MS run was set to “Reporter ion MS2” with “iTRAQ4plex” as isobaric labels and the reporter ion mass tolerance value was defined as 0.003 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for protein, peptide spectrum match, and site decoy fraction levels. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 4.5 ppm. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. MS2 spectra were searched against the uniprot Vitis vinifera cv. Pinot Noir/PN40024 database (downloaded on 01/16/2018) (https://www.uniprot.org/), 29,907 entries combined with 262 common contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set trypsin/P that allowed three missed cleavages for phosphorylation data and five missed cleavages for acetylation data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation at methionine were set as variable modifications. Phospho (STY) and acetyl (K) were set as a variable modification for the phosphorylation and acetylation enriched samples respectively.  The summed reporter ion intensity of each channel before enrichment was used as the normalization factor for phosphoproteome or acetylproteome quantitation. After filtering potential contaminants, a reverse, localization score ≥ 0.75 for phosphoproteome and acetylproteome was included in the data.   Bioinformatic analysis Differentially expressed proteins were functionally categorized based on MapMan ontology 30. MapMan ontology analysis was carried out based on blastp results using the A. thaliana predicted proteome as a reference. Functional categories were manually verified by literature searches and proteins that were not associated with any biological process category were assigned to MapMan (Bin35). Motif-X was used for motif analysis and the setting parameters for searching motifs were occurrences 20 and significance 0.000001. Functional interaction network analysis was performed using STRING software 93 and visualized by Cytoscape 94.

### Publication Abstract
Heat stress is a serious and widespread threat to the quality and yield of many crop species, including grape (<i>Vitis vinifera</i> L.), which is cultivated worldwide. Here, we conducted phosphoproteomic and acetylproteomic analyses of leaves of grape plants cultivated under four distinct temperature regimes. The phosphorylation or acetylation of a total of 1011 phosphoproteins with 1828 phosphosites and 96 acetyl proteins with 148 acetyl sites changed when plants were grown at 35&#x2009;&#xb0;C, 40&#x2009;&#xb0;C, and 45&#x2009;&#xb0;C in comparison with the proteome profiles of plants grown at 25&#x2009;&#xb0;C. The greatest number of changes was observed at the relatively high temperatures. Functional classification and enrichment analysis indicated that phosphorylation, rather than acetylation, of serine/arginine-rich splicing factors was involved in the response to high temperatures. This finding is congruent with previous observations by which alternative splicing events occurred more frequently in grapevine under high temperature. Changes in acetylation patterns were more common than changes in phosphorylation patterns in photosynthesis-related proteins at high temperatures, while heat-shock proteins were associated more with modifications involving phosphorylation than with those involving acetylation. Nineteen proteins were identified with changes associated with both phosphorylation and acetylation, which is consistent with crosstalk between these posttranslational modification types.

### Keywords
Heat, Acetylproteome, Grape, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Grape Science and Enology and Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China

### Submitter
Guotian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Li-Jun Wang
Beijing Key Laboratory of Grape Science and Enology and Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China


