### Accession
PXD026424

### Title
Mouse 129SV submandibular salivary gland. -Male vs Female- and -Wildtype vs ERdj5 knockout-

### Description
In this study we have explored the effects of ERdj5 chaperone protein deletion in the proteome of 129SV mouse submandibular salivary glands. This knockout mouse model recapitulates many aspects of Sjögren’s Syndrome, including salivary gland inflammatory infiltrations, anti-nuclear autoantibodies and others (Apostolou et al., Front.Immunol.2019;10,506). Additionally, for 12SV wildtype animals we explore the proteome profile of the extensive sexual dimorphism observed in the submanidular glands of mice.

### Sample Protocol
For the preparation of salivary gland tissue samples, we followed the Filtered Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol based on the "Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis". (Wiśniewski, et al., 2009. Nat Methods 6, 359-362. The lyophilized samples were reconstituted in 10mL ddH2O and analyzed through an LTQ Velos pro Orbitrap LC/MS instrument (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) for the identification of peptides and their relative abundances.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were analysed using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CS version 1.4.0.288) and the Mus musculus protein database from Uniprot (uniprot.org). The following search parameters were used: trypsin as a digestion enzyme; maximum number of missed cleavages 2; fragment ion mass tolerance 0.60 Da; parent ion mass tolerance 10.0 ppm; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Identified proteins were validated using SCAFFOLD software (Version 4.5.3; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Identifications were based on a minimum of 2 peptides, minimum 80% peptide identification probability (using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm), and minimum 95% protein identification probability using the Protein Prophet algorithm2. Proteins, which contained similar peptides, and which could not be differentiated based on LC-MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  The relative abundances of the identified proteins were estimated using the normalized total spectra counts, the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) and the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) in Scaffold. Quantitative differences were statistically analyzed by Student’s t-test with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Differences with p-values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Erdj5, Mouse, Sjögren’s syndrome, Salivary gland, Sexual dimorphism

### Affiliations
Linköping University
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden

### Submitter
Petros Moustardas

### Lab Head
Dr Petros Moustardas
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden


