### Accession
PXD006680

### Title
Chemoproteomics Reveals Chemical Diversity and Dynamics of 4-Oxo-2-nonenal Modifications in Cells

### Description
4-Oxo-2-nonenal (ONE) derived from lipid peroxidation modifies nucleophiles and transduces redox signaling by its reactions with proteins. However, the molecular interactions between ONE and complex proteomes and their dynamics in situ remain largely unknown. Here we de-scribe a quantitative chemoproteomic analysis of protein adduction by ONE in cells, in which the cellular target profile of ONE is mimicked by its alkynyl surrogate. The analysis reveals four types of ONE-derived modifications in cells, including ketoamide and Schiff-base adducts to lysine, Michael adducts to cysteine, and a novel pyrrole adducts to cysteine. ONE-derived adducts co-localize and crosstalk with many histone marks and redox sensitive sites. All four types of modifications derived from ONE can be reversed site-specifically in cells. In summary, our study provides much-needed mechanistic insights into the cellular signaling and potential toxicities associated with this important lipid derived electrophile.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed on ice in HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal, pH 7.5) containing inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was first reduced with 4 mM NaBH4 for 1h at room temperature. The lysate was further incubated with 8 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Research Products International) at 75°C for 15 min to reduce the revers-ibly oxidized cysteines. Reduced cysteines then were alkylated with 32 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at the room temperature. Proteins were then precipitated with a methanol-chloroform system (aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform, 4:4:1 (v/v/v)) as previously described(18, 19). The precipitated protein pellets were resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate con-taining 0.2 M urea.  Resuspended protein concentrations were determined with the BCA assay (Pierce Thermo Fisher) and adjusted to a concentration of 2 mg/mL. Resuspended proteins were first digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37°C. A secondary digestion was performed by adding additional trypsin to a 1:100 (en-zyme/substrate) ratio, followed by incubation at 37°C for additional 4 h.  The tryptic digests were desalted with HLB extraction cartridges (Waters). The desalted samples were then evaporated to dryness under vacuum.Desalted tryptic digests were reconstituted in a solution containing 30% MeCN at pH 6. Click chemistry was performed by the addition of 0.8 mM either Azido-L-biotin or Azido-H-biotin (2.5 μL of a 40 mM stock), 8 mM sodium ascorbate (10 μL of a 100 mM stock), 1 mM TBTA (2.5 μL of a 50 mM stock, and 8 mM CuSO4 (10 μL of a 100 mM stock). Samples were allowed to react at room temperature for 2 h with in the dark rotation. The Azido-L-biotin and Azido-H-biotin sample were then mixed together immediately following click chemistry. The samples were cleaned by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography as previ-ously described and then allowed to interact with pre-washed streptavidin sepharose for 2 h at room temperature. Streptavidin sepharose then was washed with 50 mM NaAc, 50 mM NaAc con-taining 2 M NaCl, and water twice each with votexing and/or rotation to remove non-specific bind-ing peptides, and resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The suspension of streptavidin sepharose was transferred to several glass tubes (VWR), irradiated with 365 nm UV light (Entela, Upland, CA) for 2 h at room temperature with stirring. The supernatant was collected, evaporated to dryness under vacuum, and stored at −20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis. Cell pellets were lysed on ice in HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal, pH 7.5) containing inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was first reduced with 4 mM NaBH4 for 1h at room temperature. The lysate was further incubated with 8 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Research Products International) at 75°C for 15 min to reduce the revers-ibly oxidized cysteines. Reduced cysteines then were alkylated with 32 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at the room temperature. Proteins were then precipitated with a methanol-chloroform system (aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform, 4:4:1 (v/v/v)) as previously described(18, 19). The precipitated protein pellets were resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate con-taining 0.2 M urea.  Resuspended protein concentrations were determined with the BCA assay (Pierce Thermo Fisher) and adjusted to a concentration of 2 mg/mL. Resuspended proteins were first digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37°C. A secondary digestion was performed by adding additional trypsin to a 1:100 (en-zyme/substrate) ratio, followed by incubation at 37°C for additional 4 h.  The tryptic digests were desalted with HLB extraction cartridges (Waters). The desalted samples were then evaporated to dryness under vacuum. Click chemistry, capture and enrichment. Desalted tryptic digests were reconstituted in a solution containing 30% MeCN at pH 6. Click chemistry was performed by the addition of 0.8 mM either Azido-L-biotin or Azido-H-biotin (2.5 μL of a 40 mM stock), 8 mM sodium ascorbate (10 μL of a 100 mM stock), 1 mM TBTA (2.5 μL of a 50 mM stock, and 8 mM CuSO4 (10 μL of a 100 mM stock). Samples were allowed to react at room temperature for 2 h with in the dark rotation. The Azido-L-biotin and Azido-H-biotin sample were then mixed together immediately following click chemistry. The samples were cleaned by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography as previ-ously described(19) and then allowed to interact with pre-washed streptavidin sepharose for 2 h at room temperature. Streptavidin sepharose then was washed with 50 mM NaAc, 50 mM NaAc con-taining 2 M NaCl, and water twice each with votexing and/or rotation to remove non-specific bind-ing peptides, and resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The suspension of streptavidin sepharose was transferred to several glass tubes (VWR), irradiated with 365 nm UV light (Entela, Upland, CA) for 2 h at room temperature with stirring. The supernatant was collected, evaporated to dryness under vacuum, and stored at −20°C until analysis.

### Publication Abstract
4-Oxo-2-nonenal (ONE) derived from lipid peroxidation modifies nucleophiles and transduces redox signaling by its reactions with proteins. However, the molecular interactions between ONE and complex proteomes and their dynamics <i>in situ</i> remain largely unknown. Here we describe a quantitative chemoproteomic analysis of protein adduction by ONE in cells, in which the cellular target profile of ONE is mimicked by its alkynyl surrogate. The analyses reveal four types of ONE-derived modifications in cells, including ketoamide and Schiff-base adducts to lysine, Michael adducts to cysteine, and a novel pyrrole adduct to cysteine. ONE-derived adducts co-localize and exhibit crosstalk with many histone marks and redox sensitive sites. All four types of modifications derived from ONE can be reversed site-specifically in cells. Taken together, our study provides much-needed mechanistic insights into the cellular signaling and potential toxicities associated with this important lipid derived electrophile.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Click chemistry, 4-oxo-2-nonenal

### Affiliations
NCPSB, China
National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Jing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
NCPSB, China


