### Accession
PXD000396

### Title
Development and performance evaluation of an ultra-low flow nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry set-up

### Description
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is the most commonly used technique for the identification and characterization of proteins. The ionization and transmission efficiency of the electrospray process is a critical factor in LC-MS/MS, ultimately limiting the sensitivity of the approach. Despite the benefits associated with very low flow rates for the ionization efficiency, most nanoLC-MS/MS platforms are operated at relatively high flow rates, aiming for a compromise between sensitivity and practicality. The purpose of this work was to target the latter issue and to develop a robust and user-friendly nanoLC system operable at a flow rate of 20 nL/min, applicable for routine analysis in proteomics laboratories. Peptide separation was performed with an analytical column packed with 2 um porous chromatographic beads, a length of 25 cm and an inner diameter (i.d.) of 25 um. Samples were concentrated and desalted using a trapping column in a vented configuration. The nanoLC system was interfaced to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer using commercially available nanoelectrospray emitters. Practical usability, reproducibility and overall performance of the system were evaluated with a tryptic peptide mixture generated from HeLa cells. Using 100 ng of sample, we identified on average 3,721 protein groups based on 25,699 unique peptides when using linear gradients of 14 hrs. We demonstrate that the number of unique peptides identified with this system increases with decreasing flow rates and in a linear fashion with the chromatographic peak capacity of the separation. Probing the sensitivity of the complete set-up we analyzed only 10 ng of the sample, identifying an average number of 2,042 protein groups based on 11,424 peptides in an 8 hrs. gradient.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
LC-MS/MS is the most commonly used technique for the identification and characterization of proteins. The efficiency of the electrospray process is a critical factor in LC-MS/MS. Despite the benefits associated with very low flow rates for the ionization efficiency, most LC-MS/MS platforms are operated at relatively high flow rates. The purpose of this work was to develop a nano LC system operable at a flow rate of 20 nL/min, applicable for routine analysis in proteomics laboratories. Peptide separation was performed with an analytical column packed with 2 &#x3bc;m porous chromatographic beads, a length of 25 cm and an inner diameter (i.d.) of 25 &#x3bc;m. Practical usability, reproducibility, and overall performance of the system were evaluated with a tryptic peptide mixture generated from HeLa cells. Using 100 ng of sample, we identified on average 3721 protein groups based on 25,699 peptides. We demonstrate that the number of peptides identified with this system increases with decreasing flow rates. Probing the sensitivity of the set-up we analyzed only 10 ng of the sample, identifying an average number of 2042 protein groups based on 11 424 peptides. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000396 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000396).

### Keywords
Lc-ms hplc gradient human hela

### Affiliations
Mass spectrometry

### Submitter
thomas koecher

### Lab Head


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: not applicable
- disease: epithelial cervix carcinoma
- cell type: epithelial
- Fractionation method: NT=High-performance liquid chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000565
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive;AC=MS:1001911
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;AC=UNIMOD:4;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Deamidated;AC=UNIMOD:7;TA=N,Q;MT=Variable
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample

