### Accession
PXD005731

### Title
BHK-21 cell iTRAQ -  Proteome analysis of Duck Tembusu virus (DTMUV)-infected BHK-21 cells

### Description
Duck Tembusu virus (DTMUV) is a newly emerging pathogenic flavivirus that has caused huge economic losses to the duck industry in China since 2010. Moreover, DTMUV can also infect geese, chickens, house sparrows and replicate in in the brain, spleen, liver and kidneys of BALB/c mice, which poses public health concerns. So developing vaccines to combat DTMUV becomes urgent. Baby hamster kidney cell line (BHK-21) is usually employed to produce veterinary vaccine and DTMUV as well as other flaviviruses can be propagated in BHK-21 cells. However, information about mammalian host cell responses to DTMUV infection is limited. In this study, LC–MS/MS coupled to iTRAQ labeling was used to quantitatively identify differentially expressed cellular proteins in DTMUV-infected BHK-21 cells. We identified 192 differentially expressed cellular proteins including 11 upregulated proteins and 8 downregulated at 24 hpostinfection; 25 upregulated proteins and 151 downregulated at 48 h postinfection. Some of these proteins were involved in viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
The DTMUV- and mock-infected cell samples were collected with cell scrapers and resuspended in 500μL of lysis buffer (9 M urea, 4% CHAPS,1% IPG buffer, 1% DTT) containing 1 mM PMSF. Then the samples were ultrasonicated on ice for 3min (80W, on 0.8s and off 0.8s) with cellular debris removed by centrifugation (15000×g, 15 min, 4°C). The concentrations of the protein extracts were determined by the BCA method. We digested 100μg of each sample at 37°C for 12 h with sequencing-grade trypsin(50ng/ul). DTMUV-infected samples at 24 hpi were labeled with iTRAQ 113 (IT113), iTRAQ 114 (IT114), and mock-infected samples at 24 hpi were labeled with iTRAQ 115 (IT115), iTRAQ 116 (IT116), meanwhile, DTMUV-infected samples at 48 hpi were labeled with iTRAQ 117 (IT117), iTRAQ 118 (IT118), and mock-infected samples at 48 hpi were labeled with iTRAQ 119 (IT119), iTRAQ 121 (IT121). The labeled samples were then mixed and dried with a rotary vacuum concentrator.Dry sample was re-suspended with 100μL buffer A (10Mm FA, 20% ACN). The Strong cation exchange (SCX) was employed on the Agilent 1200 HPLC System (Agilent, USA). The HPLC column was from Agilent. The parameter was: Narrow-Bore 2.1×150 mm 5μm with 215nm and 280nm UV detection. Separation was performed at 0.3ml/min using a nonlinear binary gradient starting with buffer A and transitioning to buffer B(500mM FA, 20% ACN), with collection of the first segment from 1-5 min, each segment with 4.5 min interval for the 6-45 min, and the last segment from 46-50 min. Every segment was dried in a vacuum freezed dryer for LC-MSMS analysis.The segments above were dissolved in Nano-RPLC buffer A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN). The online Nano-RPLC was employed on the Eksigent nanoLC-UltraTM 2D System (AB SCIEX, USA). The samples were loaded on C18 nanoLC trap column(100µm×3cm, C18, 3µm, 150Å) and washed by Nano-RPLC Buffer A at 2μL/min for 10 min. An elution gradient of 5-35% ACN (0.1% FA) within 70 min gradient was used on an analytical ChromXP C18 column (75μm x 15cm, C18, 3μm 120 Å) with spray tip. Data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, USA) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, USA) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, USA). Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 PSI, nebulizer gas of 5 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150°C. For information dependant acquistion (IDA), survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and as many as 35 product ion scans were collected if they exceeded a threshold of 150 counts per second (counts/s) with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. The total cycle time was fixed to 2.5s. A rolling collision energy setting was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation (CID). Dynamic exclusion was set for ½ of peak width (18s). And the precursor was then refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with Protein Pilot Software v. 5.0 (AB SCIEX, USA) against Cricetulus griseus database using the Paragon algorithm. The experimental data from tandem mass spectrometry (MS) was used to match the theory data to obtain result of protein identification. Protein identification was performed with the search option: emphasis on biological modifications. An automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the ProteinPilot Software). The cutoff of global FDR for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Bioinformatics analysis was conducted using Quick GO, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA), and UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
Duck Tembusu virus (DTMUV) is a newly emerging pathogenic flavivirus that has caused huge economic losses to the duck industry in China since 2010. Moreover, the infection has spread rapidly, posing a potential public health concern. In this study, iTRAQ approach was first used to quantitatively identify differentially expressed cellular proteins in DTMUV-infected BHK-21 cells which are usually employed to produce veterinary vaccines for DTMUV, as well as other flaviviruses by serial passage. We identified 192 differentially expressed cellular proteins, including 11 upregulated and eight downregulated proteins at 24&#xa0;h postinfection (hpi), as well as 25 upregulated and 151 downregulated proteins at 48 hpi, of which TLR9, DDX3X, and DDX5 may play important roles in virus propagation. Further, DDX3X could inhibit DTMUV replication by modulating the IFN pathway via TBK1. In conclusion, our study is the first to analyze the protein profile of DTMUV-infected cells by quantitative proteomics. We believe that our findings provide valuable information in better understanding the host response to DTMUV infection. These findings are particularly important in the development of vaccine-based strategies.

### Keywords
Dtmuv infection, Bhk-21 cell, Itraq

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultual University
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Xin Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Meilin Jin
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, China


