### Accession
PXD033620

### Title
Comparative genomics and interactomics of polyadenylation factors for the prediction of new parasite targets: Entamoeba histolytica as a working model

### Description
E. histolytica trophozoites (3x105) harvested in exponential growth phase were transferred to 25 cm² cell culture flasks and grown at 37°C for 24 h. Then, parasites were exposed to irradiation in a 254 nm UV-transilluminator (BioDoc-It Imaging System (UVP)) for 30 min at 4°C (Valdés et al., 2014) and cytoplasmic (CE) and nuclear (NE) extracts were obtained using the NE-PER Kit (Thermo Scientific™) according to manufacturer instructions. Immunoprecipitation (IP) assays were performed using Dynabeads protein A/G (Invitrogen) following manufacturer recommendations. Briefly, Dynabead magnetic beads (25 µl) were coupled with 10 µg of anti-HsCFIm25 polyclonal antibody (GeneTex, GTX115535) and anti-EhCFIm25 polyclonal antibody, previously produced and validated by our group (Pezet-Valdez et al., 2013) for 30 min at room temperature. Then, beads-antibody complex was incubated with NE (100 µg) for 2 h at 37°C followed by three washes with wash buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5; 0.5M NaCl and 0.05% Tween 20). Finally, magnetic bead- antibodies-proteins complex was resuspended in elution buffer (0.1 M glycine, pH 2.0) for 2 minutes at room temperature to dissociate the complex; the tube was placed on the magnet and the supernatant containing eluted antibody and bound proteins was collected.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins corresponding to eight independent experiments for each antibody were pooled (150 µg) and delivered to the Laboratorio Nacional de Servicios Experimentales (LaNSE), CINVESTAV (Mexico), for protein identification by mass spectrometry analysis LC-ESI-HDMSE as described (Silva et al., 2006; Félix-Contreras et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Raw files containing MS and MS/MS spectra were quantified by PROTEINLYNX GLOBAL SERVER (PLGS) v3.0.3 software against E. histolytica (Strain: ATCC 30459/ HM-1:IMSS, downloaded from UniProt, 7959 protein sequences, 3 January 2022) concatenated with reverse database and the protein identification was considered significant with the probability score of .95 and .99%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPI) play a key role in predicting the function of a target protein and drug ability to affect an entire biological system. Prediction of PPI networks greatly contributes to determine a target protein and signal pathways related to its function. Polyadenylation of mRNA 3'-end is essential for gene expression regulation and several polyadenylation factors have been shown as valuable targets for controlling protozoan parasites that affect human health. Here, by using a computational strategy based on sequence-based prediction approaches, phylogenetic analyses, and computational prediction of PPI networks, we compared interactomes of polyadenylation factors in relevant protozoan parasites and the human host, to identify key proteins and define potential targets for pathogen control. Then, we used Entamoeba histolytica as a working model to validate our computational results. RT-qPCR assays confirmed the coordinated modulation of connected proteins in the PPI network and evidenced that silencing of the bottleneck protein EhCFIm25 affects the expression of interacting proteins. In addition, molecular dynamics simulations and docking approaches allowed to characterize the relationships between EhCFIm25 and Ehnopp34, two connected bottleneck proteins. Interestingly, the experimental identification of EhCFIm25 interactome confirmed the close relationships among proteins involved in gene expression regulation and evidenced new links with moonlight proteins in E. histolytica, suggesting a connection between RNA biology and metabolism as described in other organisms. Altogether, our results strengthened the relevance of comparative genomics and interactomics of polyadenylation factors for the prediction of new targets for the control of these human pathogens.

### Keywords
Mrna processing; protein-protein interactions; entamoeba histolytica

### Affiliations
Instituto Politécnico Nacional

### Submitter
Rodolfo G Avila-Bonilla

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence A. Marchat
Instituto Politécnico Nacional


