### Accession
PXD030397

### Title
Changes of ubiquitylated proteins in atrial fibrillation associated with heart valve disease: proteomics in human in left appendage tissue

### Description
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common persistent arrhythmia that affect 1–2% of the general population. People with AF display an array of complications cardiogenic stroke and systemic embolism caused by hemodynamic instability and blood hypercoagulability in clinical practice. However, it’s still unclear whether and how ubiquitylated proteins react to AF in the left atrial appendage of patients with AF and valvular heart disease. This theory focuses on the changes of ubiquitylated proteins in atrial fibrillation associated with heart valve disease. We firstly widely analysis the proteins ubiquitination in patients with atrial fibrillation.

### Sample Protocol
Eighteen patients who underwent cardiac valvular surgery were prospectively enrolled, including nine patients with permanent AF and nine patients with sinus rhythm (SR), at the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. To analyze the ubiquitination characteristics, we mixed every three tissues in the same group as one sample. Then, we had three mixed samples in one group.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and then separated using NanoElute Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC). Solvent A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; solvent B was an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient consisted of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B over 43 min, 22% to 30% over 13 min, and 30% to 80% in 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. The peptides were separated by UPLC, injected into the NSI source for ionization and then analyzed by a tims-TOF Pro mass spectrometer. The electrospray voltage was set at 1.6 kV, and the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by TOF. The m/z scan range of the secondary mass spectrum was set to 100-1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode applied was parallel accumulation and serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. After first-level mass spectra were collected, the second-level spectra with precursor ion charges in the range of 0-5 were collected in PASEF mode 10 times, and the dynamic rejection time applied to the tandem mass spectrum scan was 24 seconds to avoid repeated scans of the precursor ions. The secondary mass spectrum data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0). Search parameter settings: The database was Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20191115 (20380 sequences), a reverse database was applied to calculate the false-positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library was applied to eliminate the impact of contaminating proteins on the identification results; the cleavage enzyme was set to Trypsin/P, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages; the minimum peptide length of amino acid residues applied was 7; the maximum number of peptide modifications applied was 5; the mass error tolerance applied for the primary precursor ion was 20 ppm both in First search and Main search, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ion was 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification, and the variable modifications were the oxidation of methionine, the acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, and the ubiquitination of lysine. The FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was adjusted to < 1%. The UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) was applied for Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome. GO covers three domains: cellular component, molecular function, and biological process. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway annotation was derived from the KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). First, KAAS, the KEGG online service tool, was applied to annotate the proteins, and then the KEGG mapper was applied to match the annotated proteins to the corresponding pathways in the database. The subcellular localization prediction soft Wolfpsort (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/) was applied to predict subcellular localization. MoMo software (motif-x algorithm) was used to analyze the motif characteristics of the modified sites. Protein–protein interaction enrichment analysis was derived from searching all differentially expressed modified protein database accessions or sequences against the STRING database version 11.0, and we fetched all interactions that had confidence scores ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). A corrected P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant when performing the bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Ppi networks, Atrial fibrillation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
Xiangya

### Submitter
Chenkai Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Shenghua Zhou
Department of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.


