### Accession
PXD006386

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Global Proteome in human cell line

### Description
In total, 5,829 protein groups were identified, among which 4,470 proteins were quantified. The fold-change cutoff was set when proteins with quantitative ratios above 1.3 or below 0.77 are deemed significant. Among the quantified proteins, 12 proteins are up-regulated and 116 proteins are down-regulated in group H12vsCON, 19 proteins are up-regulated and 122 proteins are down-regulated in group H24vsCON, 23 proteins are up-regulated and 31 proteins are down-regulated in group H24vsH12.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot_human database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected in Mascot. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells rewire their metabolism to satisfy the demands of uncontrolled proliferation and survival. The reprogramming of lipid metabolism supports tumor growth, metastasis, and therapy-resistance. Therefore, targeting lipid metabolic reprogramming is a potential cancer treatment strategy. We recently isolated the novel natural triterpene GL22 from Ganoderma leucocontextum, a traditional Chinese medicine. Here, we show that GL22 significantly inhibits the growth of the liver cancer cell line Huh7.5 in vitro and of Huh7.5-derived tumor xenografts in vivo. We further find that GL22 induces mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death in Huh7.5 cells, in part due to fatty acid immobilization and loss of the mitochondrial lipid cardiolipin, which has vital structural and metabolic functions. Importantly, we demonstrate that GL22 treatment decreases the expression of fatty acid-binding proteins (FABPs), which likely underlies the loss of cardiolipin, mitochondrial dysfunction, and cell death. The over-expressions of FABPs prevented the GL22-induced cell death, loss of cardiolipin, decrease of ATP production, and reduction of oxygen consumption rate in Huh7.5 cells. Our results support targeting lipid metabolism via manipulating FABPs as a cancer treatment strategy, and promote Chinese medicine as an important source of novel anticancer drugs.

### Keywords
Human, Q-exactive, Proteome

### Affiliations
PTM-Biolabs
ptm-biolab

### Submitter
zhou lianqi

### Lab Head
Dr Lianqi Zhou
PTM-Biolabs


