### Accession
PXD008655

### Title
Identification of salivary biomarkers for oral cancer with quantitative proteomics and two-phase verifying approaches

### Description
Oral cavity cancer is one of the most common cancer worldwide and oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) accounts for up to 90 percent of oral cancers. In Taiwan, OSCC is the fifth most common malignancy of male and causes more than 250 deaths per year. The poor outcome of OSCC patients is principally ascribed to the fact that this disease is often advanced at the time of diagnosis, suggesting that early detection and prevention of OSCC are urgently needed to reduce the cancer burden. Analysis of cancer-related body fluids is one of promising approaches to identify cancer-related molecules and biomarker candidates. To identify salivary biomarkers of OSCC, salivary samples of OSCC patients, individuals with oral potentially malignant disorders (OPMD), and healthy volunteers were collected. With isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, 1838 proteins were identified. The levels of 102 proteins are found to be elevated in the saliva samples of OSCC patients compared to that of OPMD and healthy groups. To improve the feasibility of biomarkers, we used a two-phase verification to measure these candidates. Among them, salivary levels of AHSG, CFH, FGA, and SERPINA1 were determined to be significantly higher in the OSCC patients than in the healthy or in the OPMD group with both of MRM-MS and ELISA. Furthermore, the levels of these proteins were highly related to tumor size, lymph-node metastasis, and cancer stages. The results of this study not only provides a powerful strategy for verification of biomarker candidates, but also suggested that AHSG, CFH, FGA, and SERPINA1 could act as salivary biomarkers for OSCC detection.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentrations of saliva samples were measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). For tryptic digestion of proteins, 20 μg protein samples in 4 M urea containing 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate were reduced with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 90 min at 37°C, and then alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min at room temperature. The proteins were then desalted using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter devices (Millipore) and digested with modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. The labeling of iTRAQ reagent (AB Sciex, Forster City, CA, USA) was performed in compliance with the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, each tube of iTRAQ reporters was reconstituted with 70 μL ethanol. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 25 μL iTRAQ dissolution buffer. The peptides from the healthy control, OPMD, and OSCC groups were labeled with iTRAQ 115, 116, and 117 tags, respectively. The peptide mixture of the healthy control, OPMD, and OSCC groups was labeled with iTRAQ 114 tag. After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, the four labeled samples were pooled, frozen, and lyophilized to dryness using a Proteomic CentriVap Concentrator System (Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA).

### Data Protocol
The protein database search was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1. 4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the reporter ions quantifier node for the iTRAQ data analysis. The MS/MS spectra were searched using the Mascot algorithm (version 2. 2. 04, Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) against the Swiss-Prot human sequence database (released Mar 16, 2016, selected for Homo sapiens, 20199 entries) of the European Bioinformatics Institute. For peptide identification, one missing tryptic cleavage was allowed. Mass tolerances of 10 ppm, 0. 5 Da, and 0. 05 Da were permitted for intact peptide masses, CID fragment ions, and HCD fragment ions, respectively. Oxidized methionine (+16 Da) was considered as a potential variable modification, and iTRAQ (N terminal, +144 Da), iTRAQ (K, +144 Da), and methyl methanethiosulfonate (C, +46 Da) were considered as the fixed modifications. The search results (peptide-spectrum match) were filtered using a high confidence of peptide identification in Proteome Discoverer to ensure that the overall false discovery rate was smaller than 0. 01. The identifications of epithelial keratins and proteins with single peptide hits were excluded. Each quantified protein contained at least two quantifiable spectra. The cutoff value for determining whether a protein is considered dysregulated was selected according to the analysis using comparison of protein levels between the same saliva protein samples.

### Publication Abstract
Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide. In Taiwan, OSCC is the fifth leading cause of cancer-related mortality and leads to 2800 deaths per year. The poor outcome of OSCC patients is principally ascribed to the fact that this disease is often advanced at the time of diagnosis, suggesting that early detection of OSCC is urgently needed. Analysis of cancer-related body fluids is one promising approach to identify biomarker candidates of cancers. To identify OSCC biomarkers, salivary proteomes of OSCC patients, individuals with oral potentially malignant disorders (OPMDs), and healthy volunteers were comparatively profiled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry (MS). The salivary levels of 67 and 18 proteins in the OSCC group are elevated and decreased compared with that in the noncancerous group (OPMD and healthy groups), respectively. The candidate biomarkers were further selected using the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)-MS and validated with the immunoassays. More importantly, the higher salivary level of three proteins, complement factor H (CFH), fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA), and alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1) was correlated with advanced stages of OSCC. Our results indicate that analysis of salivary proteome is a feasible strategy for biomarker discovery, and the three proteins are potential salivary markers for OSCC diagnosis.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Oral cancer, Mrm-ms, Salivary biomarker, Elisa

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chih-Ching Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Chih-Ching Wu
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan


