### Accession
PXD032194

### Title
ATM interactome and analysis of its substrates

### Description
Study of ATM interactome and its substrates following pull-down with anti -pSQ/TQ antibody

### Sample Protocol
Label Free quantitative analysis, in-gel protein digestion

### Data Protocol
Label Free data analysis by MaxQuant and Perseus and pathway enriched analysis by Enrichr software

### Publication Abstract
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) DNA damage response (DDR) kinases contain elastic domains. ATM also responds to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and ATR to nuclear mechanical stress. Mre11 mediates ATM activation following DNA damage; ATM mutations cause ataxia telangiectasia (A-T). Here, using in&#xa0;vivo imaging, electron microscopy, proteomic, and mechano-biology approaches, we study how ATM responds to mechanical stress. We report that cytoskeleton and ROS, but not Mre11, mediate ATM activation following cell deformation. ATM deficiency causes hyper-stiffness, stress fiber accumulation, Yes-associated protein (YAP) nuclear enrichment, plasma and nuclear membrane alterations during interstitial migration, and H3 hyper-methylation. ATM locates to the actin cytoskeleton and, following cytoskeleton stress, promotes phosphorylation of key cytoskeleton and chromatin regulators. Our data contribute to explain some clinical features of patients with A-T and pinpoint the existence of an integrated mechano-response in which ATM and ATR have distinct roles unrelated to their canonical DDR functions.

### Keywords
Nlc-ms-ms, Interactome, Phosphorylated proteins

### Affiliations
Cogentech SRL Benefit Corporation 
IFOM

### Submitter
angela cattaneo

### Lab Head
Dr angela bachi
IFOM


