### Accession
PXD002942

### Title
A proteomic analysis of the surface attachment in Pseudomonas aeruginosa early as 20 minutes incubation.

### Description
The goal of the project is the study of molecular events occurring during the attachment phase, first step of the biofilms formation. Thanks to an original growth system developed in our laboratory, we were able to compare, for the first time, the protein content of P. aeruginosa immobilized for 20 minutes only to that of their planktonic counterparts.

### Sample Protocol
Sessile and planktonic bacteria were lysed directly by adding 1V of lysis solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 65 mM CHAPS, 20 mM DTT, 1 M NaCl) to 1V of bacterial sample. The mix was frozen (-80°C, 30 min) and thawed (34°C, 20 min). The extracted proteins were concentrated by 15% (v/v) TCA precipitation followed by 2 acetone washings. Proteins were suspended in 50 µL of the following solution: 7 M urea, 70 mM SDS, 20 mM DTT. Before the label free analysis, protein samples were decomplexified on SDS-PAGE (10%). The 6 biological samples (SC (Sessile cells) vs FT (unattached cells)) were loaded on the gel with a protein quantity estimated at 30 µg per sample. After colloidal blue staining, each lane was divided into 4 parts of equal length and each part was cut in 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. The gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µL in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% ACN), rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The gel pieces were then incubated for 15 min in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% ACN at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel pieces for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. The pooled supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and were resuspended in 40 µL of water acidified with 0.1% HCOOH. Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 15-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B in 108 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.9-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.2 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-2000) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 120 ms and a resolution of R = 35000. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: neither sheath nor auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 25% and an isolation width of 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the protein database from Pseudomonas Genome Database website. Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionine (+16 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+1 Da), propionamide (+71 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57 Da) were considered as variable modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). Data processing included the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across the samples, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Normalization on ratio median, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) ANOVA test at peptide level and filtering for features p <0.05, (vii) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides), (viii) ANOVA test at protein level and filtering for features p <0.05. Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilms are present in all environments and often result in negative effects due to properties of the biofilm lifestyle and especially antibiotics resistance. Biofilms are associated with chronic infections. Controlling bacterial attachment, the first step of biofilm formation, is crucial for fighting against biofilm and subsequently preventing the persistence of infection. Thus deciphering the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in attachment could allow discovering molecular targets from it would be possible to develop inhibitors against bacterial colonization and potentiate antibiotherapy. To identify the key components and pathways that aid the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa in attachment we performed for the first time a proteomic analysis as early as after 20 minutes of incubation using glass wool fibers as a surface. We compared the protein contents of the attached and unattached bacteria. Using mass spectrometry, 3043 proteins were identified. Our results showed that, as of 20 minutes of incubation, using stringent quantification criteria 616 proteins presented a modification of their abundance in the attached cells compared to their unattached counterparts. The attached cells presented an overall reduced gene expression and characteristics of slow-growing cells. The over-accumulation of outer membrane proteins, periplasmic folding proteins and O-antigen chain length regulators was also observed, indicating a profound modification of the cell envelope. Consistently the sigma factor AlgU required for cell envelope homeostasis was highly over-accumulated in attached cells. In addition our data suggested a role of alarmone (p)ppGpp and polyphosphate during the early attachment phase. Furthermore, almost 150 proteins of unknown function were differentially accumulated in the attached cells. Our proteomic analysis revealed the existence of distinctive biological features in attached cells as early as 20 minutes of incubation. Analysis of some mutants demonstrated the interest of this proteomic approach in identifying genes involved in the early phase of adhesion to a surface.

### Keywords
Bacterial attachment, Biofilm, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteome, Glass wool

### Affiliations
University of Bordeaux, Center of Functionnal Genomics, Proteome Platform
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
University of Bordeaux, Center of Functionnal Genomics, Proteome Platform


