### Accession
PXD014370

### Title
CD45+ vs CD45- RCC proteome characterization

### Description
Exploration of proteome differences between CD45+ and CD45- cell types in renal cell carcinoma tumors and normal adjacent tissue patient samples.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were sorted via flow cytometry. Cell populations were then subjected to lysis and trpytic digestion in 8M urea buffer and homoegenized using Brandon Sonifier 250 probe sonicator. Lysates were subjected to reduction with 10 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Tryptic digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC.  Peptides were recovered, lyophilized and subjected to cleanup using C-18 SepPak columns and dried down. 1 ug of peptide was separated using Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system on an in-house packed 20 cm x 75 um diameter C18 column (1.9 um Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads; Picofrit 10 um opening). The column was heated to 50°C using a column heater. The flow rate was 0.300 ul/min with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile (B). The peptides were separated with a 6–30% B gradient in 84 mins and analyzed using the Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Parameters were as followed MS1: resolution – 60,000, mass range – 350 to 1800 m/z, RF Lens – 30%, AGC Target 4.0e5, Max IT – 50 ms, charge state include - 2-6, dynamic exclusion – 45 s, top 20 ions selected for MS2; MS2: resolution – 50,000, high-energy collision dissociation activation energy (HCD) – 34, isolation width (m/z) – 0.7, AGC Target – 2.0e5, Max IT – 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
Global peptide .RAW files were searched against UniprotKB Swiss-Prot human protein database (version June 2017; 20,192 reviewed sequences) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and most default search parameter settings: 20 ppm peptide and fragment mass tolerance, variable modification: methionine +15.99492, fixed modification: cysteine +57.02510, and semi-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages, minimum ratio count of one peptide for LFQ protein quantitation, and 1% FDR at the protein level

### Publication Abstract
Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers worldwide with research efforts dramatically improving understanding of the biology of the disease. To investigate the role of the immune system in treatment-na&#xef;ve clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC), we interrogated the immune infiltrate in patient-matched ccRCC tumor samples, benign normal adjacent tissue (NAT) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs isolated from whole blood, focusing our attention on the myeloid cell infiltrate. Using flow cytometric, MS, and ExCYT analysis, we discovered unique myeloid populations in PBMCs across patient samples. Furthermore, normal adjacent tissues and ccRCC tissues contained numerous myeloid populations with a unique signature for both tissues. Enrichment of the immune cell (CD45<sup>+</sup>) fraction and subsequent gene expression analysis revealed a number of myeloid-related genes that were differentially expressed. These data provide evidence, for the first time, of an immunosuppressive and pro-tumorigenic role of myeloid cells in early, clinically localized ccRCC. The identification of a number of immune proteins for therapeutic targeting provides a rationale for investigation into the potential efficacy of earlier intervention with single-agent or combination immunotherapy for ccRCC.

### Keywords
Renal cell carcinoma, Cd45+, Normal adjacent tissue

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine's Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD, USA
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Jelani Zarif
Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine's Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD, USA


