### Accession
PXD022694

### Title
A genetic platform to delineate tissue-specific in vivo secretion

### Description
At present, it remains difficult to deconvolute serum in order to identify the cell or tissue origin of a given circulating protein. Here, by exploiting the properties of proximity biotinylation, we describe a mouse model that enables the elucidation of the in vivo tissue-specific secretome. As an example, we demonstrate how we can readily identify in vivo endothelial-specific secretion, as well as how this model allows for the characterization of muscle-derived serum proteins that either increase or decrease with exercise. This genetic platform should therefore be of wide utility in understanding normal and disease physiology and for the rational design of tissue-specific disease biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture medium from ER-BioIDHA lentivirus infected cells or mouse serum was collected and incubated with Streptavidin beads overnight. Beads were collected using a magnetic stand and the biotinylated proteins were collected in SDS loading buffer and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the in vitro mass spectroscopy data.  For the in vivo analysis of the Secretome mice, we employed PLS (Partial Least Squares) regression, a method for relating two blocks of variables, X (proteins) and Y (samples), to each other via a linear multivariate model.

### Publication Abstract
At present, it remains difficult to deconvolute serum in order to identify the cell or tissue origin of a given circulating protein. Here, by exploiting the properties of proximity biotinylation, we describe a mouse model that enables the elucidation of the in vivo tissue-specific secretome. As an example, we demonstrate how we can readily identify in vivo endothelial-specific secretion as well as how this model allows for the characterization of muscle-derived serum proteins that either increase or decrease with exercise. This genetic platform should, therefore, be of wide utility in understanding normal and disease physiology and for the rational design of tissue-specific disease biomarkers.

### Keywords
Biotinylation, Serum, Er-bioidha, Secretome, Muscle, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Aging Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine/UPMC
National Heart Lung and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Mehdi Pirooznia

### Lab Head
Dr Toren Finkel
Aging Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine/UPMC


