### Accession
PXD022741

### Title
Categorization of Phosphorylation Site Behavior During the Diauxic Shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Protein phosphorylation has long been recognized as an essential regulator of protein activity, structure, complex formation, and sub-cellular localization among other cellular mechanisms. However, interpretation of the changes in protein phosphorylation is difficult. To address this difficulty, we measured protein and phosphorylation site changes across 11 points of a time course and developed a method for categorizing phosphorylation site behavior relative to protein level changes using the diauxic shift in yeast as a model and TMT11 sample multiplexing. We classified quantified proteins into behavioral categories that reflected differences in kinase activity, protein complex structure, and growth and metabolic pathway regulation across different phases of the diauxic shift. These data also provide a valuable resource for the study of fermentative versus respiratory growth and set a new benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics for Diauxic Shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast Culture  Yeast strain BY4742 was cultured in Synthetic Complete media supplemented with 20 g/L glucose and grown at 30°C shaking at 250 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifuging samples at 4000g for 5 min, washed with water, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. OD was measured using a Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000.   Phosphoproteomic Workflow  Frozen cell pellets were processed using the streamlined TMT labelling protocol (17). Samples were lysed in 8M urea in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease (Pierce A32953) and phosphatase (Pierce A32957) inhibitors, mixed with yeast disruption beads (BioSpec 11079105z), and shaken on a bead beater (BioSpec) for 60s at 4°C three times with 60s rest in between. Lysates were cleared by centrifuging at 16,000g for 10 min in a 4°C centrifuge. Protein levels were determined by BCA assay. Samples were then reduced with 5mM TCEP, alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5mM DTT, followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation of 200ug protein (11-plex). Pellets were reconstituted in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5, digested overnight with LysC (Wako 129-02541) at 1:100 while shaking at room temperature, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce 90305) at 1:100 while shaking at 37°C. Anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell AS017-0100) was added to ~30%, followed by labelling with TMT11 (Thermo A37727) reagent. 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure labeling efficiency was >97% and that the samples are mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labelled peptide samples were de-salted using a 200mg Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054925), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Samples were enriched using the Pierce High Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (A32992) according to manufacturer’s specifications, except that elutions were carried out into tubes containing 100μL 10% formic acid before rotary evaporation. The flow-through and elution fractions were dried in a rotary evaporator, followed by desalting on a 200mg SepPak cartridge (flow-through, Waters WAT054925), or stage-tip (enriched). The flow-through fraction was then reconstituted in 5% ACN 10mM ammonium bicarbonate for basic reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent 300extend-C18 column (3.5μm, 4.6x250mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13% to 42% of Buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) four alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Assuming adjacent fractions contain overlapping peaks, only 12 non-adjacent samples were analyzed by the mass spectrometer. The pooling scheme has been illustrated previously (17, 18). Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis.   Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (100 μm i.d., Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å, packed in-house) using a 90 min gradient (from 5% -30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. Each analysis used an SPS-MS3-based TMT method (19, 20), which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2-based quantification (21).  MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1400 m/z). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 34, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, and isolation window of 0.7 Da using a Top10 method. MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, NCE of 45%, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and AGC of 1.5e5.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a COMET-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt Yeast database (downloaded July 2020), using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (11-plex: +229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (+.984016 Da), and phosphorylation with neutral loss (+79.9663 Da, -97.9769 Da) were set as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labelling channels (column normalized). Lastly, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation has long been recognized as an essential regulator of protein activity, structure, complex formation, and subcellular localization among other cellular mechanisms. However, interpretation of the changes in protein phosphorylation is difficult. To address this difficulty, we measured protein and phosphorylation site changes across 11 points of a time course and developed a method for categorizing phosphorylation site behavior relative to protein level changes using the diauxic shift in yeast as a model and TMT11 sample multiplexing. We classified quantified proteins into behavioral categories that reflected differences in kinase activity, protein complex structure, and growth and metabolic pathway regulation across different phases of the diauxic shift. These data also provide a valuable resource for the study of fermentative versus respiratory growth and set a new benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics for the diauxic shift in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022741.

### Keywords
Diauxic shift, Yeast, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


