### Accession
PXD024457

### Title
Allosteric transcription stimulation by super elongation complex

### Description
The super elongation complex (SEC) contains the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) and a subcomplex, ELL2-EAF1, which stimulates transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Here we report the cryo-EM structure of ELL2-EAF1 bound to a Pol II elongation complex at 2.8 Å resolution. The ELL2-EAF1 dimerization module directly binds the Pol II lobe, explaining how SEC delivers P-TEFb to Pol II. The same site on the lobe also binds the initiation factor TFIIF, consistent with SEC binding only after the transition from transcription initiation to elongation. Structure-guided functional analysis shows that elongation stimulation requires the dimerization module and an ELL2 protein linker that tethers this module to the Pol II protrusion. Our results show that SEC stimulates elongation allosterically and indicate that this stimulation involves stabilization of a further closed conformation of the Pol II active center cleft.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was subjected to chemical cross-linking using 2 mM BS3 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for 1 hour on ice, quenched with 100 mM Tris 7.5 and 20 mM, and was adjusted to 8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM DTT followed by an incubation for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark and the reaction was quenched by 10 mM DTT for 5 min at 37 °C. The reaction volume was adjusted to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Nucleic acids fragments within the SEC-EC complex were digested for 30 min at 37 °C by in the presence of 1 mM MgCl2 in the reaction and 500 U of universal nuclease. Trypsin digest was performed overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified with 100% formic acid (FA), desalted on MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer’s instructions and vacuum-dried. Dried peptides were dissolved in 50 µl 30% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and peptide size exclusion (pSEC, Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column on an ÄKTAmicro system, GE Healthcare) was performed to enrich for crosslinked peptides at a flow rate of 50 µl min−1. Fractions of 50 µl were collected. The first 15 fractions containing cross-linked peptides were vacuum-dried and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA (v/v) for analysis by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (LC–MS/MS). Samples were separated applying the following 118 min gradient: mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (v/v), mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile/0.08% formic acid (v/v). The gradient started at 5% B, increasing to 10% B within 3 min, followed by 10–48% B within 92 min, 48-65% within 10.9 min, then increasing B to 90% within 0.6 min and keeping B constant at 90% for 3.5 min. After each gradient the column was again equilibrated to 5% B for 6.5 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nl min−1. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap covering a mass range of 350–1600 m/z. Injection time was set to 60 ms and automatic gain control target to 3 × 106. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 sec. Only precursors with a charge state of 3–8 were included. MS2 spectra were recorded with a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap, injection time was set to 300 ms, automatic gain control target to 2 × 105 and the isolation window to 1.4 m/z. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation at 30%.

### Data Protocol
For identification of crosslinked peptides, raw files were analyzed by pLink (v. 2.3.9), using BS3 as cross-linker and trypsin/P as digestion enzyme with maximal three missed cleavage sites. The search was conducted against a customized protein database containing all proteins within the complex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as a variable modification. Searches were conducted in combinatorial mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 (separate mode). Spectra of both technical duplicates were combined and evaluated manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pol ii protrusion, Super elongation complex, Transcription, Eaf1, Rna polymerase ii, Tfiif, Ell2, Stimulation of transcription elongation, P-tefb

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry (Göttingen) and University Medical Center, Bioanalytics - Institute for Clinical Chemistry (Göttingen)
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Momchil Ninov

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany


