### Accession
PXD008784

### Title
SM/J mice display spontaneous early onset disc degeneration link to ion transport system  and matrisome changes

### Description
To fully apprehend the complex mechanisms responsible for intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration, one needs to gain a deeper understanding of what characterizes a good and bad intervertebral disc. Using a quantitative proteomic approach, we compared methodically the differences existing between a mouse model known as good healer LG/J to another mouse model characterize as bad healer SM/J. A total of 5245 proteins were identified. By assessing the overlap of the NP LG/J and SM/J proteomic signature with a list of over 1000 matrisomal proteins generated by Naba and co-workers (33), we provide a first comprehensive comparison of NP IVD matrix composition in a good and bad condition and identify potential changes that are fundamental for maintenance of a healthy disc.

### Sample Protocol
Dissection: 4 weeks LG/J and SMJ mice were sacrificed by intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbitone (100mg kg-1). The coccygeal segments of their spines were harvested. NP structures were isolated from each collected IVD and proteins were extracted using containing guanidine hydrochloride accordingly to Onnerfjord et al, 2012 before being analyzed by LC-MS/MS. At least 3 biological replicates were harvested for each condition tested. Briefly, samples were pulverized and resuspended into 15 v/w of chaotropic buffer (4M GdnHCl, 50 mM NaAc, 100 mM 6-aminocaproic acid, 5 mM benzamidine, 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide, pH 5.8) for 48 h on an orbital shaker at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 13,200 g, 4 °C for 30 min. Pellets were resuspended into chaotropic buffer for another 24hrs prior to centrifugation. Soluble fractions were pooled reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 1 h, alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 1hr, followed by ethanol precipitation. Protein estimation was done using BCA assay prior to trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from raw mass spectrometric files using MaxQuant software version (v.1.5.3.30). Peak lists were generated for most intense MS peaks in a large mass window (10-30 Da) by MaxQuant prior to the database search. Database search was performed in Andromeda search engine against Mouse Uniprot database (16,935 entries, Nov 2017) supplemented with sequences of contaminant proteins. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to tolerance of 6 ppm for the parental peptide and 20 ppm for fragmentation spectra and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Oxidation of methionine, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Minimal required peptide length was specified at 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins detected by at least 2 LFQ ion counts for each peptides in one of the samples with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% were accepted. For data analysis we undertook a comparison of LG/J and SM/J NP proteomes at 4weeks. Proteins were quantified by normalized summed peptide intensities computed in MaxQuant with the label free quantification (LFQ) option switched on. The normalized mass spectrometric intensities. (LFQ intensities) were compared between LG/J and SM/J using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) t test in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD) causes back pain and sciatica, affecting quality of life and resulting in high economic/social burden. The etiology of IDD is not well understood. Along with aging and environmental factors, genetic factors also influence the onset, progression and severity of IDD. Genetic studies of risk factors for IDD using human cohorts are limited by small sample size and low statistical power. Animal models amenable to genetic and functional studies of IDD provide desirable alternatives. Despite differences in size and cellular content as compared to human intervertebral discs (IVDs), the mouse is a powerful model for genetics and assessment of cellular changes relevant to human biology. Here, we provide evidence for early onset disc degeneration in SM/J relative to LG/J mice with poor and good tissue healing capacity respectively. In the first few months of life, LG/J mice maintain a relatively constant pool of notochordal-like cells in the nucleus pulposus (NP) of the IVD. In contrast, chondrogenic events are observed in SM/J mice beginning as early as one-week-old, with progressive fibrotic changes. Further, the extracellular matrix changes in the NP are consistent with IVD degeneration. Leveraging on the genomic data of two parental and two recombinant inbred lines, we assessed the genetic contribution to the NP changes and identified processes linked to the regulation of ion transport systems. Significantly, "transport" system is also in the top three gene ontology (GO) terms from a comparative proteomic analysis of the mouse NP. These findings support the potential of the SM/J, LG/J and their recombinant inbred lines for future genetic and biological analysis in mice and validation of candidate genes and biological relevance in human cohort studies. The proteomic data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [1] partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008784.

### Keywords
Mouse intervertebral disc, Proteomic, Nucleus pulposus, Lg/j and sm/j.

### Affiliations
HKU Biochemistry
S Y and H Y Cheng Professor in Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine Assistant Dean (Research postgraduate studies), Faculty of Medicine Professor (School of Biomedical Sciences), Faculty of Medicine Deputy Director (Education and Development of Research Integrity), HKU

### Submitter
MATEUSZ KUDELKO

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Danny Chan
S Y and H Y Cheng Professor in Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine Assistant Dean (Research postgraduate studies), Faculty of Medicine Professor (School of Biomedical Sciences), Faculty of Medicine Deputy Director (Education and Development of Research Integrity), HKU


