### Accession
PXD002373

### Title
Proteome and carbon flux analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa  clinical isolates from different infection sites

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is known as opportunistic pathogen frequently isolated from different infection sites such as burned wounds, lung and urinary tract. To shed light on the expression rates of cytoplasmic P. aeruginosa proteins, commonly expressed by eleven different clinical isolates, absolute protein quantities were determined using P. aeruginosa PAO1 as a reference strain and employing a highly precise gel-free and data-independent LC-IMSE approach. Moreover, the metabolic diversity of these isolates has been investigated by 13C-metabolic flux analyses. 903 proteins were reproducibly identified and absolutely quantified for P. aeruginosa PAO1, 363 of which were also identified and relatively quantified in all of the tested clinical isolates. The vast majority of these proteins is expressed in constant amounts in all strains and exhibits a relatively low relative standard deviation. In contrast, the expression rates of 42 proteins were highly variable between the isolates. Notably, the outer membrane protein OprH and the response regulator PhoP were strongly expressed in isolates from burned wounds when compared to isolates from lung or urinary tract. Moreover, proteins involved in the uptake of iron and amino acids (i.e. HitA, BfrB, PA5217, BraC, PA5153) were found to be more abundant in urinary tract isolates compared to lung isolates. The fluxome data revealed a conserved glycolysis, and a niche-specific divergence in fluxes through the glyoxylate shunt and the TCA cycle among the isolates. The integrated analysis of proteome and fluxome did not indicate straightforward correlation between the amount of proteins and their flux, but rather points to additional layers of regulation that mediate metabolic adaption of P. aeruginosa to different host environments.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested in the mid-exponential growth phase by centrifugation (3 min, 16,000× g, 4°C, Biofuge Fresco, Heraeus, Germany), resuspended in 700 µl 50 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and transferred in a 2 mL screw cap micro tube containing 500 µL glass beads with 0.1 mm diameter.  Subsequently, cells were lysed mechanically using the Precellys 24 homogenizator (PeqLab, Erlangen, Germany; 3 × 30 s at 6,800 rpm). Cell debris and glass beads were removed by centrifugation (3x 20 min at 22.000xg). Protein concentration of extracts was determined using a ninhydrin-based assay. Protein extracts (100 µg) were reduced, alkylated and trypsin-digested (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) as previously described. Prior to LC/MSE analysis, samples were desalted using C18 - Stage Tips (Thermo scientific, Waltham, MA) and a complete tryptic digest of alcohol dehydrogenase of yeast (ADH1_YEAST, Waters, Milford, MA) was added to a final concentration of 25 fmol/µL).

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed with a nanoACQUITY ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer (Waters), as previously described [8]. Raw data were processed via the ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, Version 2.5.3, Waters) by the Apex3D algorithm including the following parameters: Chromatographic peak width and MS TOF resolution were set to automatic, lock mass charge 2 set to 785.8426 Da/e with a lock mass window of 0.25 Da, low energy threshold 200.0 counts, elevated energy threshold 20.0 counts, intensity threshold 750 counts. The processed data were searched against a randomized P. aeruginosa PAO1 database containing 11,226 entries including common contaminations and the yeast ADH1 sequence. The following search parameters were used: enzyme type, trypsin (KR); 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein; 2 missed cleavages allowed; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+57.0215); variable modifications: deamidation N, Q (+0.9840), oxidation M (+15.9949), pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM (-27.9949); the false-discovery rate (FDR) was 5%; and the calibration protein was yeast ADH1. Only proteins were considered that were identified in two out of three technical replicates and in both biological replicates (replicate filter). After replicate filter application the initial FDR was reduced to 0.2%. Absolute protein quantification was achieved using the Hi3 approach with yeast ADH as a reference. Data was normalized by dividing each protein by the sum of all protein intensities per sample. All measurements were carried out in 2 biological and 3 technical replicates per biological sample.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is known as opportunistic pathogen frequently isolated from different infection sites. To investigate the expression rates of P.&#xa0;aeruginosa proteins commonly expressed by different clinical isolates, absolute protein quantities were determined employing a gel-free and data-independent LC-IMS(E) approach. Moreover, the metabolic diversity of these isolates was investigated by (13) C-metabolic flux analyses. 812 proteins were reproducibly identified and absolutely quantified for the reference strain P. aeruginosa PAO1, 363 of which were also identified and relatively quantified in all isolates. Whilst the majority of these proteins were expressed in constant amounts, expression rates of 42 proteins were highly variable between the isolates. Notably, the outer membrane protein OprH and the response regulator PhoP were strongly expressed in burned wounds isolates compared to lung/urinary tract isolates. Moreover, proteins involved in iron/amino acids uptake were found to be highly abundant in urinary tract isolates. The fluxome data revealed a conserved glycolysis, and a niche-specific divergence in fluxes through the glyoxylate shunt and the TCA cycle among the isolates. The integrated proteome/fluxome analysis did not indicate straightforward correlation between the protein amount and flux, but rather points to additional layers of regulation that mediate metabolic adaption of P. aeruginosa to different host environments. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002373 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002373).

### Keywords
Clinical isolates, Gel-free and label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Christian Lassek

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Greifswald, Germany


