### Accession
PXD018726

### Title
Proteomic Investigations of Two Pakistani Naja Snake Venoms Species Unravel the Venom Complexity, Posttranslational Modifications and Presence of Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Latest advancement of omics technologies allows in-depth characterization of venom compositions. In the present work we present a proteomic study of two snake venoms of the genus Naja i.e. Naja naja (black cobra) and Naja oxiana (brown cobra), of Pakistani origin. The present study has shown that these snake venoms consist of a highly diversified proteome.  Furthermore, the data also revealed variation among closely related species. High throughput mass spectrometric analysis of the venom proteome allowed to identify for the N. naja venom 34 protein families and for the N. oxiana 24 protein families. The comparative evaluation of the two venoms showed that N. naja consists of a more complex venom proteome than N. oxiana venom.

### Sample Protocol
Venom was milked manually from adult snake species of N. naja (black cobra) and N. oxiana (brown cobra). N. naja snakes were captured from the rural surroundings of Mianwali district, while N. oxiana sankes were caught from Lahore, Punjab province, Pakistan. The venom was freeze dried and kept at -20 °C till further use.  For LC-MS/MS analysis the lyophilized crude venom from N. naja (black cobra) and N. oxiana (brown cobra) was dissolved in 10mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1 % v/w Sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma) buffer. Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 20 µg of venom protein was tryptically digested. In brief, cysteine residues were reduced for 30 min. in the presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) at 60 °C and alkylated for 30 min. with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) at 37 °C in the dark. Thereafter, sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added in a protease/protein ratio of 1:100 at 37 °C to hydrolyze venom proteins overnight. Enzymatic activity was quenched by addition of 1 % v/v formic acid (FA, Fluka) and the SDC was precipitated by centrifugation at 16000 g for 5 min. The peptide containing supernatant was vacuum dried and reconstituted in 0.1 % FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of the venom samples was performed using a nano ACQUITY UPLC® System (Waters) coupled to a Hybrid-Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive™, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC system was equipped with a reversed phase chromatography (RPC) columns [ACQUITY UPLC® Symmetry C 18 (180 µm i.d x 20 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Waters] as trap column and a RPC separation column [ACQUITY UPLC® Peptide BEH C-18 (75µm i.d x 20 cm, 1.7 µm particle size, 170 Å pore size, Waters] as analytical column. RPC was used with a linear 60 min acetonitrile gradient from 2-30 % for peptide separation. (Solvent A: 0.1 % FA in water; Solvent B: 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile; Flow rate of 250 nL/min). MS/MS data acquisition was performed in data dependent mode for the 15 most abundant precursor ions. Precursor ions with charge stages between 2+ and 5+ were selected for fragmentation if they exceeded an intensity threshold of 100000. For MS/MS spectra acquisition the set AGC-target was 100,000 with a maximal ion injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were fragmented at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 and the fragment ions were measured with a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. To avoid redundant precursor sampling a dynamic exclusion was applied for 20s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the generated raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.0.0.802. Database search was performed with the SEQUEST algorithm against an Ophiophagus hannah (txid:8665, King cobra) protein database (UniProt), since it represents the closest fully sequenced  protein database to the analyzed samples. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. Furthermore, oxidation of methionine, conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid at peptide N-termini, loss of N-terminal methionine and the acetylation of protein N-termini were considered as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Peptide-spectra matches with a maximum delta Cn of 0.05 were used by Percolator for FDR estimation.  Unidentified spectra were exported to a new mgf file and de novo sequencing was performed with Novor via DenovoGUI 1.16.2. Modifications and allowed mass tolerances were identical to the database search approach. Hits with a Novor score above 80 were considered for a protein BLAST approach. Protein BLAST for the sequenced peptides was conducted with the NCBI BLAST p algorithm (2.9.0+) with default settings against non-redundant protein sequences (nr) narrowed down to Serpentes (taxid:8570). Alignments were chosen according to the max Score, the query coverage and if the homologous proteins were related to venom activity. With this information, a venom specific peptide database was created to support database searching for further analyses. In addition, the generated raw data were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm against a Serpentes (taxid:8570) protein database via Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.0.0.802. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. Furthermore, oxidation of Methionine, deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine, conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid at peptide N-termini, loss of N-terminal methionine and the acetylation of protein N-termini were considered as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Peptide-spectra matches with a maximum delta Cn of 0.05 were used by Percolator for FDR estimation.  Unidentified spectra were exported to a new mgf file and de novo sequencing was performed with Novor via DenovoGUI 1.16.6. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was used as fixed modification, while oxidation of Methionine and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine were set as variable modifications. Hits with a Novor score above 80 were were matched against the Serpentes database with the DenovoGUI 1.16.6 “Peptide Matches” feature.

### Publication Abstract
Latest advancement of omics technologies allows in-depth characterization of venom compositions. In the present work we present a proteomic study of two snake venoms of the genus <i>Naja</i> i.e., <i>Naja naja</i> (black cobra) and <i>Naja oxiana</i> (brown cobra) of Pakistani origin. The present study has shown that these snake venoms consist of a highly diversified proteome. Furthermore, the data also revealed variation among closely related species. High throughput mass spectrometric analysis of the venom proteome allowed to identify for the <i>N. naja</i> venom 34 protein families and for the <i>N. oxiana</i> 24 protein families. The comparative evaluation of the two venoms showed that <i>N. naja</i> consists of a more complex venom proteome than <i>N. oxiana</i> venom. Analysis also showed N-terminal acetylation (N-ace) of a few proteins in both venoms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study revealing this posttranslational modification in snake venom. N-ace can shed light on the mechanism of regulation of venom proteins inside the venom gland. Furthermore, our data showed the presence of other body proteins, e.g., ankyrin repeats, leucine repeats, zinc finger, cobra serum albumin, transferrin, insulin, deoxyribonuclease-2-alpha, and other regulatory proteins in these venoms. Interestingly, our data identified Ras-GTpase type of proteins, which indicate the presence of extracellular vesicles in the venom. The data can support the production of distinct and specific anti-venoms and also allow a better understanding of the envenomation and mechanism of distribution of toxins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018726.

### Keywords
Naja naja; naja oxiana; venom proteome;

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf: Hamburg, Hamburg, DE, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Benjamin Dreyer

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlüter
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf: Hamburg, Hamburg, DE, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics


