### Accession
PXD024216

### Title
Shotgun-based Proteomics of Extracellular Vesicles in Alzheimer’s Disease Reveals Biomarkers Involved in Immunological and Coagulation Pathways

### Description
Alzheimer’s dementia (AD) is the most common form of dementia and without readily available clinical biomarkers. Blood-derived proteins are routinely used for diagnostics, however, comprehensive plasma profiling is challenging due to the large dynamic range in protein concentrations. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) can cross the blood-brain barrier and may provide a source for AD related biomarkers. We investigated plasma-derived EV proteins for biomarkers towards AD diagnostics from 10 AD patients, 10 Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) patients, and 9 healthy controls (Con) using liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). EV enrichment was performed using a double centrifugation of 100,000 × g, 1h, 4°C with a wash of the pellet. Some AD patients presented with highly elevated FXIIIA1 (log2 FC: 4.6, p-value: 0.005) and FXIIIB (log2 FC: 4.9, p-value: 0.018). A group of proteins was identified discriminating Con and AD (AUC: 0.91, CI: 0.67-1.00) with ORM2 (AUC: 1.00, CI: 1.00-1.00), RBP4 (AUC: 0.99, CI: 0.95-1.00), and HYDIN (AUC: 0.89, CI: 0.72-1.00) found especially relevant for AD. This indicates that EVs provide an easily accessible matrix for possible biomarkers for AD. Some of the MCI patients, with similar protein profiles as the AD group progressed to AD within a 2-year timespan.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion the commercially available S-Trap Micro Spin Columns (Protifi, NY, USA) were used, according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, EV pellets were lysed in solubilisation buffer (5 % SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.55). Proteins were then reduced by adding Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) to a concentration of 10 mM (final concentration) and heated at 95 °C for 10 minutes, cooled to room temperature, and alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) in dark for 30 minutes. After reduction and alkylation, a final concentration of 1.2 % phosphoric acid was added to the samples, followed by six times volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90 % MeOH, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1). Samples were then loaded onto S-Trap spin columns, centrifuged at 4,000 × g until all buffer had passed through. The trapped protein was collected and washed three times with S-Trap buffer at the same settings. Afterwards, 20 µL of digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) was mixed with 2 – 5 µg trypsin and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted using three stepwise buffers; 50 mM TEAB, 0.2 % aqueous formic acid, and 50 % acetonitrile with 0.2 % formic acid. For the first two buffers 40 µL was added, and for the last buffer 35 µL was added. After addition of each buffer the samples were centrifuged at 4,000 × g. The elutions were pooled, dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in buffer A (99.9 % water, 0.1 % formic acid). Peptide concentrations were measured by fluorescence using an EnSpire microplate reader (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) and dissolved at 1 µg/µL. Samples were injected twice with an amount of 1 µg of sample protein per injection, with several hours to days between replicates. All samples were run in duplicates, except one which was analysed only once. The median technical coefficient of variation was calculated for the proteins in each sample. The mean of this was 13.3 %. Peptide mixtures were separated using nano Liquid-Chromatography (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, CA, USA) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Peptides were trapped and separated by use of a µ-Precolumn (300 µm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and an analytical column (EASY-Spray Column, 50 mm × 75 µm, PepMap RSCL, C18, 2 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA), respectively. Peptide elution was performed with a flow of 300 nL/min using a 60 minute gradient, mixing buffer A with buffer B (99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). For MS detection, the universal method setting was used for 60 minutes, starting at 0 minutes with full Orbitrap scans (m/z 375 – 1,500) with a resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each cycle time was three seconds. Precursor ions with highest intensity were selected, with an intensity threshold set at 5 × 103, and charge states 2 – 7 included. The linear ion trap was used for MS2 scans at a rapid scan rate with a collision-induced dissociation energy at 35 % and an AGC target of 2 × 103 with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. Using the quadrupole, precursor ions were isolated using an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, with dynamic exclusion set to 60 seconds. Internal mass calibration was performed by activating the EASY-IC using fluoranthene. The 57 raw data files were searched against the human Uniprot database Uniprot (downloaded 12/03/2019) and using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) for label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis (Cox et al. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 2513–2526, 2014). Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as fixed modification, and the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), protein, and site were each set at 1 %. Minimum ratio count for LFQ was set to 1. Tandem MS (MS/MS) was required for LFQ comparisons. For quantification of proteins, unique and razor peptides, unmodified and modified with oxidation (M) or acetyl (protein N-terminal) were used. The function match between runs was used, reverse sequences were used for decoy search, and contaminant sequences were included in the search.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were filtered for potential contaminants, reverse sequences, proteins only identified by site. A minimum of 2 unique peptides were required for identification. LFQ values were log2 transformed and technical replicates were averaged. Distributions were assessed through histograms. Proteins were required to have 70 % valid values in at least one group. Venn diagrams were used to investigate proteins common and unique for each group and matched to the top 100 proteins from EV databases; Vesiclepedia and ExoCarta (both downloaded 07/04/2020). Trends in data were assessed through unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA), after missing value imputation (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8). Differentially expressed proteins were identified between healthy and diseased individuals using Student’s t-test and considered statistically significant if p < 0.05 and log2 fold change (FC) > 1 or < -1, corresponding to FC > 2 or < ½, visualised with volcano plots. A permutation-based FDR < 0.05 with 250 randomizations was adapted to correct for multiple hypothesis testing, reported as q-values. Comparisons of protein expressions were depicted using non-log2 transformed LFQ values. Significantly expressed proteins were subjected to enrichment analysis and annotated with the top five significant gene ontology biological process (GOBP) terms using the functional annotation clustering analysis by DAVID version 6.8 (Huang et al. Nature Protocols 4, 44–57, 2009). Enrichment scores (ES) and Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-values, denoted q-values, were shown. STRING version 11.0 (Szklarczyk et al. Nucleic Acids Research 47, D607–D613, 2019) analysis was performed for protein-protein interactions relating to biological functions for the differentially expressed proteins, requiring a minimum interaction score of 0.4 (medium interaction). When more than one protein ID was listed, the first was used as the allocated protein. STRING could not identify seven of the proteins. The Random Forest algorithm in MetaboAnalyst 4.0 (Xia Lab, Quebec, Canada, Chong et al. Nucleic Acids Research 46, W486–W494, 2018) was used to select proteins distinguishing AD patients and controls. Prior to Random Forest, missing values were imputed as described above. Models selected by Random Forest were presented through receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves together with biomarker candidates. Perseus version 1.6.10.50 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany, Tyanova et al., Nature Methods 13, 731–740, 2016),  IBM SPSS Statistics 26 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA), and GraphPad Prism 9.0.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) were used.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and without readily available clinical biomarkers. Blood-derived proteins are routinely used for diagnostics; however, comprehensive plasma profiling is challenging due to the dynamic range in protein concentrations. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) can cross the blood-brain barrier and may provide a source for AD biomarkers. We investigated plasma-derived EV proteins for AD biomarkers from 10 AD patients, 10 Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) patients, and 9 healthy controls (Con) using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The ultracentrifuged EVs were washed and confirmed according to the MISEV2018 guidelines. Some AD patients presented with highly elevated FXIIIA1 (log<sub>2</sub> FC: 4.6, p-value: 0.005) and FXIIIB (log<sub>2</sub> FC: 4.9, p-value: 0.018). A panel of proteins was identified discriminating Con from AD (AUC: 0.91, CI: 0.67-1.00) with ORM2 (AUC: 1.00, CI: 1.00-1.00), RBP4 (AUC: 0.99, CI: 0.95-1.00), and HYDIN (AUC: 0.89, CI: 0.72-1.00) were found especially relevant for AD. This indicates that EVs provide an easily accessible matrix for possible AD biomarkers. Some of the MCI patients, with similar protein profiles as the AD group, progressed to AD within a 2-year timespan.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mild cognitive impairment, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Alzheimer, Blood

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Jonas Ellegaard Nielsen

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Honoré
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark


