### Accession
PXD013289

### Title
Label free mass spectrometry quantification of differentially expressed proteins in an atypical presentation of Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome.

### Description
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a rare disease characterized among others things by chronic massive, nonmalignant lymphoadenopathy and splenomegaly. ALPS has been defined as a defect in the lymphocyte apoptotic pathway and is associate with inherited mutations in the FAS, Fas ligand and caspase 10 genes. However, 20-30% of the patients clinically diagnosed do not present any known mutations. We report here the case of a 10 years old girl with a probable diagnostic of ALPS. The patient meet the criteria of the disease nevertheless, the sequencing analysis of the genes involved did not present mutations. In order to go further in the knowledge of the ailment of this patient, we performed the study of the proteome of her peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) population. We compare the expression of proteins in the sample of the patient with a sample of a same years old healthy girl. The information achieved will provide us valuable elements to make a more integral diagnostic of ALPS and also, others autoimmune diseases.

### Sample Protocol
50 μg of PBMC proteins obtained from the patient and from a healthy donor were digested using RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA). Resulting peptides were injected in a mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si in MSE mode to calculate the AUC. Afterward, the same amount of tryptic peptides in each condition were analyzed using data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach through HDMSE mode. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high energy chromatograms) in positive mode in a range of m/z 50-2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. Generated *.raw files were analyzed in the DriftScope v2.8 software (Waters) to selectively apply quasi-specific collision energies based on the drift time for each peptide detected in the mass spectrometer. A *.rul file was generated and used to apply specific collision energy for every peptide detected in the UDMSE mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS intensities contained in the generated *.raw files were normalized, aligned, compared and relatively quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0.3 against a reversed Homo sapiens database. The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as cut enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphoryl (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. The results generated from Progenesis Software were exported to *.xlsx files in order to verify two levels of data quality control for label-free experiments according to the figures of merit (FOM) described by Souza et al. All proteins considered differentially expressed presented at least a ratio ±1.2 (expressed as a base 2 logarithm).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (alps), Caspase10, Label-free quantitation., Fasl, Fas, Mutation, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Cinvestav-IPN.
Cinvestav-IPN

### Submitter
Emmanuel Rios-Castro

### Lab Head
Dr José Tapia Ramírez
Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Cinvestav-IPN.


