### Accession
PXD001873

### Title
MCF-7 phosphoproteome LC-MS/MS

### Description
MCF-7 cells were stimulated with TNF-alpha in order to identify IKKb substrates.  conditions:  TNF alpha stimulation TNF alpha stimulation + SC-514 IKK (kinase dead mutant) + TNF alpha stimulation IKK(WT) + TNF alpha stimulation basal  Already validated IKK substrates were used to train random forest and to predict new substrates. Among other interesting candidates we validated AEG-1 (S298) as an IKKb substrate. We provide evidence that IKKb-mediated AEG-1 phosphorylation is essential for IkBa degradation as well as NF-kB-dependent gene expression and cell proliferation, which correlate with cancer patient survival in vivo. (replicate 1 out of at least 2)

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled cells were pooled using TNF alpha stimulation (10 min) as an internal standard. Proteins were digested using the FASP protocol, fractionated by SCX chromatography. Phospho-peptides were enriched using the TiO2 strategy. Flow-through was collected and peptides were separated according to their charge in acidic conditions using a linear increase in salt concentration in a binary buffer system: buffer A) 7mM KH2PO4 in 30% acetonitrile (ACN) (pH=2.65) and B) 7mM KH2PO4, 350mM KCl in 30% ACN (pH=2.65). All fractions were pooled conducting absorbance at 280 nm to a total of 8–10 fractions, concentrated and adjusted to binding conditions for Titan sphere (TiO2) bead-based extraction of phosphorylated peptides (80% acetonitrile, 6% TFA). Fractions were incubated twice with 2.5 mg of TiO2 beads and flow-throughs were incubated three times with 5mg of TiO2 beads (SLSC Science). Beads were washed several– times with decreasing content of TFA (6–3%) and loaded on C8 material-containing tips. Peptides were eluted with 40% ammonia/acetonitrile (pH=11.6), concentrated in a speed vac at room temperature to almost complete dryness and diluted in acidified (0.1% formic acid or 0.5% acetic acid) H2O before mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were analysed by MaxQuant and the implemented Andromeda search engine. FDR was estimated using the Reward algorithm at the protein, peptide and modification-peptide level. Minimal score was set to 0 for modified peptides however we filtered after inspection of spectra. Random forest analysis was done in R using the caret package.

### Publication Abstract
The inhibitor of the nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B (I&#x3ba;B) kinase (IKK) complex is a key regulator of the canonical NF-&#x3ba;B signalling cascade and is crucial for fundamental cellular functions, including stress and immune responses. The majority of IKK complex functions are attributed to NF-&#x3ba;B activation; however, there is increasing evidence for NF-&#x3ba;B pathway-independent signalling. Here we combine quantitative mass spectrometry with random forest bioinformatics to dissect the TNF-&#x3b1;-IKK&#x3b2;-induced phosphoproteome in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. In total, we identify over 20,000 phosphorylation sites, of which &#x223c;1% are regulated up on TNF-&#x3b1; stimulation. We identify various potential novel IKK&#x3b2; substrates including kinases and regulators of cellular trafficking. Moreover, we show that one of the candidates, AEG-1/MTDH/LYRIC, is directly phosphorylated by IKK&#x3b2; on serine 298. We provide evidence that IKK&#x3b2;-mediated AEG-1 phosphorylation is essential for I&#x3ba;B&#x3b1; degradation as well as NF-&#x3ba;B-dependent gene expression and cell proliferation, which correlate with cancer patient survival in vivo.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Phosphoproteome, Ikkb, Tnf stimulation

### Affiliations
HN
Max Planck Institute Bad Nauheim for Heart and Lung Research Ludwigstrasse 42 Bad Nauheim, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Max Planck Institute Bad Nauheim for Heart and Lung Research Ludwigstrasse 42 Bad Nauheim, Germany


