### Accession
PXD000246

### Title
Human breast cancer cell line LC-MS/MS

### Description
Human breast cancer cell lines were pooled according to ER/Her2 status.  The whole cell lysate samples were reduced and treated with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin.  The samples were separated into 6 fractions by online high pH reverse-phase fractionation and then analyzed by reverse-phase chromatography coupled to a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. MS/MS files were searched against version 3.69 of the Human International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database with decoy sequences by the X!Tandem database search engine with k-score plugin with the following parameters:  tryptic enzyme constraint allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Peptide MH+ mass tolerances set at 2.0 Da with post search filtering of precursor mass to 50 ppm. Oxidized methionine as a variable modification and carbamidomethylated cysteine as a static modification.  FDR < 0.005 based on decoy search.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry has been successfully applied to monitor targeted proteins in biological specimens, raising the possibility that assays could be configured to measure all human proteins. We report the results of a pilot study designed to test the feasibility of a large-scale, international effort for MRM assay generation. We have configured, validated across three laboratories and made publicly available as a resource to the community 645 novel MRM assays representing 319 proteins expressed in human breast cancer. Assays were multiplexed in groups of &gt;150 peptides and deployed to quantify endogenous analytes in a panel of breast cancer-related cell lines. The median assay precision was 5.4%, with high interlaboratory correlation (R(2) &gt; 0.96). Peptide measurements in breast cancer cell lines were able to discriminate among molecular subtypes and identify genome-driven changes in the cancer proteome. These results establish the feasibility of a large-scale effort to develop an MRM assay resource.

### Keywords
Human, Cell line, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head


