### Accession
PXD014409

### Title
Maize Root system iTRAQ result under salt treatment

### Description
To acknowledge the molecular mechanisms underlying maize salt tolerance, two maize inbred lines, including salt-tolerant 8723 and salt-sensitive P138, were used in this study. Comparative proteomics of seedling roots from two maize inbred lines under 180 mM salt stress for 10 days was performed by the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) approach. We obtained a total of 336237 spectra. 30616 peptides and a total of 7505 proteins were identified with 1% FDR. A total of 7505 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. 626 DEPs were identified in line 8723 under salt stress, among them, 378 up-regulated and 248 down-regulated. 473 DEPs were identified in P138, of which 212 were up-regulated and 261 were down-regulated. Venn diagram analysis showed that 17 DEPs were up-regulated and 12 DEPs were down-regulated in the two inbred lines. In addition, 8 DEPs were up-regulated in line 8723 but down-regulated in P138, 6 DEPs were down-regulated in line 8723 but up-regulated in P138. In salt-stressed 8723, the DEPs were primarily associated with phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, starch and sucrose metabolism, and the MAPK signaling pathway. Intriguingly, the DEPs were only associated with the nitrogen metabolism pathway in P138. Compared to P138, the root response to salt stress in 8723 could maintain stronger water retention capacity, osmotic regulation ability, synergistic effects of antioxidant enzymes, energy supply capacity, signal transduction, ammonia detoxification ability, lipid metabolism, and nucleic acid synthesis. Based on the proteome sequencing information, changes in the abundance of 8 DEPs were correlated with the corresponding mRNA levels. Our results from this study may elucidate some details of salt tolerance mechanisms and salt tolerance breeding of maize.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Methods：Salt-tolerant 8723 and salt-sensitive P138 were used to study the mechanism of salt tolerance in maize. Seeds were surface-sterilized with 0.5 % NaClO for 10 min, and washed five times with distilled water, then soaked for 12 hours in either deionized water or 180 mM NaCl solution , and sown in pots (15 cm × 13 cm, 10 seedlings per pot) with three biological replicates per treatment. After sowing, seeds were cultured in the greenhouse, at a temperature of 25 ± 2 ℃, 12 h light, 600 μmol / s-1·m-2 light intensity, 60% relative humidity, and 50 mL deionized water was added every two days. Further, 50 mL 180 mM NaCl solution was added every three days, beginning when the control leaves grew to the three-leaf stage (about ten days).  The sample was stored at -80 ℃ for further use. Two independent biological replicates were sampled for proteomic analysis. Protein Extraction: Samples weighing 1−2 g were placed into a mortar to which 10% polyvinylpolypyrrolidone was added. The samples were then ground in liquid nitrogen, and Lysis Buffer 3 was added and the samples were placed in an ultrasonic ice bath for 5 min, following which they were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube to which 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 10 mM DTT were added at five times the volume of the supernatant, and the solution was precipitated for 2 h at -20°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant discarded. The sediment was transferred into a new tube to which 1 mL TCA and 10 mM DTT were added. After being ground, the sediment was placed at -20°C for approximately 30 min, centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant discarded. This process was repeated several times until the supernatant became colorless. The precipitate was air-dried and the appropriate amount of amount of Lysis Buffer 3, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 mM DTT were added. The mixture was sonicated for 5 min in an ice bath and then centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 44°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube to which 10 mM DTT was added, and the tube was placed in a water bath at 56°C for 1 h. Upon returning to room temperature, 55 mM iodoacetamide was added and the tube was kept in the dark for 45 min. The samples were precipitated in 5 times the volume of cold acetone for 2 h and then centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, following which the supernatant was discarded. The appropriate amount of Lysis Buffer 3 was added and the sample was placed in a sonicating ice bath for 5 min and centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and then the supernatant was collected.  iTRAQ Quantification: Following trypsin digestion, the 8723 control groups were labeled with iTRAQ 119 and 121; the 8723 treatment groups were labeled with iTRAQ 117 and 118; the P138 control groups were labeled with iTRAQ 113 and 114; and the P138 treatment groups were labeled with iTRAQ 115 and 116. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h. A LC-20AB liquid phase system (Shimadzu. Kyoto, Japan) and 5 μm 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 separation column were used for liquid phase separation of the sample. All peptide mixtures were dissolved in 2 mL of buffer A and loaded onto the column. Elution was performed using a linear binary gradient at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40 min, 35-95% buffer B for 1 min, buffer B for 3 min, and 5% buffer B for 10 min to equilibrium. The elution peak was monitored at 214 nm, one fraction was collected per minute, and 20 fractions were pooled by combining the chromatographic elution peaks, and then dried under vacuum. LC-ESI-MS/MS Analysis: The drained peptide samples were resuspended in buffer A, centrifuged at 20,000 r/min for 10 min, and then the supernatant was injected into the LC. Separation was carried out using a LC-20AD-type nanoliter liquid chromatograph. The sample first entered the trap column for enrichment and desalting, following which it entered a self-contained C18 column. The flow rate was 300 nL/min with the following effective gradient separation: 0–8 min, 5% buffer B; 8–43 min, buffer B linearly increased from 8% to 35%; 43–48 min, buffer B increased from 35% to 60%; 48–50 min, buffer B increased from 60% to 80%; 50–55 min, 80% buffer B; 55–65 min, 5% buffer B. The nanoliter liquid phase separation terminal was directly connected to the mass spectrometer. The liquid phase-separated peptides were then sent to an ESI tandem mass spectrometer. A TripleTOF 5600 was used with a Nanospray III ion source and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter. When collecting data, the parameters of the mass spectrometer were set as follows: ion source spray voltage of 2300 V, nitrogen pressure of 30 psi, spray gas of 15, and a spray interface temperature of 150°C.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis: The raw mass spectral data were converted to mgf format, and the final protein identification was obtained by comparison with sequences in the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and the Uniprot Zea mays L. database (40,026 sequences). Protein identification had a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da for intact peptides and 0.1 Da for fragmented peptides, allowing for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. The parameters were set to Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y) as potential variables, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. Each of the selected proteins involved at least one specific peptide segment, and a significant DEP was screened based on the trusted protein. The screening of DEPs was performed under the conditions of fold change >1.2 and P<0.05. Inverse library data and invalid blank values were removed. The number of DEPs for each term was calculated using the Gene Ontology (GO) database (http://www.geneontology.org/), and the hypergeometric test was used to find significant enrichment GO entries by comparing significantly different proteins with the overall identified proteins as background. If the hypergeometric test had a P<0.05, then the DEPs were significantly enriched in the GO terms. Cluster of Orthologous Groups of Proteins (COG) analysis was also conducted (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/). Using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway as a unit, the hyperpathic test was used to identify the pathways that were significantly enriched in DEPs compared to the entire protein background.

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is one of the key abiotic stresses that causes great loss of yield and serious decrease in quality in maize (<i>Zea mays</i> L.). Therefore, it is very important to reveal the molecular mechanism of salt tolerance in maize. To acknowledge the molecular mechanisms underlying maize salt tolerance, two maize inbred lines, including salt-tolerant 8723 and salt-sensitive P138, were used in this study. Comparative proteomics of seedling roots from two maize inbred lines under 180 mM salt stress for 10 days were performed by the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) approach. A total of 1056 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. In total, 626 DEPs were identified in line 8723 under salt stress, among them, 378 up-regulated and 248 down-regulated. There were 473 DEPs identified in P138, of which 212 were up-regulated and 261 were down-regulated. Venn diagram analysis showed that 17 DEPs were up-regulated and 12 DEPs were down-regulated in the two inbred lines. In addition, 8 DEPs were up-regulated in line 8723 but down-regulated in P138, 6 DEPs were down-regulated in line 8723 but up-regulated in P138. In salt-stressed 8723, the DEPs were primarily associated with phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, starch and sucrose metabolism, and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. Intriguingly, the DEPs were only associated with the nitrogen metabolism pathway in P138. Compared to P138, the root response to salt stress in 8723 could maintain stronger water retention capacity, osmotic regulation ability, synergistic effects of antioxidant enzymes, energy supply capacity, signal transduction, ammonia detoxification ability, lipid metabolism, and nucleic acid synthesis. Based on the proteome sequencing information, changes of 8 DEPs abundance were related to the corresponding mRNA levels by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Our results from this study may elucidate some details of salt tolerance mechanisms and salt tolerance breeding of maize.

### Keywords
Salt, Root, Maize, Itraq

### Affiliations
Gansu Agricultural University
departement,lab

### Submitter
Yunling Peng

### Lab Head
Dr College of Agronomy, Gansu Agricultural University,College of Agronomy, Gansu Agricultural University
departement,lab


