### Accession
PXD009037

### Title
Proteomic characterization of Zamilon vitis virions produced in various contexts

### Description
Acanthamoeba-infecting Mimiviridae belong to three clades: Mimiviruses (A), Moumouviruses (B) and Megaviruses (C). The uniquely complex mobilome of these giant viruses includes virophages and linear 7 kb-DNA molecules called “transpovirons”. We recently isolated a new virophage (Zamilon vitis) and two new transpovirons (maBtv and mvCtv) respectively associated to B-clade and C-clade Mimiviridae. We used the capacity of the Zamilon virophage to replicate both on B-clade and C-clade host viruses to investigate the three partite interaction network governing the propagation of transpovirons. We notably performed proteomic comparisons of host viruses and virophage particles carrying or cleared of transpovirons in search of proteins involved in this adaptation process. These experiments revealed that transpoviron-encoded proteins are synthetized during the combined Mimiviridae/virophage/transpoviron replication process and are specifically incorporated into the virophage and Mimiviridae virions together with the cognate transpoviron DNA. This is a unique example of intricate commensalism in the viral world, where the Zamilon virophage and the transpoviron depend on their host giant virus to replicate, and the transpoviron depends on the virophage to propagate from one host virus to another.

### Sample Protocol
All giant viruses were purified on a CsCl gradient. To separate Z. vitis from the giant viruses, we used several steps of filtration/centrifugation with a final purification on sucrose gradient. The preparation was filtered on 0.2 µM filter and centrifuged at 100,000 g for 90 minutes. The pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of 40 mM Tris HCl pH7.5 and filtered on 0.1 µM filter.  The filtrate was then centrifuged at 150,000 g for 1h, and the pellet resuspended in 0.2 mL of 40 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 and loaded on a 70%/60%/50%/40% sucrose gradient and centrifuged at 200,000 g for24h. The band corresponding to the virus was recovered with a syringe and washed once with 40 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5. For proteomic analysis the virions pellets were resuspended in Tris HCl 40 mM pH 7.5, 60 mM DTT, 2% SDS and incubated 10 min at 95°C. The protein concentration of the lysates were measured using the 660 nm Protein Assay Reagent appended with Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and 4 µg of proteins were stacked in the top of a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) before R-250 Coomassie blue staining. Proteins were then in-gel digested using trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). Resulting peptides were analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus or HF) using a 120-min gradient. Two replicates were analysed per sample, except for Z. vitis purified from MB maliensis and Z. vitis purified from MC chilensis containing maBtv.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software  (version1.6.2.10). Spectra were searched against the corresponding MegavirusC chilensis, MegavirusC vitis, MoumouvirusB australiensis, MoumouvirusB maliensis, Zamilon vitis, mvCtv, maBtv and Acanthamoeba castellanii protein sequence databanks and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 aa. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at PSM, peptide and protein levels. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were calculated from MS intensities of unique+razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Acanthamoeba-infecting Mimiviridae are giant viruses with dsDNA genome up to 1.5&#x2009;Mb. They build viral factories in the host cytoplasm in which the nuclear-like virus-encoded functions take place. They are themselves the target of infections by 20-kb-dsDNA virophages, replicating in the giant virus factories and can also be found associated with 7-kb-DNA episomes, dubbed transpovirons. Here we isolated a virophage (Zamilon vitis) and two transpovirons respectively associated to B- and C-clade mimiviruses. We found that the virophage could transfer each transpoviron provided the host viruses were devoid of a resident transpoviron (permissive effect). If not, only the resident transpoviron originally isolated from the corresponding virus was replicated and propagated within the virophage progeny (dominance effect). Although B- and C-clade viruses devoid of transpoviron could replicate each transpoviron, they did it with a lower efficiency across clades, suggesting an ongoing process of adaptive co-evolution. We analysed the proteomes of host viruses and virophage particles in search of proteins involved in this adaptation process. This study also highlights a unique example of intricate commensalism in the viral world, where the transpoviron uses the virophage to propagate and where the Zamilon virophage and the transpoviron depend on the giant virus to replicate, without affecting its infectious cycle.

### Keywords
Virion proteomics, Virophage, Giant virus, Mimiviridae, Transpoviron

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


