### Accession
PXD011106

### Title
Proteomic analysis of oral keratinocytes chronically exposed to shisha

### Description
Shisha smoking is widely believed to be a hazard-free habit. Studies have reported shisha smoking to be associated with oral lesions as well ascarcinomas of the lung, esophagus, bladder, and pancreas. A better understanding of the underlying mechanism may contribute to the identification of biomarkers for targeted therapy and better prognosis of the disease. In this study, we have established a chronic model of shisha-exposed oral keratinocytes to study the effect of shisha smoking on oral cells. Normal oral keratinocytes (non-transformed and immortalised), OKF/TERT1, were chronically treated with shisha extract for 8 months. In vitro cellular assays as well as total proteomic analysis were performed using the OKF6/TERT1-Parental and shisha-exposed cells (OKF6/TERT1-Shisha) to understand the effect of shisha smoking on cellular transformation. Chronic exposure of OKF6/TERT1 cells with shisha resulted in a significant increase in cellular proliferation and cell invasion compared to the OKF6/TERT1-Parental cells. Quantitative proteomic analysis of OKF6/TERT1-Parental and OKF6/TERT1-Shisha cells resulted in the identification of more than 5,515 proteins. Of these 5,515 proteins, 82, 77, 106, 110 proteins were found to be differentially expressed (1.5-fold) in OKF6/TERT1 cells chronically treated with shisha extract for 2M, 4M, 6M and 8M, respectively when compared with OKF6/TERT1-Parental. Pathway and gene ontology-based analysis revealed dysregulation of interferon pathway, upregulation of proteins involved in cell growth and downregulation of immune processes. This study reveals that chronic treatment of normal oral keratinocytes with shisha leads to cellular transformation. Elucidation of dysregulated proteins in shisha smoke-exposed cells will provide insights into the effect of shisha smoking on oral cells and aid in identification of therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  OKF6/TERT1-Parental cells and OKF/TERT1-Shisha cells (2M, 4M, 6M and 8M) were grown to 80% confluence. The cells were rinsed thrice with 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and starved in supplement-free media containing 1% penicillin-streptomycin for 8h. The cells were then rinsed thrice with 1X PBS and harvested in 2% SDS-containing buffer ((2% SDS, protease inhibitors (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)). The cell lysates were sonicated at 40% amplitude and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min. Protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid assays (BCA) method (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Equal amounts of protein from each cell line were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60oC for 20 min and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) for 10 min at room temperature. Protein was precipitated overnight at -80oC using the ice cold acetone. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min, the acetone was removed and air-dried. The pellet was then dissolved in 4M urea. Proteins were then digested using Lysyl Endopeptidase®, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Catalog#125-05061, Wako, Richmond, VA) at 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio for 4 h at 37oC. After 4 h, the urea concentration was reduced from 4M to 2M using 50 mM TEABC. The samples were then digested using TPCK-treated trypsin (Worthington, NJ) at a 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio for 16 h at 37°C. The samples were cleaned using Sep-PAK Classic C18 columns (Catalog#WAT051910, Waters, Milford, MA).The samples were then completely dried and reconstituted in 50 mM TEABC buffer.   TMT labeling and basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC)   Peptides from each sample were differentially labeled using TMT labeling reagents as per manufacturer’s instructions (catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were labeled with TMT channels as follows: OKF6/TERT1-Parental cells with 128N, OKF6/TERT1-Shisha 2M with 128C, OKF6/TERT1-Shisha 4M with 129N, OKF6/TERT1-Shisha 6M with 129C, OKF6/TERT1-Shisha 8M with 130N.The TMT-labeled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation as described previously. The 96 fractions obtained were concatenated into 6 fractions. The fractions were vacuum dried, desalted using C18 Stage Tips and analyzed using LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis  The peptide fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on Orbitrap FusionTMTribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (75 μm x 2 cm, Magic C18AQ, 5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Biosciences Inc., Auburn, CA) using 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 3µl/min. The peptides were then resolved on an analytical column (75 μm x 20 cm, Magic C18AQ, 3 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Biosciences Inc, Auburn, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using 8% -25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) for 3 to 73 min and 25%-30% solvent B for 73 to 103 min. The MS and MS/MS scans were acquired at a mass resolution of 120,000 and 50,000 at 200 m/z. Full MS scans were acquired in the m/z range of 400-1600. For MS/MS, top speed with a cycle time of 3 sec was selected for each duty cycle with charge ≥2 were sequentially isolated in each cycle. Precursor ions with single charge or unassigned charge were rejected. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursor ions was set to 40 s. Precursor ions were isolated using quadrapole mass filter using isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Higher energy collision dissociation was used as the fragmentation method for fragmentation with 34% normalized collision energy.The peptide fractions were analyzed thrice on the mass spectrometer (three technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained was searched against human protein database NCBI RefSeq (Release 81) using Sequest search algorithm on a Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Fisher scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters included: Charge state 2-5, trypsin as the proteolytic enzymes with an allowance of up to two missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine as the dynamic modification, carbamidomethyl at cysteine and TMT 6-plex modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine as the static modifications. The acquired data was searched against decoy database to obtain the false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) at 1% FDR were considered for peptide identification. TMT quantitation was done using reporter ion intensities. The ratio was calculated as follows: 128C (OKF6/TERT1-Shisha-2M) / 128N (OKF6/TERT1-Parental), 129N (OKF6/TERT1-Shisha-4M) / 128N (OKF6/TERT1-Parental), 129C (OKF6/TERT1-Shisha-6M) / 128N (OKF6/TERT1-Parental), and 130N (OKF6/TERT1-Shisha-8M) / 128N (OKF6/TERT1-Parental).

### Publication Abstract
Shisha (water pipe) smoking is falsely believed to be a hazard-free habit and has become a major public health concern. Studies have reported shisha smoking to be associated with oral lesions, as well as carcinomas of the lung, esophagus, bladder, and pancreas. A deeper understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms would contribute to identification of biomarkers for targeted public health screening, therapeutic innovation, and better prognosis of associated diseases. In this study, we have established an in vitro chronic cellular model of shisha-exposed oral keratinocytes to study the effect of shisha on oral cells. Normal nontransformed, immortalized oral keratinocytes were chronically exposed to shisha extract for 8 months. This resulted in significant increase in cellular proliferation and cell invasion in shisha-exposed cells compared to the parental cells. Quantitative proteomic analysis of OKF6/TERT1-Parental and OKF6/TERT1-Shisha cells resulted in the identification of 5515 proteins. Forty-three differentially expressed proteins were found to be common across all conditions. Bioinformatic analysis of the dysregulated proteins identified in the proteomic study revealed dysregulation of interferon pathway, upregulation of proteins involved in cell growth, and downregulation of immune processes. The present findings reveal that chronic exposure of normal oral keratinocytes to shisha leads to cellular transformation and dysregulation of immune response. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that has developed a model of oral keratinocytes chronically exposed to shisha and identified proteomic alterations associated with shisha exposure. However, further research is required to evaluate the health burden of shisha smoking.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Immune response, Proteomics, In vitro cellular model, Interferon pathway

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore


