### Accession
PXD004804

### Title
Assassin bug (Pristhesancus plagipennis) venom proteome

### Description
Assassin bugs (Hemiptera: Heteroptera: Reduviidae) are venomous insects that prey on invertebrates. Assassin bug venom has features in common with venoms from other animals, such as paralysing and lethal activity when injected, and a molecular composition that includes disulfide-rich peptide neurotoxins. Uniquely, this venom also has strong liquefying activity that has been hypothesised to facilitate feeding through the narrow channel of the proboscis—a structure inherited from sap- and phloem-feeding phytophagous hemipterans and adapted during the evolution of Heteroptera into a fang and feeding structure. However, further understanding of the function of assassin bug venom is impeded by the lack of proteomic studies detailing its molecular composition. In addition, the lack of knowledge regarding venoms of predaceous reduviids limits our understanding of how the venoms of the blood-feeding kissing bugs (Reduviidae: Triatominae) evolved to facilitate hematophagy. By using a combined transcriptomic/proteomic approach we show that the venom proteome of the harpactorine assassin bug Pristhesancus plagipennis includes a complex suite of >100 proteins comprising disulfide-rich peptides, CUB-domain proteins, cystatins, putative cytolytic toxins, triabin-like protein, odorant binding protein, serine proteases, catabolic enzymes, putative nutrient-binding proteins, plus eight families of proteins without homology to characterised proteins. Serine proteases, CUB domain proteins and other novel proteins in the 10–16 kDa mass range, as well as putative cytolytic toxins, were the most abundant venom components. Thus, in addition to putative neurotoxins, assassin bug venom includes a high proportion of enzymatic and cytolytic venom components well suited to tissue liquefaction. While some protein families such as lipocalin/triabins occur in the venoms of both predaceous and blood-feeding reduviids, the composition of venoms in these two groups differs markedly. These results provide insights into the venom evolution in the insect suborder Heteroptera.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis, venom was centrifuged (12,000 rcf, 4°C) to remove particulate matter and prepared for MS from crude venom or fractionated using 1D and 2D gel electrophoresis or HPLC. For 1D electrophoresis, 1, 2, 4, 8 or 16 µg (A280 equivalent) of venom was run on a 12.5% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel after denaturation (5 min 95°C) in sample buffer with or without the reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT). Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250. For 2D electrophoresis, 400 µg (A280 equivalent) of venom was lyophilized and re-suspended in 125 µl resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 4% CHAPS) supplemented with 10 mM DTT and 1% ampholyte solution (Life Sciences #17-6000-88), and absorbed into Readystrip immobilised pH gradient strip (pH 3–10, nonlinear, Life Sciences #163-2005) for 16 h. Isoelectric focusing was then conducted under mineral oil on an Ettan IPGphor3 isoelectric focuser (GE Healthcare) using a program of 5900 total Vh. The strip was then incubated in reducing reagent (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 6M urea, 2% SDS, 30% glycerol, and 1.5% DTT) for 10 minutes and then alkylation reagent (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 6M urea, 2% SDS, 30% glycerol, and 2% iodoacetamide) for 20 minutes. Second dimension SDS-PAGE was then run using a 15% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel alongside a PrecisionPlus ladder (BioRad #1610374) and the gel stained with colloidal coomassie stain (38). Protein bands and spots were then excised with a scalpel, incubated for 2 h at 37°C in reduction/alkylation buffer (50 mM ammonium carbonate pH 11.0, 1% iodoethanol, 0.025% triethylphosphine in 48.5% acetonitrile), then for 4¬–16 h at 37 °C in 5¬–20 µl of digestion reagent (20 ng/µl trypsin (Sigma #T7575, proteomics grade; specifically cleaves on carboxylic side of Arg and Lys residues) in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 5% acetonitrile). Samples where then incubated for 30 min at room temperature in extraction reagent (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid) with occasional vortexing.   For HPLC, ~1 mg of venom (A280 equivalent) was diluted >5-fold in loading buffer consisting of 95% solvent A (0.05% TFA) and 5% solvent B (0.043% TFA, 90% acetonitrile). After centrifugation (10 min, 17,000 rcf, 4°C), the supernatant was fractionated using a Jupiter 250 x 10 mm Jupiter C4 column (10 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size, Phenomenex #00G-4168-NO) using a linear gradient from 5–75% solvent B in solvent A over 56 min and a flow rate of 3 ml/min, yielding 64 fractions. After lyophilisation and resuspension in 30 µl milliQ water, each fraction was analysed by MALDI-TOF MS and LC-MS/MS. For MALDI-TOF MS, each fraction was diluted in MALDI solvent (70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and spotted together with the same volume of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (5 mg/ml in MALDI solvent) and analysed on a 4700 MALDI TOF/TOF Proteomics Analyzer (AB SCIEX) operated in reflectron mode with a laser power of 3400–3800 V. For LC-MS/MS preparation, 3 µl of each resuspended HPLC fraction was incubated with 7 µl reduction/alkylation buffer (2 h, 37°C), lyophilized, and incubated in 5 µl digestion reagent (16 h, 37°C) before the reaction was terminated by addition of 20 µl 5% formic acid. For crude venom samples, 5 µg protein (A280 equivalent) was processed using the same protocol as for HPLC fractions, except terminated at the appropriate stage to produce samples that were either: native; reduced, alkylated but undigested; or reduced, alkylated and digested.   Peptide digests from gel spots and bands, HPLC fractions, and crude venom preparations, were resuspended in 1% formic acid, 2.5% acetonitrile, and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Liquid chromatography was performed using either a Shimadzu Nexera X2 LC system with a 100 x 2.1 mm Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (1.8 µM particle size, 300 Å pore size, Agilent #858750-902) or a Shimadzu Nano LC system coupled to a 150 x 0.1 mm Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (3.5 µM particle size, 300 Å pore size, Agilent #5065-9910). The LC outflow was coupled to a 5600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) equipped with a Turbo V ion source. Peptides were eluted over 14 or 25 min gradients of 1¬–40% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. MS1 scans were collected between 350–1800 m/z, and precursor ions in the range m/z 350–1500 with charge +2 to +5 and signal >100 counts/s selected for analysis, excluding isotopes within 2 Da. MS/MS scans were acquired at with an accumulation time of 250 ms and a cycle time of 4 s. The ‘Rolling collision energy’ option was selected in Analyst, allowing collision energy to be varied dynamically based on m/z and z of the precursor ion. Up to 20 similar MS/MS spectra were pooled from precursor ions differing by less than 100 mDa.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectra in WIFF format were then compared to a library of ORFs extracted from transcriptomes generated from RNA-Seq experiments (together with a list of common MS contaminants) using a Paragon 4.0.0.0 algorithm implemented in ProteinPilot 4.0.8085 software (AB SCIEX). A mass tolerance of 50 mDa, which is ProteinPilot default value for data obtained on an AB SCIEX 5600 mass spectrometer, was used for both precursor and MS/MS ions. MS contaminants considered are included as a FASTA file ‘MS contaminants.fa’ in the PRIDE submission associated with this study (PXD004804). For all searches, the options ‘Biological modifications’, ‘Amino acid substitutions’ and ‘Thorough ID’ were selected. The ‘Biological modifications’ option allows detection of 232 modifications in addition to the 59 default modifications considered by the Paragon algorithm in ProteinPilot, which are described in the file ‘Modifications Catalogue and Translations.xls’ in the same PRIDE submission. The ‘Amino acid substitutions’ option allows detection of substitutions of all standard amino acids. In addition to searching predicted cleavage products of protein sequences against precursor ions, the ‘Thorough ID’ option runs an algorithm to match sequence tag information to amino acid sequences independently of expected cleavage sites (34). For the 2D gel spot search, the option ‘Gel based ID’ was also selected, which computationally prioritises oxidative modifications that are common artefacts of electrophoresis. The results of the pooled-sample Paragon searches were reviewed manually. Low-quality identifications were excluded by only reporting proteins for which three or more peptides were observed with > 95% confidence (p > 95%), or one or more peptide with p > 95% plus a secretion signal sequence with D-score > 0.65 according to SignalP 4.1 (39), were detected.

### Publication Abstract
Assassin bugs (Hemiptera: Heteroptera: Reduviidae) are venomous insects, most of which prey on invertebrates. Assassin bug venom has features in common with venoms from other animals, such as paralyzing and lethal activity when injected, and a molecular composition that includes disulfide-rich peptide neurotoxins. Uniquely, this venom also has strong liquefying activity that has been hypothesized to facilitate feeding through the narrow channel of the proboscis-a structure inherited from sap- and phloem-feeding phytophagous hemipterans and adapted during the evolution of Heteroptera into a fang and feeding structure. However, further understanding of the function of assassin bug venom is impeded by the lack of proteomic studies detailing its molecular composition.By using a combined transcriptomic/proteomic approach, we show that the venom proteome of the harpactorine assassin bug <i>Pristhesancus plagipennis</i> includes a complex suite of &gt;100 proteins comprising disulfide-rich peptides, CUB domain proteins, cystatins, putative cytolytic toxins, triabin-like protein, odorant-binding protein, S1 proteases, catabolic enzymes, putative nutrient-binding proteins, plus eight families of proteins without homology to characterized proteins. S1 proteases, CUB domain proteins, putative cytolytic toxins, and other novel proteins in the 10-16-kDa mass range, were the most abundant venom components. Thus, in addition to putative neurotoxins, assassin bug venom includes a high proportion of enzymatic and cytolytic venom components likely to be well suited to tissue liquefaction. Our results also provide insight into the trophic switch to blood-feeding by the kissing bugs (Reduviidae: Triatominae). Although some protein families such as triabins occur in the venoms of both predaceous and blood-feeding reduviids, the composition of venoms produced by these two groups is revealed to differ markedly. These results provide insights into the venom evolution in the insect suborder Heteroptera.

### Keywords
Heteroptera, Venom, Assassin bug, Reduviidae

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia

### Submitter
Andrew Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia


