### Accession
PXD026725

### Title
RNA-bound PGC-1α controls gene expression in liquid-like nuclear condensates

### Description
The peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) integrates environmental cues by controlling complex transcriptional networks in various metabolically active tissues. However, it is unclear how a transcriptional coregulator coordinates dynamic biological programs in response to multifaceted stimuli such as endurance training or fasting. Here, we discovered a central function of the poorly understood C-terminal domain (CTD) of PGC-1α to bind RNAs and assemble multi-protein complexes. Surprisingly, in addition to controlling the coupling of transcription and processing of target genes, RNA binding is indispensable for the recruitment of PGC-1α to chromatin into liquid-like nuclear condensates, which compartmentalize and regulate active transcription. These results demonstrate a hitherto unsuspected molecular mechanism by which complexity in the regulation of large transcriptional networks by PGC-1α is achieved. These findings are not only essential for the basic understanding of transcriptional coregulator-driven control of biological programs, but will also help to devise new strategies to modulate these processes in pathological contexts in which PGC-1α function is dysregulated, such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases or skeletal muscle wasting.

### Sample Protocol
TMT analysis Cells were lysed in 80 μl of lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M TRIS, 10 mM TCEP, pH = 8.5) using 10 cycles of sonication (Bioruptor, Diagnode). Samples were reduced for 10 min at 95°C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50 w/w; Promega,V5113) for 12 h at 37°C. Tryptic digests were acidified (pH<3) using TFA and cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, P.O.00027) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -20 °C.  Sample aliquots comprising 25 μg of peptides were labelled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT 10-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90110). TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm; Waters, 186003562) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system.  Dried peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch, r119.aq.) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1.  The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a total cycle time of approximately 1s. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 30 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, maximum accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.  In vitro affinity purification mass spectrometry (in vitro AP-MS) analysis C2C12 myotubes were transduced with PGC-1α FL at MOI 3 and nuclear extract was prepared with NE-PER™ Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #78835). Pull-down and negative control comprised 350 µg of protein from nuclear extract, while 12 µg of recombinant N-terminal His-Tag CTD of mouse PGC-1α (US Biological Life Sciences, #156296) was added only to pull-down samples. Samples were incubated overnight at 4°C with rotation, following which protein-protein complexes were purified with Pierce™ His Protein Interaction Pull-Down Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #21277) following manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-dependent interactions were assessed by treating nuclear extracts with 1 U/μl RNasin® Ribonuclease Inhibitors (Promega, # N2615) as control or 1 mg/ml of RNase A (Sigma, #R4642) for 15 min at 37°C before adding the recombinant protein for overnight incubation. Eluted proteins were TCA precipitated, washed with acetone, resuspended in Gua buffer (2 M Guanidinium-HCl, 0.1 M Ammonium bicarbonate and 5 mM TCEP) and subjected to tryptic digest. Peptides were purified using C18 reverse phase spin columns (Microspin, The Nest Group, Inc., #SEM SS18V) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C.  Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSilPur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch, r119.aq.) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1.  The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at “Rapid” scan rate with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 35 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 1e6 and 1e4, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 5e3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
TMT analysis The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)) and searched using MASCOT against a murine database (consisting of 49434 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20141124) and 390 commonly observed contaminants. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported into the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc.) and the protein false discovery rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statistical analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script v2.3.2. This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics. The calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method, with significance defined as q-value < 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.2. Overlap between different datasets was determined with Venny (version 2.1, https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). GO analysis was performed with DAVID 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/), with significance defined as adjusted (Benjamini) p-value < 0.05.  In vitro affinity purification mass spectrometry (in vitro AP-MS) analysis The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a murine database (consisting of 33968 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20180710), spiked with the sequence of his-tagged Ppargc1a and 392 commonly observed contaminants using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the dataset. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2 (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and t-Tests, MS-intensity signals were transformed from the linear to the log-scale. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html), with significance defined as p-value < 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.2. Overlap between different datasets was determined with Venny (version 2.1, https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). GO analysis was performed with DAVID 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/), with significance defined as adjusted (Benjamini) p-value < 0.05. Heat maps were generated with Morpheus (https://clue.io/morpheus).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcms/ms, Muscle cells, Apms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility 
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Klingelbergstrasse 50/70
CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland
Dr. Alexander Schmidt Proteomics Core Facility  Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland

### Submitter
Danilo Ritz

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Dr. Alexander Schmidt Proteomics Core Facility  Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland


