### Accession
PXD026593

### Title
Proteomic signatures of schizophrenia-sourced iPSC-derived neural progenitors and neurons

### Description
Schizophrenia is a complex and severe neuropsychiatric disorder, with a wide range of debilitating symptoms. Several aspects of its multifactorial complexity are still unknown, and some are accepted to be an early developmental deficiency with a more specifically neurodevelopmental origin. Understanding timepoints of disturbances during neural cell differentiation processes could lead to an insight into the development of the disorder. In this context, human brain organoids and neural cells differentiated from patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells are of great interest as a model to study the developmental origins of the disease. Here we evaluated the differential expression of proteins of schizophrenia patient-derived neural progenitors, early neurons, and brain organoids. Using bottom-up shotgun proteomics with a label-free approach for quantitative analysis. Multiple dysregulated proteins were found in pathways related to synapses, in line with postmortem tissue studies of schizophrenia patients. However, organoids and immature neurons exhibit impairments in pathways never before found in patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cell studies, such as spliceosomes and amino acid metabolism. In conclusion, here we provide comprehensive, large-scale, protein-level data that may uncover underlying mechanisms of the developmental origins of schizophrenia.

### Sample Protocol
Progenitors and neuronal cells were lysed in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1% CHAPS, 70 mM DTT, and EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), proteins extracted and digested in-gel with trypsin, after reduced by DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed in a nanoUPLCtandem nanoESI-UDMSE platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisition (DIA) experiments.

### Data Protocol
We used Progenesis QI 3.0 for proteomics software for proper spectra processing and database searching conditions, packaged with Apex3D, peptide 3D, and ion accounting informatics (Waters). Proteins were processed by using dedicated algorithms and cross-matched with the Uniprot human proteome database, version 2017/10, with the default parameters for ion counting and quantitation. The following parameters were considered in identifying peptides: (1) digestion by trypsin allowing one missed cleavage; (2) methionine oxidation was considered a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation (C) a fixed modification; (3) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuron, Disease, Organoid, Proteome, Scz, Hnpc, Neural cell, Ips

### Affiliations
University of Campinas
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil

### Submitter
Juliana Minardi Nascimento

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil


