### Accession
PXD016576

### Title
Protease-resistant streptavidin for interaction proteomics

### Description
Streptavidin-mediated enrichment is a powerful strategy to identify biotinylated biomolecules and their interaction partners by mass spectrometry. Since contamination by streptavidin limits protein identification, we here present protease-resistant streptavidin beads (prS). Their application to different biotinylated biomolecules (DNA, protein and lipid) result in >100 streptavidin contamination and better coverage of both the target and its protein interactors without the need for sample pre-fractionation.

### Sample Protocol
SEC61b interactors investigated through BioID BioID experiments were performed in stable HeLa cell lines expressing SEC61b-BirA* fusion protein or BirA*-expressing cells, as control, as described previously (Schopp I M, 2017) with minor modifications. Upon centrifugation at 4⁰C 16000g, the supernatant was incubated with 200μL of equilibrated prS- or wtS-beads o.n. at 4⁰C on rotating wheel. Beads were then recovered on a magnetic rack and washed sequentially twice with SDS 2% in water, twice with HEPES 50mM, Na-deoxycholate 0.1%, Triton X-100 1%, NaCl 500mM, EDTA 1mM, twice with Tris-HCl pH 8 10mM, NP-40 0.5%, Na-deoxycholate 0.1%, LiCl 250mM, EDTA 1mM and twice with Tris-HCl pH 7.4, NP-40 0.1%, NaCl 50mM. Beads were then conditioned with 500μL of ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) 50mM for 5min at RT and resuspended in 28μL of SDS 0.1% in AmBic 50mM. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated with DTT 7mM at 50⁰C for 30min and iodoacetamide 20mM at RT for 45min in the dark, respectively. Upon quenching with DTT, 300ng of trypsin was added (Promega V5111) for o.n. digestion at 37⁰C with 700rpm shaking. Chromatin-associated interactors of Suz12 investigated through ChIP-SICAP ChIP-SICAP experiment was performed as already described in [Rafiee, M.R. et al 2016] with some modifications. In brief, mESCs proficient or knock-out for Suz12 were used labeled with SILAC. Experiments were performed in two biological replicates with label swap. Cell pellets corresponding to 24*106 cells were cross-linked with 1.5% formaldehyde final and lysed. Upon 10 cycles of sonication and centrifugation in Triton 1% final, the supernatants were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and used as input for ChIP with 3uL of Suz12 antibody (D39F6) followed by proteinG magnetic beads enrichment. Biotinylation of the enriched DNA was performed on beads by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase , protein beads were then washed and proteins were eluted, diluted in IP buffer and 100μL of either prS- or wtS-beads were added for the DNA enrichment. Streptavidin beads were washed and were resuspended in SDS 0.1% in ammonium bicarbonate 50mM before subjected to protein reduction/de-crosslinking and alkylation. Tryptic digestion was carried out o.n. and peptides were subjected to de-salting by SP3 beads protocol as previously described [Rafiee, M.R. et al 2016, Hughes, C. S. et al 2014, Hughes, C.S. et al 2019]. Peptides were eluted in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1% and then either directly injected for single shot MS run or subjected to HpH fractionation. Lipid pull-down for the identification of ceramide-interacting proteins Lipid pull-down experiments were performed essentially as described before in Haberkant P. et al 2016 with minor modifications. In brief, A549 cells were fed with clickable ceramide derivative and labeled with SILAC and the lipid ceramide was either linked to biotin through click-chemistry or let not biotinylated as negative control. Three biological replicates were performed. Cells were lysed and 270ug of input material were used per each sample. 600uL of prS-beads or 400uL of slurry NeutrAvidin beads were conditioned and then added to the triple SILAC-coded sample. The enrichment was performed o.n. at RT in rotation. Protease-resistant beads were then washed, then moved in a PCR tube and resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate 50mM. NeutrAvidin beads were washed and proteins were eluted in with 50μL of agarose elution buffer and incubated at RT for 1h followed by 95⁰C for 30min. Samples were subjected to protein clean up with SP3 beads as previously described [Hughes C. S. et al 2014] and resuspended in AmBic 50mM. Reduction and alkylation were perfomed as above. Proteins were trypsin digested overnight at 37°C. Peptides were cleaned up by SP3 protocol as previously described [Hughes C. S. et al 2014].

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and data visualization RAW data were processed with MaxQuant (1.5.2.8, 1.6.2.6) [Cox, J.; Mann, M. 2008] using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against the Uniprot databases (Human for BioID and Lipid-BioID experiment, mouse for ChIP-SICAP) concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. Global false discovery rate for both protein and peptides was set to 1%. The match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled. Intensity-based quantification options (iBAQ and LFQ) were calculated. Perseus free software was used for data visualization [Tyanova, S. et al 2016]; after canonical filtering (Reverse, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site) only proteins with at least 1 unique peptide in all the replicates were considered as identified while only proteins with LFQ or SILAC ratio in all the replicates were defined as quantified. Streptavidin intensity percentage was calculated as the intensity of streptavidin protein over the intensity of all identified proteins (expressed as percentage). For GO analysis, the free online tool g.Profiler was used [Raudvere, U. et al 2019].

### Publication Abstract
Streptavidin-mediated enrichment is a powerful strategy to identify biotinylated biomolecules and their interaction partners; however, intense streptavidin-derived peptides impede protein identification by mass spectrometry. Here, we present an approach to chemically modify streptavidin, thus rendering it resistant to proteolysis by trypsin and LysC. This modification results in over 100-fold reduction of streptavidin contamination and in better coverage of proteins interacting with various biotinylated bait molecules (DNA, protein, and lipid) in an overall simplified workflow.

### Keywords
Bioid, Lipid binding protein, Membrane protein, Chip sicap, Dna pull down, Streptavidin, Biotin, Chip, Affinity purification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer
DKFZ

### Submitter
Gianluca Sigismondo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer


