### Accession
PXD012618

### Title
The rise and fall of major royal jelly proteins during a honey bee (Apis mellifera) workers’ life

### Description
The genome of the western honey bee (Apis mellifera) harbours ten different major royal jelly protein genes (mrjp1-10) which originate from a single-copy precursor via gene duplication. The evolutionary fate of duplicated genes is eventually determined over time as to result in loss due to pseudogenization, or in preservation due to neo- or sub-functionalization. Both fates were already observed in the mrjp gene cluster, as only mrjp1 - 9 are expressed, whereas mrjp10 was pseudogenized and represents an incomplete gene copy. In contrast, MRJP1 underwent neofunctionalization and developed an essential function within the food jelly of queen larvae, to guaranty the survival of the whole colony. We here show combining quantitative real time PCR with quantitative mass spectrometry that expression of most mrjps (mrjp1-5 and 7) shows an age dependent pattern in worker hypopharyngeal glands as well as in brains. Expression increases after hatching until the nurse bee period and is followed by a decrease in older workers that forage for different plant products. Mrjp6 expression deviates considerably from the expression profiles of the other mrjps and transcript abundance does not correlate with protein amount. Thus, either mrjp6 does fulfil a total different function or it might be on its way to pseudogenization. Furthermore, a tissue-specific function of the proteins MRJP8 and 9 in the hypopharyngeal glands and the brain can be excluded, suggesting a more general physiological than a nutritive function for both gene products.

### Sample Protocol
Honey bees (Apis mellifera) were sampled in May and June 2016 from a queen-right brood-rearing colony located in Halle (Saale), Germany (Latitude: 51.5046, Longitude: 11.9493). To raise age matched worker bees, a brood frame containing pupae with dark eyes was removed from the hive and incubated at 34 °C and 60% relative humidity. 600 freshly hatched bees were paint marked on their thoraces and returned to the hive. After 0 (directly after hatching), 4, 8, 12 (nurse bee period), 16, 20 (transition phase) and 24 days (foragers), ten bees per day were freeze killed in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further processing. Proteins were precipitated from the flow through after binding of the RNA to the NucleoSpin® RNA columns (NucleoSpin® RNA Kit, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) by sodium deoxycholate/trichloroacetic acid according to (Arnold & Ulbrich-Hofmann, 1999). Of the ten samples isolated per tissue on day zero and eight, five were retained for subsequent quantitative mass spectrometry (see point 2.4). For SDS-PAGE, individual protein pellets were dissolved in 15 µl sample buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl, 4.8% (w/v) SDS, 16% (v/v) glycerol, 0.1% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 2% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8.0) and analyzed in 8% acrylamide gels (Laemmli, 1970) at 175 V for 60 min. RJ protein extract used as reference was prepared from frozen RJ (Naturprodukte Lembcke GbR, Faulenrost, Germany) according to (Buttstedt, Ihling, Pietzsch, & Moritz, 2016). Unstained Protein Marker Broad Range (10 - 200 kDa) (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) was used as protein marker and gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Neuhoff, Arold, Taube, & Ehrhardt, 1988). Protein bands cut from SDS PA gels were identified via mass spectrometry (ESI-QTOF-MS/MS) according to (Pamminger et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Obtained masses of all samples were initially reconciled against the reference protein sequences from A. mellifera (Amel_4.5, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/GCA_000002195.1) yielding in a total of 1734 identified proteins and protein isoforms. However, exact quantification struggled as some proteins were automatically eliminated or misallocated by the program due to the following two reasons: i) for some genes different transcript/protein isoforms are annotated which result eventually in exactly the same proteins regarding amino acid sequence but are recorded as different proteins with different accession numbers in the NCBI database (e.g. Hbg 3 alpha-glucosidase, Gene ID 406131, 7 protein isoforms (XP_016767971.1, XP_016767969.1, XP_016767968.1, XP_006560870.1, XP_006560869.1, XP_006560868.1 & NP_001011608.1)). ii) although encoded by different genes some resulting proteins show an amino acid sequence identity of more than 95% (e.g. actin related protein 1, actin clone 205-like, actin clone 403-like and actin muscle like; Gene IDs: 406122, 551176, 552637 and 410075) leading again to quantification problems as an identified peptide cannot be proteotypically assigned to a specific protein and is thus neglected. Therefore, we constructed our own quantification reference database based on the 1734 proteins originally identified.

### Publication Abstract
The genome of the western honeybee (<i>Apis mellifera</i>) harbors nine transcribed <i>major royal jelly protein</i> genes (<i>mrjp1-9</i>) which originate from a single-copy precursor via gene duplication. The first MRJP was identified in royal jelly, a secretion of the bees' hypopharyngeal glands that is used by young worker bees, called nurses, to feed developing larvae. Thus, MRJPs are frequently assumed to mainly have functions for developing bee larvae and to be expressed in the food glands of nurse bees. In-depth knowledge on caste- and age-specific role and abundance of MRJPs is missing. We here show, using combined quantitative real-time PCR with quantitative mass spectrometry, that expression and protein amount of <i>mrjp1-5</i> and <i>mrjp7</i> show an age-dependent pattern in worker's hypopharyngeal glands as well as in brains, albeit lower relative abundance in brains than in glands. Expression increases after hatching until the nurse bee period and is followed by a decrease in older workers that forage for plant products. <i>Mrjp6</i> expression deviates considerably from the expression profiles of the other <i>mrjps</i>, does not significantly vary in the brain, and shows its highest expression in the hypopharyngeal glands during the forager period. Furthermore, it is the only <i>mrjp</i> of which transcript abundance does not correlate with protein amount. <i>Mrjp8</i> and <i>mrjp9</i> show, compared to the other <i>mrjps,</i> a very low expression in both tissues. Albeit <i>mrjp8</i> mRNA was detected via qPCR, the protein was not quantified in any of the tissues. Due to the occurrence of MRJP8 and MRJP9 in other body parts of the bees, for example, the venom gland, they might not have a hypopharyngeal gland- or brain-specific function but rather functions in other tissues. Thus, <i>mrjp1-7</i> but not <i>mrjp8</i> and <i>mrjp9</i> might be involved in the regulation of phenotypic plasticity and age polyethism in worker honeybees.

### Keywords
Apalbumin, Gene evolution, Gene duplication, Social insect, Division of labour, Mrjp

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie
B CUBE - Center for Molecular Bioengineering, Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 41, 01307 Dresden, Germany

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Buttstedt
B CUBE - Center for Molecular Bioengineering, Technische Universität Dresden, Tatzberg 41, 01307 Dresden, Germany


