### Accession
PXD011804

### Title
Discovery and qualification of serum protein biomarkers for cholangiocarcinoma diagnosis

### Description
The aim of the study is to discover and qualify serum protein biomarkers for cholangiocarcinoma diagnosis. Serum samples from normal, periductal fibrosis and CCA groups were screened using LC-MS/MS and MRM/MS as described in manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
All depleted serum samples were spiked with iRT and processed as described in manuscript.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) was used for quantitative label-free analysis of LC-MS/MS data.

### Publication Abstract
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a major health problem in northeastern Thailand. The majority of CCA cases are clinically silent and difficult to detect at an early stage. Although abdominal ultrasonography (US) can detect premalignant periductal fibrosis (PDF), this method is not suitable for screening populations in remote areas. With the goal of developing a blood test for detecting CCA in the at-risk population, we carried out serum protein biomarker discovery and qualification. Label-free shotgun proteomics was performed on depleted serum samples from 30 participants (<i>n</i> = 10 for US-normal, US-PDF, and CCA groups). Of 40 protein candidates selected using multiple reaction monitoring on 90 additional serum samples (<i>n</i> = 30 per group), 11 discriminatory proteins were obtained using supervised multivariate statistical analysis. We further evaluated 3 candidates using ELISA and immunohistochemistry (IHC). S100A9, thioredoxin (TRX), and cadherin-related family member 2 (CDHR2) were significantly different between CCA and normal, and CCA and PDF groups when measured in an additional 247 serum samples (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.0001). By IHC, TRX and CDHR2 were detected in the cytoplasm and nucleus of CCA and inflammatory cells. S100A9 was detected in the infiltrating tumor stroma immune cells. Proteomics discovery and qualification in depleted sera revealed promising biomarker candidates for CCA diagnosis.

### Keywords
Cholangiocarcinoma; proteomics; mass spectrometry; multiple reaction monitoring; serum biomarker discovery pipeline

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand 40002

### Submitter
Kassaporn Duangkumpha

### Lab Head
Dr Watcharin Loilome
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand 40002


