### Accession
PXD042936

### Title
High Efficiency Enrichment by Saturating Nanoliters of Protein Affinity Media

### Description
Affinity-purification mass-spectrometry (AP-MS) is an established technique for identifying protein-protein interactions (PPIs). The basic technology involves immobilizing a high-specificity ligand to a solid phase support (e.g., an agarose or magnetic bead) to pull down protein(s) of interest from cell lysates. Although these supports are engineered to minimize interactions with background protein, the conventional method recovers mostly non-specific binders. The law of mass action for dilute solutions has taught us to use an excess of beads to capture all target proteins, especially weakly interacting ones. However, modern microbead technology presents a binding environment that is much different from dilute solution. We describe a fluidic platform that captures and processes ultralow nanoliter quantities of magnetic particles, simultaneously increasing the efficiency of PPI detection and strongly suppressing non-specific binding. We demonstrate the concept with synthetic mixtures of tagged protein and illustrate performance with a variety of AP-MS experiment types. These include a BioID experiment targeting lamin-A interactors from HeLa cells, and pulldowns using GFP-tagged proteins associated with a double-strand DNA repair mechanism. We show that efficient extraction requires saturation of the solid-phase support and that <10 nL of beads is sufficient to generate comprehensive protein interaction maps.

### Sample Protocol
Eg5 sample preparation and processing. The expression and purification of the motor domain of Eg5 (1-386), together with the biotinylation of the protein, are described in Supporting Information. Samples for AP-MS were prepared by spiking biotinylated Eg5 into clarified E. coli cell lysate (45 µg, PBS, pH 7.4, 0.1% Triton X100, 1mM PMSF). Enrichment efficiency was determined using variable amounts of Promag® 1 series streptavidin coated magnetic beads (Bangs Laboratory, Catalog # PMS1N), incubated with sample volumes ranging from 50-200 µL at 4 ˚C. At the end of the incubation, sample was aspirated at the rate of 10 µL/min through a fused silica capillary (250/360 μm ID/OD, Polymicro Technologies™, Molex®) placed in a specially designed magnetic trap, described below. The beads were washed online at 10 µL/min for 10 min. At the end of the wash, the beads were collected in a tube containing 5 μL of digestion buffer (20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 20 ng MS-grade trypsin, Pierce, Catalog # 90057), and placed in a 37 ⁰C incubator for overnight on-bead digestion. Digestion was quenched by adding 1 μL of 10% formic acid. Following quench, the supernatant was removed and transferred directly to a sample vial for LC-MS/MS analysis. BioID sample preparation and processing. The cell lines used in BioID experiments were Flp-In-T-REx HeLa cells transfected with BirA*-FLAG-LMNA, or BirA*-FLAG-GFP constructs with tetracycline inducible stable expression (kind gifts from Gingras Lab, University of Toronto, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute). Cells were grown and proximity labeling induced as described in Supporting Information. Dynabeads™ (MyOne™ Streptavidin T1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog # 65601)) were incubated with BioID cell lysates for 2 hours at 4 °C. Following incubation, beads were captured in the magnetic trap, and washed with 100 µL of PBS (pH = 7.4) at 10 µL/min for 10 min. For higher volume enrichments (≥500 µl) the capillary was switched to 320 µm ID/450 µm OD (Polymicro Technologies™, Molex®) and the wash flow rate increased to 20 µL/min for 5 min. On-bead digestion was performed as described above. Affinity Enrichment of GFP-tagged DNA repair proteins. EGFP-tagged constructs were prepared for three proteins involved in DNA damage repair through the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway:  EGFP-DNA-PKcs, EGFP-XRCC4 and EGFP-XLF. The anti-GFP nanobody used to isolate these proteins and their binders was prepared as previously described30 and immobilized on the T1 Dynabeads. Details are provided in Supporting Information. Cell lysates were then incubated with anti-GFP magnetic beads for 2 hours at 4 °C. At the end of incubation, the beads were captured in the magnetic trap and washed online with PBS (pH 7.4) at 20 µL/min for 5 minutes. On-bead digestion was performed as described above.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired on EASY-nLC-1200 pump coupled with Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using conditions described in Supporting Information. For peptide identification, raw spectral files were searched with the MSFragger (version 3.5)31 database search engine implemented in the FragPipe GUI. Philosopher (version 4.4.0)32, and IonQuant (version 1.8.0)33 were enabled in the FragPipe for results filtering and peptide/protein level quantitation, respectively. Perseus (version 2.0.6.0)34 was used to perform statistical analysis using protein intensity data imported from the FragPipe output. Details on the search criteria and methods of statistical analysis used are set out in the Supporting Information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Enrichment efficiency, Magnetic beads, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Shaunak Raval

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Schriemer
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada


