### Accession
PXD005266

### Title
Proteasome activity profiling uncovers alteration of catalytic β2 and β5 subunits of the stress-induced proteasome during salinity stress in tomato roots

### Description
The stress proteasome in the animal kingdom facilitates faster conversion of oxidized proteins during stress conditions by incorporating different catalytic β subunits. Plants deal with similar kind of stresses and also carry multiple paralogous genes encoding for each of the three catalytic β subunits. Here we investigated the existence of stress proteasomes upon salt stress in tomato roots. In contrast to Arabidopsis thaliana, tomato has a simplified proteasome gene set with single genes encoding each β subunit except for two genes encoding β2. Using proteasome activity profiling on tomato roots during salt stress we discovered a transient modification of the catalytic subunits of the proteasome coinciding with a loss of viability. This stress-induced proteasome disappears at later time points and coincides with the need to degrade oxidized proteins during salt stress. Subunit-selective proteasome probes and MS analysis of fluorescent 2D gels demonstrated that the stress-induced proteasome is not caused by altered subunit assembly, but involves an increased molecular weight (MW) of both β2 and β5 subunits, and an additional acidic pI shift for β5, whilst β1 remains mostly unchanged. Although the underlying subunit modification is unknown, we can rule out ubiquitination, phosphorylation and glycosylation as underlying molecular mechanisms. This stress-induced proteasome may play an important role in PCD during abiotic stress.

### Sample Protocol
Bands were excised by hand and treated with trypsin as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Tryptic digests were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). After elution from the StageTips samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo, Michalski et al., 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the two-column mode. The home-made fused silica column equipped with a glass fiber frit (Maiolica et al., 2005) was packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch) and connected to the analytical column via an UHPLC union (Upchurch; UH 432). The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 25 cm) with integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in UPLC grade water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). Peptides were delivered to the pre-column via the integrated autosampler at a flow rate of 2 – 3 µl/min in 100% solvent A. Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 70 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 60 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 5 min and 100% B for 5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48) and was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS) in the scan range of m/z 300-1,500 and at a resolution of 120,000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al., 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.6 – 2.0 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. CID collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states bigger than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The recorded RAW files were processed in ProteomDiscoverer 1.4 (PD14, Thermo). MS2 spectra were extracted using the Spectrum Selector node. Precursor selection was set to “use MS1 precursor”. The mass range was set between 350 – 5,000 Da with a minimum peak count of 1. Mass analyzer was set to “any” and MS order to “MS2”. Activation type was set to “is CID” and Scan type was defined as “full” with ionization source set to “is nanospray”. Selected spectra were submitted to the in house MASCOT server (version 2.4.1 (Perkins et al., 1999)) using the PD14 MASCOT node. Alternatively, RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.30) using the default settings (Cox et al., 2005). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al., 2014).  MS2 spectra data were searched against the tomato_ITAG.fasta database (solgenomics.net; version 2.3; 34725 entries). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MASCOT and MaxQuant, 263 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Mascot and Andromeda searches allowed for oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and a static modification on cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P. The instrument type in MASCOT searches was set to ESI-TRAP and the mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm for precursor mass and ±0.35 Da for product ion masses. MS2 spectra matches were then evaluated using the peptide validation node of PD14 with the standard settings (search against decoy database, target false discovery rate (FDR, strict): 0.01 and target FDR (released): 0.05). The reported results were further filtered. On peptide level only peptides with a minimum confidence ‘medium’ were reported and on protein level only proteins with a minimum of at least two peptide hits were reported. For the Andromeda searches the default MaxQuant settings were used. Briefly, the precursor peptide tolerance for the first search was 20 ppm and for the main search 4.5 ppm. The ion trap MS/MS match tolerance was 0.5 Da. Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was switched on. All other settings were comparable to the MASCOT search.

### Publication Abstract
The stress proteasome in the animal kingdom facilitates faster conversion of oxidized proteins during stress conditions by incorporating different catalytic &#x3b2; subunits. Plants deal with similar kind of stresses and also carry multiple paralogous genes encoding for each of the three catalytic &#x3b2; subunits. Here, we investigated the existence of stress proteasomes upon abiotic stress (salt stress) in tomato roots. In contrast to <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, tomato has a simplified proteasome gene set with single genes encoding each &#x3b2; subunit except for two genes encoding &#x3b2;2. Using proteasome activity profiling on tomato roots during salt stress, we discovered a transient modification of the catalytic subunits of the proteasome coinciding with a loss of cell viability. This stress-induced active proteasome disappears at later time points and coincides with the need to degrade oxidized proteins during salt stress. Subunit-selective proteasome probes and MS analysis of fluorescent 2D gels demonstrated that the detected stress-induced proteasome is not caused by an altered composition of subunits in active proteasomes, but involves an increased molecular weight of both labeled &#x3b2;2 and &#x3b2;5 subunits, and an additional acidic pI shift for labeled &#x3b2;5, whilst labeled &#x3b2;1 remains mostly unchanged. Treatment with phosphatase or glycosidases did not affect the migration pattern. This stress-induced proteasome may play an important role in PCD during abiotic stress.

### Keywords
Catalytic subunit, Immune proteasome, Salt stress, Tomato root, Programmed cell death, Activity-based protein profiling, 20s proteasome

### Affiliations
Universität Duisburg-Essen ZMB, Chemische Biologie, AG Kaiser Universitätsstr. 2 45117 Essen
University Duisburg-Essen

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Universität Duisburg-Essen ZMB, Chemische Biologie, AG Kaiser Universitätsstr. 2 45117 Essen


