### Accession
PXD003522

### Title
Comparative Phosphoproteome Analysis of Seedling Leaves in Brachypodium distachyon. under Different Drought Conditions

### Description
Drought stress is a major abiotic stress affecting plant growth and development. Brachypodiumdistachyon L. is a special model plant for wheat, barley, and several potential biofuel grasses. In this study, we make comparative phosphoproteome analysis of seeding leaves at the three leaf stage in Brachypodiumdistachyon L. for the different treatment conditions (6h, 24h). A total of 480 unique phosphopeptides, representing 439 phosphoproteins, were identified under drought stress. Motif-X analysis identified six motifs, such as [SP], [RxxS], [LxRxxS], [SxD], [SF] and [TP]. Molecular function and PPI analysis suggested that many proteins may take participation in signal transduction, gene expression, drought response and defense with energy metabolism and material transmembrane transport under moisture deficiency condition. Further analyses revealed that these SCPL phosphoproteins may play important roles in regulating signal transduction and material transmembrane transport to cope with the adverse environmental conditions. This study first focus on the effects of phosphorylation modification mechanisms on the growth and development of seeding leaves at different drought stresses.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and drought treatment Brachypodiumdistachyon21 was used as plant material in this study. For details, seeds were surface sterilized by 15% sodium hypochlorite for 3 min, and rinsed 4 times in sterile distilled water. Seeds were submerged in water for 12 h at room temperature, and then transferred to wet filter paper to germinate at room temperature (22-25°C) for 24 h. The uniformly germinated seeds were selected to grow in plastic pots containing Hoagland solution, in which Hoagland solution was changed every two days. In a greenhouse, the experimental conditions included daily photo cycle of 16 h light / 8 h dark (26°C/18°C) and 65–75% air humidity. Three biological replicates were performed under the same conditions. At the three leaf stage, the seedlings for the treatment condition (6h,24h) were cultivated in Hoagland solution containing 20% PEG6000 (ψs= -0.75) which was measured by VAPRO pressure osmometer (Wescor 5520, USA), whereas the seedlings for the control were only cultivated in Hoagland solution (ψs= -0.045). After treatment for 0h, 6h and 24h, Part of the sampled leaves for each biological replicates were used to measure physiological indicators and the remaining leaves were kept frozen in -80ºC for later protein extraction.  Protein extraction Leaf total proteins were extracted according to the method of Lvet al. (2014) with minor modifications.Approximately 500 mg of fresh leaves from each biological replicate was ground into a fine power in liquid nitrogen. The ground power was suspended in 4 mL SDS buffer  and 4 mL phenol  in a 10 mL tube, followed by the addition of 1 mMphenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 20 μL protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck KGaA, Germany) per 1 g of fresh sample to inhibit the protease activities. Samples were mixed vigorously for 15 min at room temperature, centrifuged twice at 15700 × g for 15 min each, and the supernatants were precipitated with 100 mM cold ethanolamine-methanol solution at −20°C over night. After centrifuging at 15700 × g for 15 min, the pellets were rinsed with cold acetone (−20°C) and further centrifuged three times. After freeze-drying, the pellets were added to 300 μL of solubilization buffer at room temperature for 2 h. Insoluble materials were removed by centrifugation at 15700 × g for 15 min, and protein samples were measured using a 2-D Quant Kit. The final protein solution was stored at −80°C for later use. Phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2microcolumns Extracted protein mixtures were directly reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin as described previously (Olsen et al. 2006).The enrichment for phosphopeptides procedure was performed as reported by Wu et al. (Wu et al. 2007)with some modifications. In detail, the TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) were incubated in 400 μL loading buffer containing 65% Acetonitrile (ACN) / 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) / saturated by glutamic acid. A total of 2 mg tryptic peptide were resolved in 600 μL loading buffer, and then incubated with appropriate amount of the TiO2 beads. After washing by 600 μL wash buffer (65% ACN/0.1% TFA), phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 300 μL elution buffer (500 mM NH4OH / 60% ACN). The eluates were dried down and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) / H2O for MS analysis.  Phosphopeptideidentification using LC-MS / MS Enriched phosphopeptides were separated on a self-packed C18 reversed phase column (75 μm I. D., 150 mm length) (Column Technology Inc.), which directly connected on the nano electrospray ion source on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Pump flow was split to achieve a flow rate at 1 μL/min for sample loading and 300nL/min for MS analysis. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% FA (A) and 0.1% FA and 80% ACN (B). A five-step linear gradient of 5% to 30% B in 105 min, 35% to 90% B in 16 min, 90% B in 4 min, 90% to 2% B for 0.5 min and 2% B for 14.5 min was employed. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of heated capillary was 240°C. For each sample, triplicate LC-MS/MS experiments were performed.  For data acquisition, For data acquisition, each MS scan was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z) with lock mass option enabled and was followed by a data-dependent top 10 MS/MS scans using collision induced dissociation (CID). The threshold for precursor ion selection was 500. Mass window for precursor ion selection was 2.0 Da. The dynamic exclusion duration was 120 s, repeat count was 1 and repeat duration was 30 s. The analyzer for the MS scans was Orbitrap and for the MS/MS scans wasLTQ (37% relative collision energy). Three biological replicates were performed from sample collection to the phosphopeptide identification using LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Phosphorylation residue localization Phosphorylation residue localization was evaluated based on PTM scores that assign probabilities for each of the possible residues according to their residue-determining ions. In this study, Maxquant (version 1.2.2.25) was used to calculate PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities. Then, potential phosphorylation residues were grouped into three categories depending on their PTM localization probabilities (Olsen et al. 2006) namely class I (localization probability, P ≥ 0.75), class II (0.75 >P ≥ 0.5) and class III (P < 0.5). The false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used for phosphorylation residues identification. Spectra without residue-determining ions resulted in the identification of phosphopeptides with undetermined residues. Bioinformatics The significantly enriched phosphorylation motifs were extracted from the Motif-X algorithm (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/; Schwartz and Gygi，2005). Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING version 9.1) database of physical and functional interactions was used to analyze the Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) of all the phosphoproteins identified in the current study (http://string-db.org；Franceschiniet al. 2013).The sequences of all phosphoproteins were blasted in NCBI. Function annotationswere based on the Protein family motif (Pfam) software (http://pfam.xfam.org/; Finn et al. 2014) and blast2go(http://www.blast2go.com/b2ghome; Conesa and Gotz 2008).Using EuKaryotic Orthologous Groups (KOG) database (http://eggnog.embl.de/version_3.0/;), KOG search and numbers were obtained. Then a dataset containing all the KOG numbers was used to do PPI analysis by using STRING and the interested network was displayed by Cytoscape (version 3.1.0) software (http://www.cytoscape.org/). Secondary structure of phoshoproteins was predicted via SABLE server version 2 (http://sable.cchmc.org/). Phyre2 online server (http://www.sbg.Bio.ic.ac.uk/html/ page.cgi?Id=index) was used to predict the 3D structure of some interested phosphoproteins. Then the phosphorylated residues were displayed by SPDBV (version 4.1) software (http://spdbv.vital-it.ch/; Guex and Peitsch 1997).

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress is a major abiotic stress affecting plant growth and development. In this study, we performed the first dynamic phosphoproteome analysis of Brachypodium distachyon L. seedling leaves under drought stress for different times. A total of 4924 phosphopeptides, contained 6362 phosphosites belonging to 2748 phosphoproteins. Rigorous standards were imposed to screen 484 phosphorylation sites, representing 442 unique phosphoproteins. Comparative analyses revealed significant changes in phosphorylation levels at 0, 6, and 24&#x2009;h under drought stress. The most phosphorylated proteins and the highest phosphorylation level occurred at 6&#x2009;h. Venn analysis showed that the up-regulated phosphopeptides at 6&#x2009;h were almost two-fold those at 24&#x2009;h. Motif-X analysis identified the six motifs: [sP], [Rxxs], [LxRxxs], [sxD], [sF], and [TP], among which [LxRxxs] was also previously identified in B. distachyon. Results from molecular function and protein-protein interaction analyses suggested that phosphoproteins mainly participate in signal transduction, gene expression, drought response and defense, photosynthesis and energy metabolism, and material transmembrane transport. These phosphoproteins, which showed significant changes in phosphorylation levels, play important roles in signal transduction and material transmembrane transport in response to drought conditions. Our results provide new insights into the molecular mechanism of this plant's abiotic stress response through phosphorylation modification.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation proteins, Signal transduction, Drought stress, Brachypodiumdistachyonl., Seeding leaves, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Capital Normal University 
Key Laboratory of Genetics and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, XisanhuanBeilu No. 105, 100048 Beijing, P. R. of China.

### Submitter
Linlin Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Yueming Yan
Key Laboratory of Genetics and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, XisanhuanBeilu No. 105, 100048 Beijing, P. R. of China.


