### Accession
PXD033631

### Title
MiPRISMA: Interactome profiling of small peptides and young microproteins translated from human short open reading frames Part4

### Description
All species continuously evolve small open reading frames (sORFs) that can be templated for protein synthesis and may provide raw material for evolutionary adaptation. We analyzed the evolutionary origins of 7,264 recently cataloged human sORFs and found that most were evolutionary young and emerged de novo. We additionally discovered 221 yet uncataloged peptides smaller than 16 amino acids, for which we found evidence of translation in human and rodent tissues. To investigate the potential bioactivity of microproteins and peptides translated from young and very small ORFs we established MiPRISMA: a mass spectrometry-based interactome screen with sequence motif resolution. We assessed 266 candidates and implicated several in essential cellular processes including splicing, translational regulation, and endocytosis, a subset of which we validate in cellular assays. MiPRISMA provides a scalable platform to characterize small and evolutionarily young proteins, shedding light on a largely unexplored territory of the putative human proteome.

### Sample Protocol
3xFLAG-tagged microproteins were overexpressed in HEK293T/17 cells, immunoprecipitated and analyzed by MS. On bead digestion was performed after pulldown experiment, beads were resuspended in urea buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), reduced for 30 min at 25 ¡C in 12 mM DTT solution, followed by alkylation in 40 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min in the dark at 25 C. Samples were first digested with 0.5Êµg endopeptidase LysC (Wako, Osaka, Japan) for 4 h. After adding 80Êµl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) samples were digested with 1Êµg sequence grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 25 C. The peptide-containing supernatant was collected, acidified and desalted. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column (20 cm fritless silica microcolumns with an inner diameter of 75um, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9?m resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) using a 90 min gradient with a 250 nL/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and ionized using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on an Thermo Q Exactive Plus instrument, which was run in data dependent mode selecting the top 10 most intense ions in the MS full scans, selecting ions from 350 to 2000m/z,using 70 K resolution with a 3 ? 10E6ion count target and 50 ms injection time. Tandem MS was performed at a resolution of 17.5 K. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5x10E4 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Only precursors with charge state 2-6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10-ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes.  Data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (v1.5.2.8). The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a human UniProt database (HUMAN.2017-01) and an in-house bait protein sequence database containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the ÒMatch between runsÓ option for biological replicates, in which the maximal retention time window was set to 0.7 min.  Ê

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (v1.5.2.8). The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a human UniProt database (HUMAN.2017-01) and an in-house bait protein sequence database containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the ÒMatch between runsÓ option for biological replicates, in which the maximal retention time window was set to 0.7 min.  Ê

### Publication Abstract
All species continuously evolve short open reading frames (sORFs) that can be templated for protein synthesis and may provide raw materials for evolutionary adaptation. We analyzed the evolutionary origins of 7,264 recently cataloged human sORFs and found that most were evolutionarily young and had emerged de&#xa0;novo. We additionally identified 221 previously missed sORFs potentially translated into peptides of up to 15&#xa0;amino acids-all of which are smaller than the smallest human microprotein annotated to date. To investigate the bioactivity of sORF-encoded small peptides and young microproteins, we subjected 266 candidates to a mass-spectrometry-based interactome screen with motif resolution. Based on these interactomes and additional cellular assays, we can associate several candidates with mRNA splicing, translational regulation, and endocytosis. Our work provides insights into the evolutionary origins and interaction potential of young and small proteins, thereby helping to elucidate this underexplored territory of the human proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Interactome, Proteomics, Microproteins

### Affiliations
Berlin Institute of Health at Charite,  Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility Proteomics; Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Berlin Institute of Health at Charite,  Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility Proteomics; Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany


