### Accession
PXD003061

### Title
Changes in liver proteins of rats fed both low and high-fat and sucrose diets induced by fish omega-3 PUFAs and their combination with grape polyphenols according to quantitative proteomics

### Description
This study considers the physiological modulation of liver proteins due to the supplementation with fish oils under two different dietary backgrounds: low- or high- fat and sucrose diets, and the effect of their combination with an antioxidant agent (grape polyphenols) which provides reducing power. For this scope, a quantitative proteomics approach based on the Isobaric Tag for relative and Absolute Quantitation methodology (iTRAQ)-coupled to nano-LC-MS/MS and complemented with 2D-DIGE analysis were used for determining the regulation of liver proteins exerted by the supplementation with fish oils, polyphenols or their combination of Wistar Kyoto rats in the two chosen dietary backgrounds. This experimental design was useful to investigate if the behavior of fish oils changes when the dietary background is modified and the possible synergy between fish oils and polyphenols. Results show that the capacity of fish oils, polyphenols or their combination for down or up-regulating liver proteins depends on the dietary context. In the background of low-fat low-sucrose healthy diets, 10 different proteins were altered by the sum of three supplements, in opposite to the 45 altered proteins found in the high-fat high-sucrose unhealthy diets. In both situations, fish oils seemed to be the main force for regulating liver proteins, although the addition of polyphenols was able to modulate some fish oils effects. Moreover, we provide evidence of the effect of fish oils and their combination with grape polyphenols for improving biochemical parameters and for reducing enzymes of hepatic lipogenesis and glycolysis, for enhancing fatty acid beta oxidation and insulin signaling and for the amelioration of endoplasmic reticule stress and protein oxidation when are included in an unhealthy diet.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion of pooled samples, peptide labelling with iTRAQ reagent and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Generated MGF files were independently searched against the Rattus norvegicus UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database containing 27765 protein coding genes and their corresponding reversed entries using the Mascot Server v. 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, iTRAQ4plex (N-term and K) and beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 25 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p<0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% False Discovery Rates (FDR) threshold were considered correctly identified. Only proteins having at least two quantitated peptides were considered in the quantitation. A 5% quantitation FDR threshold was estimated to consider the significant differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
This study considered the physiological modulation of liver proteins due to the supplementation with fish oils under two dietary backgrounds: standard or high in fat and sucrose (HFHS), and their combination with grape polyphenols. By using a quantitative proteomics approach, we showed that the capacity of the supplements for regulating proteins depended on the diet; namely, 10 different proteins changed into standard diets, while 45 changed into the HFHS diets and only scarcely proteins were found altered in common. However, in both contexts, fish oils were the main regulatory force, although the addition of polyphenols was able to modulate some fish oils' effects. Moreover, we demonstrated the ability of fish oils and their combination with grape polyphenols in improving biochemical parameters and reducing lipogenesis and glycolysis enzymes, enhancing fatty acid beta-oxidation and insulin signaling and ameliorating endoplasmic reticulum stress and protein oxidation when they are included in an unhealthy diet.

### Keywords
Sucrose, Diet, Liver, Proteomics, High-fat, Omega-3, Itraq

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas (IIM-CSIC)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Isabel Medina
Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas (IIM-CSIC)


