### Accession
PXD010965

### Title
PLASMA biomarkers of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

### Description
The aim of the current study is to find plasma-based biomarker candidates for Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF). Incidence of IPF seems to be increasing in Europe and there is significant mortality associated with IPF. There are no sensistive biomarkers for IPF and diagnosis is entirely clinical and/or histopathological which is often delayed. Minimally invasive biomarkers of IPF would be expected to aid clinicians perfrom early diagnosis of IPF enabling better management of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from 37 individuals (17 IPF patients and 20 healthy controls) were collected and top 12 high-abundant plasma proteins were depleted by immunoaffinity spin columns. Equal amount of protein was dried and dissolved in 6M urea. The total proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested. Then peptides were cleaned with Pierce C18 (Thermofisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol, dried and dissolved to 0.1% formic acid in water. The tryptic peptide mixture was analysed by Waters Synapt G2-Si, coupled to the nano-Acquity UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (v2, Nonlinear Dynamics), and matched against the Uniprot FASTA sequences. Search parameters variations (from default settings) were: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation), trypsin cleavage with 2 missed cleavages. False discovery rate was set to 1%. Protein identification required 2 unique peptides, and the parsimony principle was used to group peptides into protein categories. All peptide Ids where the mass error was more than 10 ppm were deleted.

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a lung parenchymal disease of unknown cause usually occurring in older adults. It is a chronic and progressive condition with poor prognosis and diagnosis is largely clinical. Currently, there exist few biomarkers that can predict patient outcome or response to therapies. Together with lack of markers, the need for novel markers for the detection and monitoring of IPF, is paramount. We have performed label-free plasma proteomics of thirty six individuals, 17 of which had confirmed IPF. Proteomics data was analyzed by volcano plot, hierarchical clustering, Partial-least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) and Ingenuity pathway analysis. Univariate and multivariate statistical analysis overlap identified haptoglobin-related protein as a possible marker of IPF when compared to control samples (Area under the curve 0.851, ROC-analysis). LXR/RXR activation and complement activation pathways were enriched in t-test significant proteins and oxidative regulators, complement proteins and protease inhibitors were enriched in PLS-DA significant proteins. Our pilot study points towards aberrations in complement activation and oxidative damage in IPF patients and provides haptoglobin-related protein as a new candidate biomarker of IPF.

### Keywords
Complement activation, Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, Biomarkers, Udmse, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 00290, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 00290, Finland


