### Accession
PXD015518

### Title
A fibroblast-specific genome-scale model focused on fatty acid alpha-oxidation

### Description
Refsum disease is an inborn error of metabolism that is characterized by a defect in peroxisomal α-oxidation of the branched-chain fatty acid phytanic acid. After clinical suspicion of this disorder, including progressive retinitis pigmentosa and polyneuropathy, Refsum disease is biochemically diagnosed by elevated levels of phytanic acid in plasma and tissues of the patient. To date, no cure exists for Refsum disease, but phytanic acid levels in patients can be reduced by plasmapheresis and a strict diet. In recent years, computational models have become valuable tools to provide insight into the complex behaviour of metabolic networks. Besides the comprehensive models that contain all known metabolic reactions within the human body, several tissue- and cell-type-specific models have been developed. However, while systems biology approaches are widely used for complex diseases, only few studies have been published for inborn errors of metabolism. In this study, we reconstructed a fibroblast-specific genome-scale model based on the recently published, FAD-curated model, based on Recon3D reconstruction. We used transcriptomics, exo-metabolomics, and proteomics data, which we obtained from healthy controls and Refsum disease patient fibroblasts incubated with phytol, a precursor of phytanic acid. Our model correctly represents the metabolism of phytanic acid and displays fibroblast-specific metabolic functions. Using this model, we investigated the metabolic phenotype of Refsum disease at the genome scale, and we studied the effect of phytanic acid on cell metabolism. We identified 20 metabolites that were predicted to discriminate between Healthy and Refsum’s Disease patients, whereof several with a link to amino acid metabolism. Ultimately, these insights in metabolic changes may provide leads for pathophysiology and therapy.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion and strong cation-exchange (SCX) fractionation Protein samples were mixed with LDS loading buffer (NuPAGE) at a concentration of 3.4 ug total protein. The sample was run briefly into a precast 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Novex, ran for maximally 5 min at 100 V). The gel was stained with Biosafe Coomassie G-250 stain (Biorad) and after destaining with milliQ-H2O, the band containing all proteins was excised from gel. The gel band was sliced into small pieces, washed subsequently with 30% and 50% v/v acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (dissolved in milliQ-H2O), each incubated at RT for 30 min while mixing (500 rpm) and lastly with 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, before drying the gel pieces in an oven at 37 °C. The proteins were reduced with 20 μL 10 mM dithiothreitol (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in milliQ-H2O, 30 min, 55 °C) and alkylated with 20 μL 55 mM iodoacetamide (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in milliQ-H20, 30 min, in the dark at RT). The gel pieces were washed with 50% v/v acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (dissolved in milliQ-H2O) for 30 min while mixing (500 rpm) and dried in an oven at 37 °C) before overnight digestion with 20 μL trypsin (1:100 g/g, sequencing grade modified trypsin V5111, Promega) at 37 °C. The next day, the residual liquid was collected before elution of the proteins from the gel pieces with 20 µL 75% v/v acetonitrile plus 5% v/v formic acid (incubation 20 min at RT, mixing 500 rpm). The elution fraction was combined with the residual liquid and were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 30 μL of 20% v/v acetonitrile plus 0.4% v/v formic acid (dissolved in milliQ-H2O) for SCX fractionation. Samples were loaded onto a SCX StageTips (20 μL tip StageTip, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except that the elution solvent (500 mM ammonium acetate in 20% v/v acetonitrile, dissolved in milliQ-H2O) plus 0.4% v/v formic acid was used instead of the 1M NaCl solution in this protocol during initialization. After loading and washing of the peptides according to the protocol, the peptides were eluted in three separate fractions by stepwise elutions (30 μL each) of 25 mM, 150 mM and 500 mM ammonium acetate in 20% v/v acetonitrile (dissolved in milliQ-H2O). The collected flow through was polled with the last elution fraction. The elution fractions were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 8 μL 0.1% v/v formic acid (dissolved in milliQ-H2O).  LC-MS analysis Discovery mass spectrometric analyses were performed on a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) using a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in acetonitrile). In general, 6 µL was injected using the µL-pickup method with buffer A as a transport liquid from a cooled autosampler (5 ˚C) and loaded onto a trap column (µPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µmx5 mm, Dionex). Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column using a linear gradient from 2-40% buffer B in 117 min at a flowrate of 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70.000 at m/z 200 over a scan range of 300 to 1650 m/z with a AGC target of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptide fragmentation was performed with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. The intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 2.0 e4 with a charge exclusion of 1≤ and ≥7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, a AGC target of 1e5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms and the isolation window set to 1.6 m/z

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data analysis LC-MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) [PMID: 19029910]. Peptide and protein identification were carried out with Andromeda against a human SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, downloaded November 10, 2016, 20,161 entries) and a contaminant database (298 entries). The searches were performed using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. For peptide identification two miss cleavages were allowed, a carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as a static modification and an oxidation of methionine residues as a variable modification. Peptides and proteins were identified with a FDR of 1%. For a protein identification, at least one unique peptide had to be detected and the match between runs option was enabled. Proteins were quantified with the MaxLFQ algorithm [PMID: 24942700] considering only unique peptides and a minimum ratio count of one. Results were exported as tab-separated *.txt for further data analysis.  Differential analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics Differential gene/protein expression analysis based on the negative binomial distribution was performed using DESeq2 (Love et al. 2014). Genes for which summed across all samples raw counts were higher than 20 were analysed. Protein intensities were transformed to integers and analysed similarly to the transcriptomics data.

### Publication Abstract
Refsum disease (RD) is an inborn error of metabolism that is characterised by a defect in peroxisomal &#x3b1;-oxidation of the branched-chain fatty acid phytanic acid. The disorder presents with late-onset progressive retinitis pigmentosa and polyneuropathy and can be diagnosed biochemically by elevated levels of phytanate in plasma and tissues of patients. To date, no cure exists for RD, but phytanate levels in patients can be reduced by plasmapheresis and a strict diet. In this study, we reconstructed a fibroblast-specific genome-scale model based on the recently published, FAD-curated model, based on Recon3D reconstruction. We used transcriptomics (available via GEO database with identifier GSE138379), metabolomics and proteomics (available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015518) data, which we obtained from healthy controls and RD patient fibroblasts incubated with phytol, a precursor of phytanic acid. Our model correctly represents the metabolism of phytanate and displays fibroblast-specific metabolic functions. Using this model, we investigated the metabolic phenotype of RD at the genome scale, and we studied the effect of phytanate on cell metabolism. We identified 53 metabolites that were predicted to discriminate between healthy and RD patients, several of which with a link to amino acid metabolism. Ultimately, these insights in metabolic changes may provide leads for pathophysiology and therapy. DATABASES: Transcriptomics data are available via GEO database with identifier GSE138379, and proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015518.

### Keywords
Human, Refsum, Model, Fibroblasts, Fatty acid alpha-oxidation

### Affiliations
​Dr. J.C. Wolters Principal investigator University Medical Center Groningen Laboratory of Pediatrics Visiting address: Antonius Deusinglaan 1 (ERIBA 6th floor), 9713 AV  Groningen, The Netherlands Mail address: P.O.Box 196, 9700 AD Groningen, The Netherlands HPC XB23/Room 3226.0657 Phone: +31 (0) 50 3636276 www.labpediatricsrug.nl
University Medical Center Groningen

### Submitter
Justina C. Wolters

### Lab Head
Dr Wolters JC
​Dr. J.C. Wolters Principal investigator University Medical Center Groningen Laboratory of Pediatrics Visiting address: Antonius Deusinglaan 1 (ERIBA 6th floor), 9713 AV  Groningen, The Netherlands Mail address: P.O.Box 196, 9700 AD Groningen, The Netherlands HPC XB23/Room 3226.0657 Phone: +31 (0) 50 3636276 www.labpediatricsrug.nl


