### Accession
PXD006245

### Title
Fishing for SAM/SAH-binding proteins

### Description
The aim of the project was to identify S-adenodsyl methionine-binding proteins expressed in D. melanogaster S2 cells. For this puprose a capture compund reagent carrying a SAH-affinity group, a biotin group for enrichment and a cross-linking moiety consisting of either  benzophenone or a nitrobenzene.

### Sample Protocol
D.melanogaster cells were harvested and lyzed and subsequently the cell lysate was incubated with the capture compound at 4 degrees. the capture compound was not added to the control sample. After the incubation peroid, crosslinking samples were subjected to photocrosslinking by UV light at 255 nm a second uncrosslinked sample was also prepared. Subsequently, streptavidin beads were added to all samples to isolate proteins that bound the capture compound. Beads were isolated, washed and subjected to trypsin digestion.  Following peptide desalting, petide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an QTOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All data files were searched together against a D.melanogaster database within the MaxQuant software suit. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantitation of all protein hits with 2 or more peptides identified. To identify specific binders, numbers of peptides and differences in protein intesnnity were compared between crosslink, no crosslink and control immunoprecipitations. Further peptide fragmetnation spectra were analyzed for peptides with variable fragmentation patterns.

### Publication Abstract
Spectral libraries play a central role in the analysis of data-independent-acquisition (DIA) proteomics experiments. A main assumption in current spectral library tools is that a single characteristic intensity pattern (CIP) suffices to describe the fragmentation of a peptide in a particular charge state (peptide charge pair). However, we find that this is often not the case. We carry out a systematic evaluation of spectral variability over public repositories and in-house data sets. We show that spectral variability is widespread and partly occurs under fixed experimental conditions. Using clustering of preprocessed spectra, we derive a limited number of multiple characteristic intensity patterns (MCIPs) for each peptide charge pair, which allow almost complete coverage of our heterogeneous data set without affecting the false discovery rate. We show that a MCIP library derived from public repositories performs in most cases similar to a "custom-made" spectral library, which has been acquired under identical experimental conditions as the query spectra. We apply the MCIP approach to a DIA data set and observe a significant increase in peptide recognition. We propose the MCIP approach as an easy-to-implement addition to current spectral library search engines and as a new way to utilize the data stored in spectral repositories.

### Keywords
Lysine methylation, S-adenosyl-methionine, Methyltransferase, Capture compound

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Department of Molecular Biology BioMedical Center, LMU Munich Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried +49 89 2180 75420

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Department of Molecular Biology BioMedical Center, LMU Munich Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried +49 89 2180 75420


