### Accession
PXD035065

### Title
Salt and metal tolerance involves formation of guttation droplets in species of the Aspergillus versicolor complex

### Description
Three strains of the Aspergillus versicolor complex were isolated from a salty marsh at a former uranium mining site in Thuringia, Germany. The strains from a metal-rich environment were not only highly salt tolerant (up to 20% NaCl), but at the same time could sustain elevated Cs and Sr (both up to 100 mM) concentrations as well as other (heavy) metals present in the environment. During growth experiments when screening for differential cell morphology, the occurrence of guttation droplets was observed, specifically when elevated Sr concentrations of 25 mM were present in the media. To analyze the potential of metal tolerance being promoted by these excretions, proteomics and metabolomics of guttation droplets were performed. Indeed, proteins involved in up-regulated metabolic activities as well as in stress responses were identified. The metabolome verified the presence of amino sugars, glucose homeostasis regulating substance, (S)-abscisic acid and bioactive alkaloids, flavones and quinones.

### Sample Protocol
During microscopical assessment, guttation droplets were observed with different colors on control plates compared to plates containing Sr. To characterize these guttation droplets, proteomics as well as metabolomics were performed. Therefore, the droplets were sampled with a micropipette, cleaned by centrifugation (13.000 rpm, 5 min) and the supernatant stored at -20 °C until further processing. Guttation droplets were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and resolubilized in 50 µl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The solution was further diluted (1:1) with 50 µl of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and protein solubilization was facilitated by 15 min ultrasonic bath treatment. Each 2 µl of 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) were added for reduction and carbamidomethylation of cysteine thiols at 70°C for 30 min incubation in a thermomixer (500 rpm). Subsequently, samples were precipitated with MeOH/chloroform/water according to the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (1984). Precipitates were resolubilized in 100 mM TEAB in 5:95 TFE:H2O (v/v) and treated for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath. Protein concentrations were determined by the Merck-Millipore Direct Detect IR-Spectrometer. Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C using a Trypsin-LysC protease mix (Promega) at a protein-to-protease ratio of 25:1. Tryptic peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, resolubilized in 30 µl 0.05% TFA and 2% ACN in water, filtered through 0.2 µm spin filters (Merck-Millipore Ultrafree-MC hydrophilic PTFE membrane) at 14,000 × g for 15 min and transferred into HPLC vials. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed as follows: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65 %B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 Top 15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3×10^6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 28% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM, ITmax of 100 ms and an AGC target of 2×10^5. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were first searched against the NCBI database of Fungi (txid 4751). As Aspergillus puulaauensis was by far the most prominent hit final searches were performed by using the NCBI database of A. puulaauensis using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4, Sequest HT, MS Amanda 2.0 and MS Fragger 3.2. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and protein N-term Met-loss and/or acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and at least a search engine threshold >30 (Mascot), >4 (Sequest HT), >300 (MS Amanda) and >8 (MS Fragger) were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted.

### Publication Abstract
Three strains of the <i>Aspergillus versicolor</i> complex were isolated from a salty marsh at a former uranium mining site in Thuringia, Germany. The strains from a metal-rich environment were not only highly salt tolerant (up to 20% NaCl), but at the same time could sustain elevated Cs and Sr (both up to 100 mM) concentrations as well as other (heavy) metals present in the environment. During growth experiments when screening for differential cell morphology, the occurrence of guttation droplets was observed, specifically when elevated Sr concentrations of 25 mM were present in the media. To analyze the potential of metal tolerance being promoted by these excretions, proteomics and metabolomics of guttation droplets were performed. Indeed, proteins involved in up-regulated metabolic activities as well as in stress responses were identified. The metabolome verified the presence of amino sugars, glucose homeostasis-regulating substances, abscisic acid and bioactive alkaloids, flavones and quinones.

### Keywords
Salt stress; heavy metals; aspergillus; mycobiome; post-mining environments

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


