### Accession
PXD038889

### Title
Quantitative comparison of manuka and clover honey proteomes with royal jelly

### Description
SWATH-MS was used to compare relative protein quantities of bee origin in manuka and clover honey to royal jelly.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of honey and royal jelly were dissolved in PBS, dialysed against PBS to remove sugars, centrifuged to remove insoluble material and concentrated.  The retentate was reconstituted in 200 µL of 15% ACN and 5 mM TCEP in 200 mM TEAB. After 20 min incubation the volume was reduced by centrifugation to 20 µL and then reconstituted in 200 µL of 15% ACN and 40 mM iodoacetamide in 200 mM aqueous TEAB. After 15 min incubation in the dark the samples were buffer exchange three times to 200 µL 15% ACN in 200 mM aqueous TEAB. Concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. Samples were then concentrated down to 20 µL and supplemented with 5 µg of sequencing grade trypsin in 15% ACN in 200 mM aqueous TEAB. Proteins were digested on filter at 37 °C overnight and boosted with an additional 2 µg of trypsin in the morning. After an incubation at 37 °C for 4 h the samples were dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm internal diameter silica emitter tip column packed with Luna (Phenomenex) C18 bead material (3.2 µm, 100 A) on a length of 20 cm. Peptides were separated by a 90 min LC gradient between mobile phase A (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 90% aqueous ACN) for manuka and royal jelly pooled samples and a 60 min LC gradient for the clover and royal jelly pooled samples. Each individual sample was analysed in technical triplicates by data-independent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data from the DIA analyses were processed using DIA-Umpire version 2.0. Raw files from manuka and royal jelly 90 min LC runs, and clover 60 min LC runs were converted with ABSCIEX MS Converter (AB Sciex) and msconvert. The files were processed with DIA-Umpire signal extraction module and converted to mzXML format with msconvert. Output files were searched using X!Tandem (2013.06.15.1) with a reference database consisting of all A. mellifera entries in the NCBI RefSeq collection (comprising 23,491 sequence entries, downloaded from the NCBI site (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) on 20/04/2021) and reverse decoys. Search parameters included trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, with a maximum of two missed cleavages, 50 ppm precursor mass error, and modifications to cysteine and methionine residues. Search outputs were scored and combined with PeptideProphet [19] and ProteinProphet [20]. The ProteinProphet results for each group were processed through the DIA-Umpire quantification module. FDR was set at 1% and filtered with a target-decoy method based on protein probability values. For comparative quantification of proteins, raw data of the DDA analyses were processed and searched against the A. mellifera reference database using ProteinPilot (version 4.5, AB Sciex). Search parameters included trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, biological modifications and single amino acid exchanges were allowed as dynamic modifications, and FDR analysis was enabled. The resulting group file was loaded into the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 integrated into PeakView (version 2.2, AB Sciex) to build spectral libraries. For accurate retention time alignment and peak matching, a time window of 12 min and a mass accuracy of 50 ppm were allowed. Peak intensities were then extracted from DIA data using the 6 strongest fragment ions from each of the 10 strongest precursors, at a peptide confidence of ≥99% and FDR threshold for peak matching of ≤1%. Shared peptides were excluded. The extracted area under the curve values were imported into MarkerView (version 1.2, AB Sciex) for data normalisation.

### Publication Abstract
Royal jelly and honey are two substances produced successively by the worker bee caste. Modern proteomics approaches have been used to explore the protein component of each substance independently, but to date none have quantitatively compared the protein profile of honey and royal jelly directly. Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) was used to compare protein quantities of bee origin in m&#x101;nuka and clover honey to royal jelly. Two analysis techniques identified 76 proteins in total. Peptide intensity was directly compared for a subset of 31 proteins that were identified with high confidence, and the relative changes in protein abundance were compared between each honey type and royal jelly. Major Royal Jelly Proteins (MRJPs) had similar profiles in both honeys, except MRJP6, which was significantly more abundant in clover honey. Proteins involved in nectar metabolism were more abundant in honey than in royal jelly as expected. However, the trend revealed a potential catalytic role for MRJP6 in clover honey and a nectar- or honey-specific role for uncharacterised protein LOC408608. The abundance of MRJP6 in m&#x101;nuka honey was equivalent to royal jelly suggesting a potential effect of nectar type on expression of this protein. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD038889.

### Keywords
Royal jelly, Manuka honey, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
ManukaMed LP

### Submitter
Blake Paget

### Lab Head
Dr Chris McMahon
ManukaMed LP


