### Accession
PXD009558

### Title
Thioredoxin reduces complement factor H and alters its complement regulatory function

### Description
Complement factor H (CFH) is an enzyme responsible for inactivating components of the complement cascade, thus limiting the downstream effector mechanisms which would otherwise occur were the process to continue unregulated. In view of the close structural and functional homology between β2GPI and CFH we sought in this study to determine whether CFH is a substrate for oxidoreductases, and whether distinct redox forms can be found in the plasma or serum of individuals and if so to determine the functional implications of such redox transformations to CFH complement regulatory function. This dataset relates to the detection of reduced disulfide bonds in CFH by TRX-1/TRX-R/NADPH.

### Sample Protocol
The native CFH protein reduced with TRX-1/ TRX-R/NADPH was resolved on NuPAGE Novex 4-12 % Bis-Tris Gel under non-reducing conditions and stained with colloidal Coomassie. The protein band was excised from the gel, destained, dried and incubated with 100 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 25 oC. The gel slice was washed with NH4HCO3 dried and incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The slices were washed and dried before digestion of the free thiol CFH protein with 20 ng.µL-1 trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 30°C.  Peptides were eluted from the slices with 5% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile for 30 min and separated by nano-LC on a Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) using a fritless nano column (75µ x ~10cm) containing C18 media (5µ, 200 Å Magic, Michrom). Peptides were eluted and analysed in an LTQFT Ultra (Themo Electron) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to mzXML and a custom script was used to quantify peptide masses +/-3ppm related to Cys+Carbamidomethyl(57.02146), Maleimide-Biotin(523.21007), Maleimide-Biotin+H(539.20498) and Maleimide-Biotin+H2O(541.22063) forms of all theoretical CFH tryptic peptides allowing for a maximum of 1 missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Complement Factor H (CFH) is an important inhibitor of the alternate complement pathway in Bruch's membrane (BM), located between the choriocapillaris and the retinal pigment epithelium. Furthermore dysfunction of its activity as occurs with certain polymorphisms is associated with an increased risk of age related macular degeneration (AMD). The retina is a site of high generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and dysfunction of redox homeostasis in this milieu also contributes to AMD pathogenesis. In this study we wanted to explore if CFH exists in distinct redox forms and whether these species have unique protective biological functions. CFH can be reduced by the naturally occurring thioredoxin -&#x202f;1 in CFH domains 1-4, 17-20. We found a duality of function between the oxidised and reduced forms of CFH. The oxidised form was more efficient in binding to C3b and lipid peroxidation by-products that are known to accumulate in the retinae and activate the alternate complement pathway. Oxidised CFH enhances Factor I mediated cleavage of C3 and C3b whereas the reduced form loses this activity. In the setting of oxidative stress (hydrogen peroxide)-mediated death of human retinal pigment epithelial cells as can occur in AMD, the free thiol form of CFH offers a protective function compared to the oxidised form. We found for the first time using a novel ELISA system we have developed for free thiol CFH, that both redox forms of CFH are found in the human plasma. Furthermore there is a distinct ratio of these redox forms in plasma depending if an individual has early or late AMD, with individuals with early AMD having higher levels of the free thiol form compared to late AMD.

### Keywords
Complement factor h, Disulfide bonds, Thioredoxin

### Affiliations
University of Hong Kong
Faculty of Medicine, St George and Sutherland Clinical School, University of New South Wales, St George Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia

### Submitter
Jason Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Krilis
Faculty of Medicine, St George and Sutherland Clinical School, University of New South Wales, St George Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia


