### Accession
PXD012147

### Title
Human macrophages in 3D - Macrophages are involved in a large number of tissue functions in homeostasis and various pathological situations

### Description
Macrophages are involved in a large number of tissue functions in homeostasis and various pathological situations. These cells present a high degree of phenotypic plasticity that is grasped by the concept of polarization. One goal of the macrophage’s biology field is to obtain molecular signatures of these polarizations. To achieve this task, it is necessary to integrate how physical environment signals are interpreted by macrophages under immune stimulation. In this work, we have studied how a 3D collagen scaffold modulates the polarizations of human macrophages and revealed that some traditionally used markers should be reassessed.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were directly lysed in Laemmli buffer and prepared and analysed as previously described (Court et al MCP 2017). Briefly, the protein equivalent of 300 000 cells for each sample was loaded on NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% acrylamide gels (Life Technologies SAS). Electrophoretic migration was controlled to allow each protein sample to be split into six gel bands. Gels were stained with R-250 Coomassie blue (Bio-Rad) before excising protein bands. Gel slices were washed then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile, incubated with 10 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at 56 °C, followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 35 min in the dark. Alkylation was stopped by adding 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After extraction fractions were pooled, dried and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. The dried extracted peptides were resuspended and analyzed by online nano-LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) directly linked to an impact IITM Hybrid Quadrupole Timeof- Flight (QTOF) instrument fitted with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonics, Germany).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed using Max- Quant software (version 1.5.2.8) and the Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and a minimum length of seven amino acids was set. MaxQuant scored peptide identifications based on a search with an initial permissible mass deviation for the precursor ion of up to 0.07 Da after time-dependent recalibration of the precursor masses. Fragment mass deviation was allowed up to 40 ppm. The Andromeda search engine was used to match MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human database . Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, whereas N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identification information to other LC-MS/MS runs based on ion masses and retention times (maximum deviation 0.7 min); this feature was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed using the label-free algorithms. A minimum peptide ratio counts of two and at least one “razor peptide” was required for quantification. The LFQ metric was used to perform relative quantification between proteins identified in different biological conditions, protein intensities were normalized based on the MaxQuant “protein group.txt” output (reflecting a normalized protein quantity deduced from all peptide intensity values). Potential contaminants and reverse proteins were strictly excluded from further analysis. Three analytical replicates from two independent biological samples (donors) were analyzed for each polarization in the 2D and 3D conditions. Missing values were deduced from a normal distribution (width: 0.3; down shift: 1.8) using the Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) post data acquisition package contained in MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org). Data were further analyzed using JMP software (v.13.0.0, SAS Institute Inc.). Proteins were classed according to the paired Welch t test difference (difference between the mean value for triplicate MS/MS analyses for the two conditions compared), and the median fold-change between the two conditions compared.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, 3d, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Inserm IAB
Inserm

### Submitter
Arnaud Millet

### Lab Head
Dr MILLET Arnaud
Inserm IAB


