### Accession
PXD027132

### Title
Casein phoshopeptides identification by partial-, double-dephosphorylation and endoGluC digestion

### Description
The aim of the present study was the development of a relatively simple method without enrichment step to detect, in a mixture of peptides and phosphopeptides, a maximum of CPPs, including multi-phosphorylated and large-size CPPs, by using high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) and bioinformatics. A commercial casein hydrolysate was used as model hydrolysate for this purpose. This approach consisted of use of double and partial dephosphorylations of CPPs as well as digestion by EndoGluC protease before peptidomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Two batches of CPP hydrolysates were prepared by the Ingredia S.A. manufacture (St-Pol-Sur-Ternoise, France) using an industrial process.  Dried CPP hydrolysates were solubilized at a concentration of 1 mg.mL-1 in a solution of LC-MS grade water acidified with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged for 10 min at 8,000 × g. Pellets were removed and supernatants were called “control CPP hydrolysates” (control CPPs) and submitted to peptidomics analysis.  A 2-step method of dephosphorylation was applied to CPP hydrolysates.  The protocol used was adapted from Matéos et al. (2009). Samples were called “doubly-dephosphorylated CPP hydrolysates” (DD CPPs)   Partial dephosphorylation of the CPPs was also carried out on CPP hydrolysates. Samples were called “partially-dephosphorylated CPP hydrolysates” (PD CPPs).  CPP hydrolysates were also subjected to enzymatic digestion by Glu-C endoproteinase (EC 3.4.21.19). Samples were called “endoGluC-digested CPP hydrolysates” (endoGluC CPPs).  Ten µl of control-, DD-, PD- and endoGluC-CPPs were chromatographically separated on an ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation) using a HALO® AQ-C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm, 2.7 µm, Advanced Materials Technology GmBH, Wilmington, USA). The eluate was directed into the electrospray ionization source of the Q-TOF Synapt G2-Si™ (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). MS analysis was performed in sensitivity, positive ion and data dependent analysis (DDA) modes.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed via the PEAKS Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) using the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot databases restricted to Bos taurus organism (September 10, 2018). A mass tolerance of 35 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.2 Da were allowed. The data searches were performed notifying the choice of trypsin as enzyme and three missed cleavage sites were allowed. Variable serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylations and methionine oxidation were also considered with a maximum of 7 post-translational modifications allowed by peptide. The relevance of (phospho)peptide identities was judged according to their identification score returned by PEAKS Studio 8.5 using ap-value of 0.05 (p<0.05) and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of phosphopeptides is currently a challenge when they are part of a complex matrix of peptides, such as a milk protein enzymatic hydrolysate. This challenge increases with both the number of phosphorylation sites on the phosphopeptides and their amino acid length. Here, this paper reports a four-phase strategy from an enzymatic casein hydrolysate before a mass spectrometry analysis in order to enhance the identification of phosphopeptides and phosphosites: (i) the control protein hydrolysate, (ii) a two-step enzymatic dephosphorylation of the latter, allowing for the almost total dephosphorylation of peptides, (iii) a one-step enzymatic dephosphorylation, allowing for the partial dephosphorylation of the peptides and (iv) an additional endoGluC enzymatic hydrolysis, allowing for the cleavage of long-size peptides into shorter ones. The reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (RP-HPLC-MS/MS) analyses of hydrolysates that underwent this four-phase strategy allowed for the identification of 28 phosphorylation sites (90%) out of the 31 referenced in UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot (1 June 2021), compared to 17 sites (54%) without the latter. The alpha-S2 casein phosphosites, referenced by their similarity in the UniProt database, were experimentally identified, whereas pSer148, pThr166 and pSer187 from a multiphosphorylated long-size kappa-casein were not. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027132.

### Keywords
Casein phosphopeptides, Endogluc digestion, Dephosphorylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UMR Transfrontalière BioEcoAgro N° 1158,Univ. Lille, INRAE, Univ. Liège, UPJV, YNCREA, Univ. Artois, Univ. Littoral Côte d’Opale, ICV – Institut Charles Viollette, F-59000 Lille, France.
UMRT BioEcoAgro

### Submitter
Barbara Deracinois

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Louis HILBERT
UMR Transfrontalière BioEcoAgro N° 1158,Univ. Lille, INRAE, Univ. Liège, UPJV, YNCREA, Univ. Artois, Univ. Littoral Côte d’Opale, ICV – Institut Charles Viollette, F-59000 Lille, France.


