### Accession
PXD002539

### Title
Proteomic study of fruit exocarp tissue in four cultivars of Vitis Vinifera

### Description
The aim of this work was to study the metabolism of grape berry skin, a tissue that has a protective role against damage by physical injuries and pathogen attacks. This role requires a metabolism able to sustain biosynthetic activities such as those relating to secondary compounds (i.e. flavonoids). In order to draw the attention on these biochemical processes, a proteomic and metabolomic comparative analysis was performed among Riesling Italico, Pinot Gris, Pinot Noir and Croatina cultivars, which are known to accumulate anthocyanins to a different extent.  The application of multivariate statistics on the dataset pointed out that the cultivars were distinguishable from each other and the order in which they were grouped mainly reflected their relative anthocyanin contents. Sorting the spots according to their significance selected proteins were characterized by LC-ESI-MS/MS.  Considering the functional distribution, the identified proteins were involved in many physiological processes such as stress, defense, carbon metabolism, energy conversion and secondary metabolism. The trends of some metabolites were related to those of the protein data. Taken together, the results permitted to highlight the relationships between the secondary compound pathways and the main metabolism (e.g. glycolysis and TCA cycle). Moreover, the trend of accumulation of many proteins involved in stress responses, reinforced the idea that they could play a role in the cultivar specific developmental plan.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fraction was extracted using the phenol method. Protein concentration was determined by 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare) Proteome was analyzed by 2-DE analysis  Spot analysys by LC-ESI-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The differences among the four cultivars were assessed analyzing the %Vol dataset through the application of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Forward Stepwise Linear Discriminant Analysis (FS-LDA) on the first 10 PCA scores. Protein identification was performed by Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics

### Publication Abstract
The role of grape berry skin as a protective barrier against damage by physical injuries and pathogen attacks requires a metabolism able to sustain biosynthetic activities such as those relating to secondary compounds (i.e., flavonoids). In order to draw the attention on these biochemical processes, a proteomic and metabolomic comparative analysis was performed among Riesling Italico, Pinot Gris, Pinot Noir, and Croatina cultivars, which are known to accumulate anthocyanins to a different extent. The application of multivariate statistics on the dataset pointed out that the cultivars were distinguishable from each other and the order in which they were grouped mainly reflected their relative anthocyanin contents. Sorting the spots according to their significance 100 proteins were characterized by LC-ESI-MS/MS. Through GC-MS, performed in Selected Ion Monitoring (SIM) mode, 57 primary metabolites were analyzed and the differences in abundance of 16 of them resulted statistically significant to ANOVA test. Considering the functional distribution, the identified proteins were involved in many physiological processes such as stress, defense, carbon metabolism, energy conversion and secondary metabolism. The trends of some metabolites were related to those of the protein data. Taken together, the results permitted to highlight the relationships between the secondary compound pathways and the main metabolism (e.g., glycolysis and TCA cycle). Moreover, the trend of accumulation of many proteins involved in stress responses, reinforced the idea that they could play a role in the cultivar specific developmental plan.

### Keywords
Grape berry, 2-de, Vitis vinifera

### Affiliations
Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie e Ambientali, Produzione, Territorio, Agroenergia (DISAA), Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan - ITALY
Università degli Studi di Milano

### Submitter
Luca Espen

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Espen
Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie e Ambientali, Produzione, Territorio, Agroenergia (DISAA), Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan - ITALY


