### Accession
PXD025182

### Title
Drug target deconvolution in Plasmodium falciparum using thermal proteomics profiling

### Description
Early identification of a compound’s mode of action can greatly benefit the discovery process.  Thermal proteomics profiling (TPP) is a powerful, unbiased tool that can be used to identify potential ligands of protein targets.  TPP takes advantage of the fact that a ligand binding to its target protein can significantly stabilise that protein, increasing its melting temperature (Tm).  We previously optimised this technique for use in drug target deconvolution in the kinetoplastid parasite, Leishmania donovani1 and here report the optimisation and validation of TPP in the malaria-causing parasite P. falciparum.

### Sample Protocol
Thermal shift assays The lysate concentration was adjusted to 1 mg/mL with lysis buffer and then 2 x 2 mL aliquots were incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the presence of test compound (equivalent to 10×EC50, DDD01510706, EC50 = 344 nM) or vehicle (0.1% DMSO). Each 2 mL aliquot (drug and vehicle treated) was divided into 10 x 100 µL aliquots in 0.5 mL Protein Lobind tubes (Eppendorf) and incubated at a designated temperature (37, 41, 45, 49, 53, 57, 61, 65, 69 and 73oC) for 3 min followed by incubation at RT for 3 min before each sample was placed on ice. Each aliquot was centrifuged (100,000 x g, 20 min, 4oC), supernatants were collected and the protein concentration was assessed.  Sample processing Samples were reduced by the addition of TCEP (25 mM final concentration) and incubated at 37 ºC for 10 min. Alkylation was carried out by the addition of iodoacetamide (25 mM final concentration) and incubated at RT for 1 h in the dark.  Samples were then digested by the addition of 1:50 LysC (Wako, Japan) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) followed by incubation at 37 ºC for 6h and then addition of 1:50 trypsin (Thermo) followed by incubation at 37 ºC overnight. The efficiency of sample digestion efficiency was assessed by MS (LTQ XL, Thermo). The samples were then vacuum-dried and resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (100 µL). Samples were then incubated in their respective Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo) for 1 h at RT with agitation. Reactions were quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min and each set of samples (treated and vehicle) were pooled in the same tube and dried overnight. The TMT-labelled samples were dried and kept at -85 ºC until further analysis. Fractionation by HPLC Pooled samples were resuspended in 200 μL 10 mM ammonium (formate pH 9.5) and subjected to fractionation on an RP-High pH HPLC.   A  C18 column (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 2.1 x 150 mm, Waters) with a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 2.1 x 10mm, Waters) were used on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Scientific). Buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in milliQ water) and Buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile) were used for fractionation, both buffers were adjusted to pH 9.5 with ammonia.  Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC auto-sampler (Thermo-Scientific) at 1 min intervals. The column and guard column were equilibrated with 2% Buffer B for 20 min at a constant flow rate of 0.2 mL min-1. Samples (180 µL) were loaded onto the column at 0.2 mL min-1, and a separation gradient started 1 min after samples were loaded onto the column. Peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 2% Buffer B to 20% B in 8 min then from 20% B to 47% B in 37 min. The column was washed for 15 min at 100% Buffer B and re-equilibrated at 2% buffer B for 20 min.  Collection of fractions started 1 min after injection and stopped after 80 min (total of 80 fractions, 200 µL each). The total number of fraction concatenated was set to 24 and the contents of the fractions were dried and suspended in 50 µL 1% formic acid, prior to analysis by LC-MS. LC-MS/MS Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-Exactive-HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used were as follows:  Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and Buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). Aliquots of each sample (1 μL)  were loaded at 5 µL/min onto a trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 5% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm x 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 µm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B (for fractions 1-10, 7% for fractions 11-20) to 35% buffer B in 130 min, and then to 98% Buffer B at 132 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min and re-equilibrated in 5% buffer B for 17 min. Q-exactive HF was used in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3 x 106) followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, resolution at 60,000, maximum ion injection time at 200 ms and AGC 1 x 105). To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs are performed.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantitation MS data were analysed using the software MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.1.0). Carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ) and Gln-> pyro-Glu were set as a variable modifications. Proteins were identified by searching the MS and MS/MS data for the peptides against P. falciparum strain 3D7 (Plasmo DB version 45, plasmodb.org). Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. Reporter ion MS2 mode was selected using the TMT-10plex labels on N-terminus and lysine. Protein abundance was calculated according to the normalized reporter ion intensities. The FDR threshold for peptides and proteins was 0.01. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, FTMS MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and ITMS MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.06 Da. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) data analysis TPP experiments were analysed using the TPP Package available in Bioconductor, as previously described [Franken et al., 2015, Corpas-Lopez et al., 2019]. Briefly, raw protein abundance, calculated from normalized reporter ion intensities of all quantified proteins, were log transformed and scaled between 0 and 1 by subtracting the global minimum and normalizing to the abundance at the lowest temperature of each protein to yield fold changes. The melting curves were calculated using a sigmoidal fitting approach with the R package TPP. This fitting was used to determine the melting point (Tm), which is defined as the temperature at which half of the amount of proteins was denatured. The melting point differences (ΔTm) were calculated by subtracting the Tm values of treated and untreated sample. The sigmoidal melting curves were filtered according to the following criteria: melting curves must reach a relative abundance plateau < 0.3 and the coefficient of determination (R2) must be >0.8. The statistical significance was calculated using a z-test and only proteins with a p-value <0.01 were considered hits. Hits found in two biological replicas were considered targets.

### Publication Abstract
There is a pressing need for new medicines to prevent and treat malaria. Most antimalarial drug discovery is reliant upon phenotypic screening. However, with the development of improved target validation strategies, target-focused approaches are now being utilized. Here, we describe the development of a toolkit to support the therapeutic exploitation of a promising target, lysyl tRNA synthetase (<i>Pf</i>KRS). The toolkit includes resistant mutants to probe resistance mechanisms and on-target engagement for specific chemotypes; a hybrid KRS protein capable of producing crystals suitable for ligand soaking, thus providing high-resolution structural information to guide compound optimization; chemical probes to facilitate pulldown studies aimed at revealing the full range of specifically interacting proteins and thermal proteome profiling (TPP); as well as streamlined isothermal TPP methods to provide unbiased confirmation of on-target engagement within a biologically relevant milieu. This combination of tools and methodologies acts as a template for the development of future target-enabling packages.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Thermal proteome profiling, Lysine trna synthetase

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Mode of Action Group, Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Victoriano Corpas-Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Susan Wyllie
Mode of Action Group, Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


