### Accession
PXD033120

### Title
The protein phosphatase 2A holoenzyme is a key regulator of starch metabolism and bradyzoite differentiation in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Phenotypic switching from tachyzoite to bradyzoite and vice versa is the fundamental mechanism underpinning the pathogenicity and adaptability of the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Accumulation of cytoplasmic starch granules is a hallmark of the quiescent bradyzoite stage. The regulatory factors and mechanisms that contribute to amylopectin storage in bradyzoites remain incompletely known. Here, we show that T. gondii protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) holoenzyme is composed of a catalytic subunit (PP2A-C), a structural subunit (PP2A-A) and a regulatory subunit (PP2A-B). Disruption of any of these subunits increased starch accumulation and disrupted the parasite differentiation. The putative PP2A holoenzyme substrates were identified by phosphoproteomics. PP2A contributes to the regulation of amylopectin metabolism via dephosphorylation of calcium-dependent protein kinase 2 at S679. Several putative PP2A substrates were found to play important roles in bradyzoite differentiation. Our findings establish PP2A as an integral component of the regulatory network mediating amylopectin metabolism and tachyzoite-bradyzoite transformation in T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and sample preparation For stable isotope labeling studies, tachyzoites of Pru, PruΔcdpk2 and PruΔpp2a-c tachyzoites were grown in R0K0 (light), R6K4 (medium) or R10K8 (heavy) SILAC medium containing 1% dialyzed FCS for at least 8 generations to ensure efficient the medium and heavy label incorporation, as done previously (McCoy et al., 2017; Beraki et al., 2019). Analysis demonstrated >95% incorporation of R6, K4, R10 or K8 labels after this time, and then labeled tachyzoites of each strain were added to HFF monolayers in 175 cm2 culture flasks each and allowed to invade in SILAC labeling medium for 4 h before extensive washing and the addition of alkaline SILAC labeling medium (pH 8.2). Parasites were cultured in a 37 °C incubator without CO2 for 4 days and medium was replaced every day to maintain high alkaline. Parasites were purified and harvested as described above, and samples were prepared for each strain from four independent experiments.  Cell lysis and protein digestion Parasite lysis was sonicated three minutes on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (1%SDS, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was added with 1 volume of pre-cooled acetone, vortexed to mix, and added with 4 volumes of pre-cooled acetone, precipitated at -20℃ for 2 h. The protein sample was then redissolved in 200 mM TEAB and ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by Strata X SPE column.  Phosphopeptide enrichment Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid). To remove the non-specifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides, the elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis and data processing The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile), loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient involved an increase from 7% to 11% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 4 min, 11% to 32% in 50 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Exploris 480 (Thermo) coupled online to the EASY-nLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.3 kV. The m/z scan range was 400 to 1200 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 35 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan was driven by 1 s cycle time method with 30 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 110 m/z.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Starch metabolism, Toxoplasma gondii, Pp2a holoenzyme, Differentiation, Dephosphorylation.

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China.

### Submitter
JinLei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing-Quan Zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


