### Accession
PXD027792

### Title
Proteins interacting with ZC3H28 and DRBD18

### Description
ZC3H28 is a zinc-finger domain protein that is essential in bloodstream forms trypanosomes. Tethering ZC3H28 to a reporter mRNA results in an increase of the reporter mRNA levels but without a corresponding increase in protein expression levels. ZC3H28 associates with long RNAs that have low complexity in their 3’-untranslated regions. RNA immunoprecipitation results also showed that there was also a clear negative correlation between ZC3H28 mRNA binding and ribosome density.  DRBD18 is a double RNA-binding domain protein that is essential in bloodstream forms and in procyclic forms. RNAi-mediated depletion of DRBD18 in bloodstream forms leads to reduction in RBP10 protein expression levels and caused accumulatio of several shortened RBP10 mRNA isoforms. DRBD18 depletion had similar effects on more than other 100 mRNAs including DRBD12. Binding of DRBD18 to mRNAs did not correlate with effects on the transcriptome, presumably because binding to mRNA precursors is not detected. We speculate that DRBD18 might bind to processing signals in the 3'-UTRs of mRNAs, thus preventing their use, and that this binding also serves to recruit mRNA export factors.

### Sample Protocol
To purify TAP-ZC3H28 and TAP-DRBD18, both proteins were subjected to a single-step purification. Briefly, the cleared lysate was incubated with IgG-coupled magnetic beads (DynabeadsTM M-280 Tosylactivated, Invitrogen) for 3 hours, then washed and the bound proteins were eluted with TEV protease. The eluate was incubated with Ni-NTA-magnetic beads to allow removal of the TEV protease. The proteins were eluted by magnetic separation. Eluted proteins were separated on 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel until the running front had migrated roughly 2 cm, thereafter the gel was stained with Coomassie blue and destained with destaining solution (10 % acetic acid, 50 % methanol in H2O). Two areas per lane were cut and analyzed in the ZMBH Mass Spectrometry facility. Cell lines expressing the TAP-GFP served as controls.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of co-purifying proteins was done in the ZMBH Mass Spectrometry facility via the Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system directly coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). MS spectra (m/z 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution. Fragmentation in CID cell was performed for up to 10 precursors. MS2 spectra were acquired at rapid scan rate. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30; J. Cox, M. Mann, Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, 1367) for peptide identification and quantification. MS2 spectra were searched against the TriTrypDB-8.1TREU927-AnnotatedProteins-1 database (containing 11567 sequences). Data were analyzed quantitatively and plotted using Perseus software (Version 1.6.15.0). Protein identification were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The parasite <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> grows as bloodstream forms in mammals, and as procyclic forms in tsetse flies. Transcription is polycistronic, all mRNAs are <i>trans</i> spliced, and polyadenylation sites are defined by downstream splicing signals. Expression regulation therefore depends heavily on post-transcriptional mechanisms. The RNA-binding protein DRBD18 was previously implicated in the export of some mRNAs from the nucleus in procyclic forms. It copurifies the outer ring of the nuclear pore, mRNA export factors and exon-junction-complex proteins. We show that for more than 200 mRNAs, DRBD18 depletion caused preferential accumulation of versions with shortened 3'-untranslated regions, arising from use of polyadenylation sites that were either undetectable or rarely seen in nondepleted cells. The shortened mRNAs were often, but not always, more abundant in depleted cells than the corresponding longer versions in normal cells. Their appearance was linked to the appearance of <i>trans</i>-spliced, polyadenylated RNAs containing only downstream 3'-untranslated region-derived sequences. Experiments with one mRNA suggested that nuclear retention alone, through depletion of MEX67, did not affect mRNA length, suggesting a specific effect of DRBD18 on processing. DRBD18-bound mRNAs were enriched in polypyrimidine tract motifs, and DRBD18 was found in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm. We therefore suggest that in the nucleus, DRBD18 might bind to polypyrimidine tracts in 3'-UTRs of mRNA precursors. Such binding might both prevent recognition of mRNA-internal polypyrimidine tracts by splicing factors, and promote export of the processed bound mRNAs to the cytosol.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins; trypanosoma brucei; post-transcriptional regulation

### Affiliations
ZMBH, University of Heidelberg

### Submitter
Tania Bishola

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Clayton
ZMBH, University of Heidelberg


