### Accession
PXD019374

### Title
Ablation of the miRNA cluster 24 has profound effects on extracellular matrix protein abundance in cartilage

### Description
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate cartilage differentiation and contribute to the onset and progression of joint degeneration. These small RNA molecules may affect extracellular matrix organization (ECM) in cartilage, but for only a few miRNAs has this role been defined in vivo. Previously, we showed that cartilage-specific genetic ablation of the Mirc24 cluster in mice leads to impaired cartilage development due to increased RAF/MEK/ERK pathway activation. Here, we studied the expression of the cluster in cartilage by LacZ reporter gene assays and determined its role for extracellular matrix homeostasis by proteome and immunoblot analysis. The cluster is expressed in prehypertrophic/hypertrophic chondrocytes of the growth plate and we now show that the cluster is also highly expressed in articular cartilage. Cartilage-specific loss of the cluster leads to increased proteoglycan 4 and matrix matrix metallopeptidase 13 levels and decreased aggrecan and collagen X levels in epiphyseal cartilage. Interestingly, these changes are linked to a decrease in SRY-related HMG box-containing (SOX) transcription factors 6 and 9, which regulate ECM production in chondrocytes. Our data suggests that the Mirc24 cluster is important for ECM homoeostasis and the expression of transcriptional regulators of matrix production in cartilage.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 15 μg of protein/biological sample were sequentially reduced, alkylated, and digested in Lys-C and trypsin using standard procedures. Peptide samples (n=5 biological replicates per genotype) were analyzed by liquid chromatography-MS on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (self-packed, 50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) using 0.1% formic acid as loading buffer. Peptides were chromatographically separated with a gradient 3-5% 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile over 1 min and a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min, followed by 5-30% over 65 min, 30-50% over 13 min, 50-95% over 1 min, washing and column equilibration. The MS1 survey scan was acquired with a resolving power set to 70,000 in the mass range from m/z 300 to m/z 1750. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 15.0 s. Peptides were identified by searching expected protein sequences in the UniProt Mouse database using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8, https://www.maxquant.org/). Standard settings were used (in short, 1% FDR using a reversed database with razor approach, LFQ quantification and normalization using MaxLFQ algorithm [30] with activated match between runs option between samples from the Cre control and hKO groups, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Afterwards, results from the protein group table were processed in Perseus (version 1.6.1.1, https://www.maxquant.org/perseus). After initial basic data cleanup (removal of identifications stemming from peptides only identified in modified form, or identified as contaminants, or from the reverse database used for FDR calculations), all LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and samples grouped together either in the Cre control or hKO group. All proteins not present in at least four out of five replicates in at least one group were filtered out. Each sample was checked for normal distribution of intensities before and after imputation of missing values, which was performed for each sample individually. A two-sample Student's t-test was performed with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05, 250 randomizations, and an S0 of 0.2. Proteins with a resulting q-value below 0.05 (93 in total) were deemed significantly different between both groups.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate cartilage differentiation and contribute to the onset and progression of joint degeneration. These small RNA molecules may affect extracellular matrix organization (ECM) in cartilage, but for only a few miRNAs has this role been defined <i>in vivo</i>. Previously, we showed that cartilage-specific genetic ablation of the Mirc24 cluster in mice leads to impaired cartilage development due to increased RAF/MEK/ERK pathway activation. Here, we studied the expression of the cluster in cartilage by LacZ reporter gene assays and determined its role for extracellular matrix homeostasis by proteome and immunoblot analysis. The cluster is expressed in prehypertrophic/hypertrophic chondrocytes of the growth plate and we now show that the cluster is also highly expressed in articular cartilage. Cartilage-specific loss of the cluster leads to increased proteoglycan 4 and matrix metallopeptidase 13 levels and decreased aggrecan and collagen X levels in epiphyseal cartilage. Interestingly, these changes are linked to a decrease in SRY-related HMG box-containing (SOX) transcription factors 6 and 9, which regulate ECM production in chondrocytes. Our data suggests that the Mirc24 cluster is important for ECM homoeostasis and the expression of transcriptional regulators of matrix production in cartilage.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix; mirc24; mir-322; mir-503; cartilage; prg4; articular; sox9; sox6; mmp13

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Experimental Neonatology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Veronika S.  Georgieva

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Brachvogel
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Experimental Neonatology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


