### Accession
PXD024278

### Title
Tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics analysis of chicken bursa of Fabricius infected with reticuloendotheliosis virus

### Description
Reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) is a type C avian retrovirus; which causes immunosuppression, dwarf syndrome, and lymphoma in infected hosts. In this study, we used tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to characterize protein alterations in chicken bursa of Fabricius, before and after REV infection at 7, 14, 21, and 28 days. Our data showed that 1127, 999, 910 and 1138 differentially expressed proteins were significantly altered at 7, 14, 21, 28 days after REV infection, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis indicated these proteins were mainly participate in are mainly involved with immune responses, energy metabolism, cellular processes, biological regulation, metabolic processes, response to stimuli, and multicellular organismal process. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway cluster analysis showed that post-infection, proteins were enriched in the cell cycle, Wnt signaling, antigen processing and presentation, cytokine receptor interaction, Adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate signaling pathway, and NF-κB signaling. In addition, heat shock protein (HSP) levels also changed significantly after REV infection. These findings help clarify interactions between REV and the host, and provides mechanistic insights on REV-induced host immunosuppression.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue at -80°C was, ground to powder in liquid nitrogen, after which 10% trichloroacetic acid /acetone was added. The sample was then precipitated at -20°C for 2 h. After this, the sample was centrifuged at 4500 g for 5 min, the supernatant discarded, and the pellet washed in precooled acetone precipitation. After drying, samples were ultrasonically lysed 1% SDS and 1% protease inhibitors, then centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min 4°C, and the supernatant transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was estimated using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Elabscience Biotechnology Co., Ltd).Protein digestion was initiated by vortexing samples in precooled acetone, and precipitation at -20°C for 2 h. Samples were centrifuged at 4500 g for 5 min, the supernatant discarded, and the pellet washed twice in chilled acetone. Tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) at a final concentration of 200 mM was added after drying precipitation, ultrasonic dispersion precipitation, adding trypsin, enzymatic hydrolysis overnight. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM, with samples reduced at 56 °C for 30 min. Then, iodine acetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 11mM, and samples incubated in the dark at room temperature for15 min. The trypsin-hydrolyzed peptides were desalted on a Strata XC18 (Phenomenex) column and vacuum freeze-dried. For analysis, peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled according to TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) instructions. Briefly, labeling reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile, mixed with sample peptides and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Then, labeled peptides were mixed and desalted, and vacuum freeze-dried.After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved using Maxquant 1.5.2.8 search parameters. The database was Gallus _ gallus _ 9031 _ PR _ 2020072 (24376 sequences). Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. .Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used.  KEGG Pathway Annotation: KEGG connects known information on molecular interaction networks.KEGG Pathways mainly including: Metabolism, Genetic Information Processing, Environmental Information Processing, Cellular Processes, Rat Diseases, Drug development. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Subcellular Localization: The cells of eukaryotic organisms are elaborately subdivided into functionally distinct membrane bound compartments. There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis: Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis: Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis: For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.1 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
Reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) is a type C avian retrovirus that causes immunosuppression, dwarf syndrome, and lymphoma in infected hosts. In this study, we used tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to characterize protein alterations in chicken bursa of Fabricius, before and after REV infection at 7, 14, 21, and 28 days. Our data showed that 1,127, 999, 910, and 1,138 differentially expressed proteins were significantly altered at 7, 14, 21, and 28 days after REV infection, respectively. Morphological analysis showed that REV infection reduced in cortical lymphocytes, bursal follicle atrophy, and nuclear damage. Bioinformatics analysis indicated these proteins were mainly involved with immune responses, energy metabolism, cellular processes, biological regulation, metabolic processes, response to stimuli, and multicellular organismal process. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway cluster analysis showed that post-infection, proteins were enriched in the cell cycle, Wnt signaling, antigen processing and presentation, cytokine receptor interaction, adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate signaling pathway, and NF-&#x3ba;B signaling. In addition, we observed that peroxiredoxin 4 (PRDX4), peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), glutathione peroxidase 3 (GPX3), catalase (CAT), and peroxidasin (PXDN) were involved in oxidative stress. Some heat shock protein (HSP) family members such as HSPH1, DNAJA4, HSPA8, and HSPA4L also changed significantly after REV infection. These findings help clarify interactions between REV and the host and provides mechanistic insights on REV-induced host immunosuppression.

### Keywords
Reticuloendotheliosis virus; bursa of fabricius; quantitative proteomics; differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University
Northeast Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Shimin Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Shimin Zheng
Northeast Agricultural University, China


