### Accession
PXD040937

### Title
Acetyl-CoA production by Mediator-bound 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases boosts de novo histone acetylation ​and is regulated by nitric oxide

### Description
Histone modifying enzymes depend on the availability of cofactors, with acetyl-CoA being required for lysine acetyltransferase (KAT) activity. The discovery that mitochondrial acyl-CoA producing enzymes are also delivered to the nucleus, suggests that high concentrations of metabolites generated locally may impact acetylation of histones and other nuclear substrates and eventually control gene regulation. Here we show that 2-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes were stably associated with the Mediator complex in macrophages, thus providing a local supply of acetyl-CoA and increasing the generation of hyper-acetylated histone tails. Nitric oxide (NO), which is produced in large amounts in LPS-stimulated macrophages, inhibited both the activity of 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases and their association with Mediator. Consequently, NO reduced de novo histone acetylation at genomic regions with high acetyl-CoA deposition rates. Our findings indicate that a local supply of acetyl-CoA generated by Mediator-bound 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases is required to maximize acetylation of histone tails at sites of elevated HAT activity.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 4 µg of histone octamer were mixed with an equal amount of heavy-isotope labelled histones, which were used as an internal standard, and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. Histone bands were excised, chemically acylated with propionic anhydride and in-gel digested with trypsin, followed by peptide N-terminal derivatization with phenyl isocyanate (PIC).

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described. The acquired RAW data were analyzed using EpiProfile 2.0, selecting the SILAC option.

### Publication Abstract
Histone-modifying enzymes depend on the availability of cofactors, with acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) being required for histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. The discovery that mitochondrial acyl-CoA-producing enzymes translocate to the nucleus suggests that high concentrations of locally synthesized metabolites may impact acylation of histones and other nuclear substrates, thereby controlling gene expression. Here, we show that 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases are stably associated with the Mediator complex, thus providing a local supply of acetyl-CoA and increasing the generation of hyper-acetylated histone tails. Nitric oxide (NO), which is produced in large amounts in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages, inhibited the activity of Mediator-associated 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases. Elevation of NO levels and the disruption of Mediator complex integrity both affected de novo histone acetylation within a shared set of genomic regions. Our findings indicate that the local supply of acetyl-CoA generated by 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases bound to Mediator is required to maximize acetylation of histone tails at sites of elevated HAT activity.

### Keywords
Histone post translational modifications

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


