### Accession
PXD017809

### Title
Non-metabolic PHGDH facilitates cMyc to urge advanced liver cancer

### Description
Metabolic dysregulation is an important feature of malignant tumors. Serine synthesis pathway (SSP) reshapes tumor cells to enhance their growth and survival capabilities, especially under serine starvation. However, whether and how SSP is involved in the progression of liver cancer has not been clearly stated. We applied a combination of quantitative proteomics and transcriptomics and discovered the increased expression of PHGDH and PSAT1 in mice liver cancer induced by SB. PHGDH is the first rating-limited enzyme of SSP and the conditional knockout of PHGDH in liver impaired the advanced liver cancer formation. However, the specific inhibition of enzymatic activity of PHGDH in liver has no obvious suppressive effect on advanced liver cancer. Further, we explored a non-metabolic function of PHGDH, which used its ACT domain to bind and regulate cMyc transcriptional activity, then selectively activated genes expression of Lcn2, Got1, Fabp5 and Psat1, indicating PHGDH drives/links multiple metabolic pathways and augmented its function through its non-metabolic role. In addition, the mutant p53 would release the suppression of PHGDH in mice liver cancer model and clinical liver cancer samples. Hence, the mutant p53/PHGDH/cMyc axis could be a potential target to cure advanced liver cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The liver tissues were quickly collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen after the SB model mice were sacrificed at T0, T2 and T7. Proteins were extracted with SDS lysis buffer (100 mM dithiothreitol, 4% sodium SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) using mechanical homogenization followed by ultrasonication. Proteins were then denatured and reduced at 95°C for 5 min. The insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant was used for proteomic experiment. The protein concentration was determined by a tryptophan-based fluorescence quantification method.  The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used for protein digestion as previously described4. Briefly, 100 μg proteins were loaded in a 10 kDa centrifugal filter tube (Millipore), washed twice with 200 μL UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 200 μL UA buffer for 30 min in the darkness, washed thrice with 100 μL UA buffer again and finally washed thrice with 100 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3. All above steps were centrifuged at 12,000 g at 25°C. Proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) in 200 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C for 16 h, and peptides were eluted by centrifugation. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 Stage-tips and evaporated to dryness in a Speed-Vac sample concentrator. Finally, the amount of purified peptides was determined by NanoDrop (Thermo). Then, TMT labeling and High pH RP fractionation were performed.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 against the mouse Swiss-Prot database containing 22,259 sequences (downloaded in August, 2019). TMT-MS2 was chosen for proteomic quantification with a reporter ion mass tolerance set at 0.003 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. Oxidized methionine and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin/P. The maximum missing cleavage site was set as 2. The tolerances of first search and main search for peptides were set at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The minimal peptide length was set at 7. The cutoff of false discovery rates (FDR) of peptide and protein was set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Herein, we observed that nuclear localization of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) is associated with poor prognosis in liver cancer, and Phgdh is required for liver cancer progression in a mouse model. Unexpectedly, impairment of Phgdh enzyme activity exerts a slight effect in a liver cancer model. In liver cancer cells, the aspartate kinase-chorismate mutase-tyrA prephenate dehydrogenase (ACT) domain of PHGDH binds nuclear cMyc to form a transactivation axis, PHGDH/p300/cMyc/AF9, which drives chemokine CXCL1 and IL8 gene expression. Then, CXCL1 and IL8 promote neutrophil recruitment and enhance tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) filtration in the liver, thereby advancing liver cancer. Forced cytosolic localization of PHGDH or destruction of the PHGDH/cMyc interaction abolishes the oncogenic function of nuclear PHGDH. Depletion of neutrophils by neutralizing antibodies greatly hampers TAM filtration. These findings reveal a nonmetabolic role of PHGDH with altered cellular localization and suggest a promising drug target for liver cancer therapy by targeting the nonmetabolic region of PHGDH.

### Keywords
Hepatocellular carcinoma, Proteome, Serine synthesis, Phgdh

### Affiliations
sibs
Shanghai Institue of Nutrition and Health, CAS

### Submitter
zhu sam

### Lab Head
Dr Xiongjun Wang
Shanghai Institue of Nutrition and Health, CAS


