### Accession
PXD023986

### Title
Ubiquitin chain types on ubiquitinated VPS34 in the presence or absence of UBE3C in vitro LC-MSMS

### Description
We identified VPS34 as the direct substrate of UBE3C E3 ligase in vivo and in vitro. Next, to analyze the ubiquitin chain on VPS34 that was assembled by UBE3C in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
VPS34 bound on beads was in vitro ubiquitinated, washed, and cleaved by Lbpro*. Lbpro*-treated reaction was separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with SYPROTM Ruby Protein Gel Stain (Invitrogen). The band corresponding to the molecular weight of monoubiquitin was excised for in-gel digestion with Asp-N at 37 °C for overnight. NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Nanospray Flex interface. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters, Milford, MA) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore width of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 90 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey of full scan MS spectra was acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 60K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control (AGC) target at 106. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for HCD MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the orbitrap with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s. For MS/MS, we used a resolution of 7500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and a target value of 50000 ions, with maximum accumulation times of 250 ms. Fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 0.1 ms. Ions with singly and unrecognized charge state were excluded.

### Data Protocol
All data generated were searched against the Swiss- Prot Human database, and (561,911 entries total) database using the Mascot search engine (v.2.7.0; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) through Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4.1.15; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, variable modifications set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), ubiquitinylation (K) allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Peptide sequence assignments contained in MASCOT search results were validated by manual confirmation from raw MS/MS data. For label-free quantification, precursor ions intensities were extracted using Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer with a 2 ppm mass precision and 2 min retention time shift (align the LC/MS peaks mapping to the isotope pattern and retention time).

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy are two major quality control processes whose impairment is linked to a wide variety of diseases. The coordination between UPS and autophagy remains incompletely understood. Here, we show that ubiquitin ligase UBE3C and deubiquitinating enzyme TRABID reciprocally regulate K29/K48-branched ubiquitination of VPS34. We find that this ubiquitination enhances the binding of VPS34 to proteasomes for degradation, thereby suppressing autophagosome formation and maturation. Under ER and proteotoxic stresses, UBE3C recruitment to phagophores is compromised with a concomitant increase of its association with proteasomes. This switch attenuates the action of UBE3C on VPS34, thereby elevating autophagy activity to facilitate proteostasis, ER quality control and cell survival. Specifically in the liver, we show that TRABID-mediated VPS34 stabilization is critical for lipid metabolism and is downregulated during the pathogenesis of steatosis. This study identifies a ubiquitination type on VPS34 and elucidates its cellular fate and physiological functions in proteostasis and liver metabolism.

### Keywords
Ube3c, Vps34, Ubiquitin chain types

### Affiliations
R602, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yu-Hsuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Hsuan Chen
R602, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica


