### Accession
PXD009218

### Title
Sequencing Greenlip Abalone - We have used the greenlip abalone draft genome (PRJNA433241) to generate basic genetic knowledge of the reproductive process with a specific focus on the key interactive processes of maturation, neural signalling, communication and the stress response.

### Description
We have used the greenlip abalone draft genome (PRJNA433241) to generate basic genetic knowledge of the reproductive process with a specific focus on the key interactive processes of maturation, neural signalling, communication and the stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Neural signaling during maturation Samples were extracted individually in triplicate (biological replicates) for each sex at strategic time points in the maturation cycle as determined by the VGI. Ganglia were thermally treated to denature proteolytic enzymes, and peptides were extracted using acetic acid as previously described for mice [37] and cattle [38] hypothalamus tissue. In brief, 100 mg of tissue was mixed with 20 µL of 0.5% acetic acid and then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. Peptides smaller than 10 kDa were isolated by filtration using Microcon YM-10 filter devices (Millipore) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 90 min at 4°C. Samples were vacuum dried and stored at -20°C until analysis.  Exoproteins and heavy metal stress response For the heavy metal stress experiment abalone (n = 3) were transferred to six aquaria with air stones and a small submersible pump to maintain a constant water flow of 3 L min-1. Aquaria were placed inside a larger tank to function as a thermal bath with seawater maintained at 23°C to maintain a steady temperature for the duration of the experiment. Abalone were allowed to settle and attach to the glass before the aquaria were filled with seawater (23°C, 98% O2 saturation, salinity 32 ppt). The non-stressed abalone aquaria (n = 3) was filled with clean seawater while stressed abalone aquaria (n = 3) was filled with seawater contaminated with heavy metals (Table S5). Stressed abalone were exposed to the heavy metal contaminated seawater until detachment from the aquaria was observed. The contaminated seawater was then siphoned out and replaced with clean seawater and abalone re-attached to the aquaria. All abalone were left in the aquaria undisturbed for 24 h following treatment. The following morning seawater flow was ceased and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the water to a final concentration 0.1% before filtering through a 0.45 µm PVDF membrane. Peptides were purified using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Milford, MA, USA) by washing with 0.1% TFA to remove salts and molecules, and eluting with 70% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Eluate was lyophilised and stored at -80°C for subsequent liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy (LC-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Neural signaling during maturation analysis Peptides were identified by database searching of spectral datasets using ProteinPilotTM 4.5 software (SCIEX) against Uniprot and a database derived by neuropeptide prediction (as described in neural signaling during maturation previously). Search parameters were defined as no cysteine alkylation and no digestion enzyme. The ID focus was on biological modifications and thorough identifications. The resultant peptide identifications were imported into PeakViewTM 1.1.0.0 software (SCIEX) with the Protein QtoolDirector 1.0.0.0 plug-in for peak alignment (SCIEX). A complete list of peptides with confidence greater than 80% was exported to MarkerViewTM 1.2.1.1 software (SCIEX) for statistical analyses of reproduction related candidates. The abundance of each peptide was evaluated using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) model that contained the main effects of sex and VGI and their interaction. The estimates of least-square means for the sex by VGI interaction (Table S2) were used to identify peptides with statistically differential abundance between the two sexes at either one of the three VGI levels. Statistical analyses were performed using the Procedure GLM of SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). The least-square estimates were further scrutinised in the form of a heatmap (Figure 2C) generated using the PermutMatrix software [56].  Exoprotein identification H. laevigata genome files were downloaded, from which open reading frames were predicted by CLC Main Workbench (QIAGEN, Aarhus A/S, Denmark) and used for constructing the protein database utilized in mass spectral analysis. A composite target decoy database was built with the forward and reverse sequences for calculating the false discovery rate. Proteins were identified by database searching using PEAKS v7.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) against the protein database. Search parameters were as follows: fully tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages (in-gel digestion samples) or no digestion (HPLC fractions), variable modifications including amidation, methionine oxidation, conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, and deamidation of asparagine. Precursor mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and a fragment ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da; the false discovery rate was set to ≤1%, and the individual peptide ion score [-10*Log(p)] was calculated accordingly, where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproduction, Haliotis laevigata, Greenlip abalone, Neural signalling (or similar), Secreted proteins, Stress, Communication, Exoproteins

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, Queensland 4557, Australia
University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, Queensland 4557, Australia


