### Accession
PXD006066

### Title
Quantitative cardiac phosphoproteomics profiling during ischemic/reperfusion in an immature swine model

### Description
Ischemia/Reperfusion (I/R) results in altered metabolic and molecular responses. Phosphorylation, a posttranslational modification, is one of the most noted regulatory mechanisms and differential phosphorylation affects numerous regulatory and signaling mechanisms. To further understand the phosphoproteomic changes that occur in the heart during I/R we utilized iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic and LC-MS/MS techniques to obtain a profile of phosphopeptides expressed under control and I/R conditions. A total of 1896 phosphopeptides were identified, and 116 were assessed as significant. The 116 phosphopeptides represented 87 unique proteins. Analysis of the phosphopeptides using Motif-x identified 2 predominant motifs: arginine and proline-directed serine phosphorylation sites. Two proteins known to be altered by I/R were among the dataset obtained, phospholamban and pyruvate dehydrogenase, and were used to confirm validity of the profile. Functional characterization of the phosphopetides identified in this study could lead to further understanding of the signaling mechanisms involved during I/R damage in the heart, as well as identifying new areas to target therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, isotopically labeled with iTRAQ 8-Plex, fractionated, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Phosphopeptides were isolated using IMAC.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) results in altered metabolic and molecular responses, and phosphorylation is one of the most noted regulatory mechanisms mediating signaling mechanisms during physiological stresses. To expand our knowledge of the potential phosphoproteomic changes in the myocardium during I/R, we used Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation-based analyses in left ventricular samples obtained from porcine hearts under control or I/R conditions. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006066. We identified 1,896 phosphopeptides within left ventricular control and I/R porcine samples. Significant differential phosphorylation between control and I/R groups was discovered in 111 phosphopeptides from 86 proteins. Analysis of the phosphopeptides using Motif-x identified five motifs: (..R..S..), (..SP..), (..S.S..), (..S&#x2026;S..), and (..S.T..). Semiquantitative immunoblots confirmed site location and directional changes in phosphorylation for phospholamban and pyruvate dehydrogenase E1, two proteins known to be altered by I/R and identified by this study. Novel phosphorylation sites associated with I/R were also identified. Functional characterization of the phosphopeptides identified by our methodology could expand our understanding of the signaling mechanisms involved during I/R damage in the heart as well as identify new areas to target therapeutic strategies.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> We used Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation technology to investigate the phosphoproteomic changes that occur in cardiac tissue under ischemia-reperfusion conditions. The results of this study provide an extensive catalog of phosphoproteins, both predicted and novel, associated with ischemia-reperfusion, thereby identifying new pathways for investigation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Phosphopeptide quantitation, Itraq

### Affiliations
Seattle Children's Hospital, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Portman, MD
Seattle Children's Hospital, USA


