### Accession
PXD001689

### Title
A novel strategy of profiling protein methylation on lysine and arginine

### Description
Protein methylation is involved in different processes including gene expression regulation, epigenetics, and nucleotide metabolism. Identification of methylated proteins is difficult as methyl groups are small, and do not introduce significant changes in protein hydrophobicity or charge state. The most effective analytical method to date is relative enrichment by pan-specific antibodies and methylation specific binding domains. Here, we present a novel and unbiased chemical strategy to enrich and identify sites of lysine and arginine methylations. This approach makes use of the property that methylation does not alter the charge state of lysine and arginine. This approach revealed over 793 methylation events including 211 arginine and 585 lysine methylation sites in HEK 293 Cells. This strategy proves to be convenient, effective and versatile, with the potential of analyzing other PTMs on both lysine and arginine.

### Sample Protocol
BSA protein was firstly dimethylated on protein level to introduce protein methylatin. The methylation status was checked on LTQ-orbitrap XL..Then 1ug methylated BSA was mixed with 1mg HeLa total lysate was tryptic digested, desalted and dried down.  The dried peptide mixture was mixed with 30 µL TiPP and 200 µL 12 M HCl, vortexed and kept in dark for 1 hr to introduce the MDA modification on un-methylated arginines. The solution was then diluted 20 times, and loaded on to activated SCX SPE column (50mg HyperSep™ SCX, Thermo). 80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (FA) was used to wash the column to avoid polymer contamination. The column was then eluted by 2 mL 50 mM Na2CO3 and 2 mM 50 mM NaOH to recovery the bound peptides. Then 450 µL of 10X OPA reaction buffer (5mg OPA, 100µL pure ethanol, and 5µL beta-mercaptoethenal (BME) and 900 µL 50 mM Na2CO3, pH 10.5) was added to the 4 mL SCX elution from the MDA reaction to introduce OPA modification on N-terminal and un-methylated lysine. The reaction was kept in dark and at room temperature for another 2 hours. After the OPA reaction, 5% of FA was used to lower the pH to around 3. Then the solution was loaded onto an activated SCX SPE column and washed by 80% ACN. Britton & Robinson buffers at different pH (20 mM CH3COOH, 20 mM H3PO4, 20 mMH3BO3, adjusted to pH 6, 8, 10, 11, 12 by NaOH) were used to elute the peptides off the column sequentially. The eluent was desalted and dried down for MS analysis. All the dried samples were reconstituted in 20 µL 0.5% FA and loaded 4 µL for MS analysis. The MS analysis platforms consisted of an Agilent 1100 capillary-HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) coupled with LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% (v/v) FA in water as buffer A and 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile as buffer B. Peptide separation was performed on a 75μm × 150 mm analytical column packed in-house with reverse phase Magic C18AQ resins (1.9μm; 100-Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Briefly, 4 µL of sample was loaded onto the column using 98% buffer A at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 20min. The MS method consisted of one full MS scan from 350 to 1700 m/z followed by 5 data-dependent MS/MS CID scan of the most intense ions in ion trap on Orbitrap XL . The dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2, and a repeat duration of 90s. The resolution of full MS was set 60,000 defined at m/z 400 on LTQ-Orbitrap . To improve the mass accuracy, all the measurements in Orbitrap mass analyzer were performed with internal recalibration (“Lock Mass”) at 445.1205. The charge state rejection function was enabled, with single and “unassigned” charge states rejected.

### Data Protocol
The database search was done either by Mascot 2.3. The raw files were searched against Uniprot protein fasta database (2013, July version), including commonly observed contaminants, including BSA. cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021463) was selected as fixed modification; variable modifications wereas set as follows: methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, MDA modification on arginine, OPA modification on peptide N-terminal and lysine, mono- and di- methylation on lysine.Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Up to two missing cleavages of trypsin were allowed. Precursor ion mass tolerances were 7 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for CID MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for modified peptide, peptide and protein was all set at 1% and a minimum length of six amino acids was used for peptides filteration. The .dat files generated by Mascot were parsed and filtered by BuildSsummary in Proteomics Tools with a peptide FDR of 1%,

### Publication Abstract
Methylation of arginine and lysine (RK) residues play essential roles in epigenetics and the regulation of gene expression. However, research in this area is often hindered by the lack of effective tools for probing the protein methylation. Here, we present an antibody-free strategy to capture protein methylation on RK residues by using chemical reactions to eliminate the charges on un-modified RK residues and peptide N-termini. Peptides containing methylated RK residues remain positively charged and are then enriched by strong cation exchange chromatography, followed by high-resolution mass spectrometry identification.

### Keywords
Methylation

### Affiliations
Professor, chair of BMI, faculty of Medicine, university of ottawa
research associate

### Submitter
Zhibin Ning

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Professor, chair of BMI, faculty of Medicine, university of ottawa


