### Accession
PXD016381

### Title
Redox controls metabolic robustness in the gas-fermenting acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum

### Description
Living biological systems display a fascinating ability to self-organise their metabolism. This ability ultimately determines metabolic robustness that is fundamental to control cellular behaviour. However, fluctuations in metabolism can affect cellular homeostasis through transient oscillations. For example, yeast cultures exhibit rhythmic oscillatory behaviour in high-cell density continuous cultures. Oscillatory behaviour provides a unique opportunity for quantitating the robustness of metabolism, as cells respond to changes by inherently compromising metabolic efficiency. Here, we quantify the limits of metabolic robustness in self-oscillating autotrophic continuous cultures of the gas-fermenting acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum. On-line gas analysis and high-resolution temporal metabolomics showed oscillations in gas uptake rates and extracellular by-products synchronised with biomass levels. Loss of H2 uptake makes CO the sole carbon and energy source until cells recover uptake of H2 in synchrony with increasing biomass levels. Intriguingly, oscillations are not linked to translational control as no differences were observed in protein expression during oscillations. However, intracellular metabolomics analysis revealed decreasing levels of redox ratios in perfect synchrony with the cycles. Therefore, we developed a thermodynamic metabolic flux analysis (tMFA) model to investigate if regulation in acetogens is controlled at the thermodynamic level. The data shows that the feasible range for the thermodynamic driving force of the Nfn transhydrogenase complex (i.e. NADH/NAD+×NADP+/NADPH) closely matched the experimentally observed range. The data indicate that metabolic oscillations in gas fermentation acetogens are controlled at the thermodynamic level. Our work suggests thermodynamic control of metabolism, potentially contributing to metabolic efficiency and working as a mean of energy conservation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample details High-resolution temporal sampling for proteomics was carried out throughout the oscillations. For this, 2 mL of culture was pelleted by immediate centrifugation (25,000 × g for 1 min at 4 °C) and stored at -80 °C until analysis. For comparing protein expression between two extreme states of the culture—just prior to recovery and crashing—, samples at lowest (i.e. recovery; bioreplicate #1 at 214 and 383 h, bioreplicate #2 at 252 and 407 h) and highest (i.e. crash; bioreplicate #1 at 347 and 477 h, bioreplicate #2 at 347 and 503 h) biomass concentration values (eight in total) were used for further analysis (see Fig. 2 or 3). Sample preparation was performed as described before (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9) with the following modifications: 1) thawed and washed pellets were resuspended in 450 µL of lysis buffer; 2) protein concentration in cell lysates was determined using the Direct Detect® Infrared Spectrometer (DDHW00010-WW; Merck); 3) 50 µg of protein was used for protein digestion; 4) no desalting was performed; 5) 5 µg of peptide material (~11-17 µL) from protein digestion was concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf) at 30 C for 60 min and reconstituted in 15 µL of 0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile.  LC method For generating the spectral library using data dependent acquisition (DDA) and for the data independent acquisition (DIA) sample runs, a ThermoFisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system was used. Each sample was initially injected onto a ThermoFisher Acclaim PepMap C18 trap reversed-phase column (300 µm x 5 mm nano viper, 5 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min using 2% acetonitrile (ACN) for 5 min with the solvent going to waste. The trap column was switched in-line with the separation column (ThermoFisher EasySpray Pepmap RSLC C18, 150 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm) and the peptides were eluted using a flowrate of 1.5 µL/min using 0.1% FA in water (buffer A) and 80% ACN in buffer A (buffer B) as mobile phases for gradient elution. Peptide elution employed a 3-30% ACN gradient for 63 min followed by 30-50% ACN for 10 min and 50-95% ACN for 1 min at 40 °C. The total elution time was 110 min including a 95% ACN wash and a re-equilibration step. For each DDA and DIA sample run, a volume of 3 µL equating to 1 µg of peptide material from protein digestion was injected.  DDA MS spectral library generation Two samples of one biological replicate culture (bioreplicate #1 “recovery sample” at 214 h and “crash sample” at 347 h) were analysed on the Thermo Fisher Scientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer in DDA mode to yield the spectral library for DIA MS data analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were introduced to the MS via a nano-ESI and analysed using the Q-Exactive HF-X. The electrospray voltage was 1.8 kV in positive ion mode, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 250 °C. Employing a top-20 ddMS2 acquisition method, full MS-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range m/z 400–1500 with a mass resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). The AGC target value was set at 3.00E+06. The 20 most intense peaks with a charge state between 2 and 6 were fragmented in the high energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell with a normalised collision energy (NCE) of 30. MSMS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200. The AGC target value for MSMS was set to 1.0E+05 while the ion selection threshold was set to 5E+03 counts. The maximum accumulation times were 50 ms for full MS-scans and MSMS. For all the experiments, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 25 s, and undetermined charge state species were excluded from MSMS.  DIA MS data acquisition As for the DDA method, eluted peptides were introduced to the MS via a nano-ESI and analysed using the Q-Exactive HF-X. The electrospray voltage was 1.8 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 250 °C. Full MS-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser over the range m/z 400–1200 with a mass resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200). The AGC target value was set at 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. DIA was achieved using an inclusion list: m/z 395‒1100 in steps of 15 amu and scans cycled through the list of 48 isolation windows with a loop count of 48. All DIA scans were recorded with an NCE collision energy of 30 and MSMS detection at a resolution setting of 15,000 (at m/z 200). The AGC target was set to 1.0E+06 with a maximum injection time set at ‘auto’. A first fixed mass of m/z 200 was applied, and default charge state of 2 was set for scanning MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
Identification results of DDA analysis for subsequent creation of a spectral library for DIA MS data confirmation and quantification using the software Skyline (Gillet et al. 2012; DOI:10.1074/mcp.O111.016717) were generated using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and its SEQUEST HT search as described before (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9). The final .pd result file contained peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) with q-values estimated at 1% FDR for peptides ≥4 AAs.  DIA MS data analysis DIA MS data analysis was performed with Skyline (Gillet et al. 2012; DOI:10.1074/mcp.O111.016717) as described before (Valgepea et al. 2018; DOI:10.1186/s13068-018-1052-9) with the exception of using 12 manually picked endogenous peptides for iRT alignment. Shortly, the .pd result file from Proteome Discoverer was used to build the DIA MS spectral library and the mProphet peak picking algorithm (Reiter et al. 2011; DOI:10.1038/nmeth.1584) within Skyline was used to separate true from false positive peak groups (per sample) and only peak groups with q-value<0.01 (representing 1% FDR) were used for further quantification. We confidently quantitated 3,595 peptides and 596 proteins on average within each sample with at least two peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Living biological systems display a fascinating ability to self-organize their metabolism. This ability ultimately determines the metabolic robustness that is fundamental to controlling cellular behavior. However, fluctuations in metabolism can affect cellular homeostasis through transient oscillations. For example, yeast cultures exhibit rhythmic oscillatory behavior in high cell-density continuous cultures. Oscillatory behavior provides a unique opportunity for quantitating the robustness of metabolism, as cells respond to changes by inherently compromising metabolic efficiency. Here, we quantify the limits of metabolic robustness in self-oscillating autotrophic continuous cultures of the gas-fermenting acetogen <i>Clostridium autoethanogenum</i> Online gas analysis and high-resolution temporal metabolomics showed oscillations in gas uptake rates and extracellular byproducts synchronized with biomass levels. The data show initial growth on CO, followed by growth on CO and H<sub>2</sub> Growth on CO and H<sub>2</sub> results in an accelerated growth phase, after which a downcycle is observed in synchrony with a loss in H<sub>2</sub> uptake. Intriguingly, oscillations are not linked to translational control, as no differences were observed in protein expression during oscillations. Intracellular metabolomics analysis revealed decreasing levels of redox ratios in synchrony with the cycles. We then developed a thermodynamic metabolic flux analysis model to investigate whether regulation in acetogens is controlled at the thermodynamic level. We used endo- and exo-metabolomics data to show that the thermodynamic driving force of critical reactions collapsed as H<sub>2</sub> uptake is lost. The oscillations are coordinated with redox. The data indicate that metabolic oscillations in acetogen gas fermentation are controlled at the thermodynamic level.

### Keywords
Metabolic robustness; oscillations; acetogen; gas fermentation; wood-ljungdahl pathway; metabolism; data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Australia
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology,The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Kaspar Valgepea

### Lab Head
Dr Esteban Marcellin
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Australia


