### Accession
PXD030009

### Title
Proteomics profiling of end-stage COVID-19 diseased human lungs

### Description
Lung biopsies were collected from recently deceased patients, who tested positive and were treated for SARS-CoV-2 infections, or from patients that succumbed to a non-inflammatory unrelated disease, serving as control. Two samples were taken from each patient either from macroscopically affected lung tissue, for SARS-CoV-2 patients, or healthy homogeneous lung parenchyma of the control patients. All samples were then subjected to shotgun proteomics analysis using data independent acquisition approach.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue pieces measured approximately 3x3x3 mm in volume, were collected in BeadBugTM 2.0 ml tubes (SIGMA-Aldrich, USA) containing 2.8 mm stainless steel beads and filled with 600 µl of 2 % sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) buffer containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), and 0.1 M Tris-HCl at a pH of 7.6. Collected biopsies were homogenized using a MagNA Lyser (Roche, USA) bead mill set to 6500 rpm for 3 x 25 seconds. Samples were cooled on ice after each run to avoid excessive heating of the sample. A 30 min 3500g centrifugation step at 4°C was performed to remove all insoluble cellular debris. Protein content was estimated using bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) after which 100 µg of protein per sample was precipitated overnight with 3 volumes of acetone. The following day, protein pellets were re-dissolved in 25 % trifluoroethanol (in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5), diluted to 10 % trifluoroethanol with ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Consequently, 4 µg of digest was offline desalted using in-house made stage tips and around 300 ng per sample was used for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed using DIA-NN software (version 1.7.13 beta. 12) SwissProt human proteome database in fasta format (containing common contaminants; downloaded on 16.04.2019, 20,467 sequences) was used for a library-free search with false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1 %. Deep learning-based spectra and retention time prediction was enabled, minimum fragment m/z was set to 200 and max fragment m/z set to 1800. N-terminal methionine excision was enabled and maximum number of trypsin missed cleavages set to 1. Minimum peptide length set to 7 and maximum to 30 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Mass accuracy was fixed to 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2. Tissue pieces collected from the same patient were considered as technical duplicates and therefore the mean value per each protein was taken. Resulting matrix of proteins was filter to retain only those proteins with at least three valid values in at least one group. Data was then subjected to statistical analysis using linear model approach (limma package, Bioconductor). Limma dynamic p-value < 0.05 was taken as significance threshold.

### Publication Abstract
The outbreak of a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in 2019 led to a worldwide pandemic, which remains an&#xa0;integral part of our lives to this day. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a flu like condition, often accompanied by high fever and respiratory distress. In some cases, conjointly with other co-morbidities, COVID-19 can become severe, leading to lung arrest and even death. Although well-known from a clinical standpoint, the mechanistic understanding of lethal COVID-19 is still rudimentary. Studying the pathology and changes on a molecular level associated with the resulting COVID-19 disease is impeded by the highly infectious nature of the virus and the concomitant sampling challenges. We were able to procure COVID-19 post-mortem lung tissue specimens by our collaboration with the BSL-3 laboratory of the Biobanking and BioMolecular resources Research Infrastructure Austria which we subjected to state-of-the-art quantitative proteomic analysis to better understand the pulmonary manifestations of lethal COVID-19. Lung tissue samples from age-matched non-COVID-19 patients who died within the same period were used as controls. Samples were subjected to parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation combined with data-independent acquisition (diaPASEF) on a timsTOF Pro and obtained raw data was processed using DIA-NN software. Here we report that terminal COVID-19 patients display an increase in inflammation, acute immune response and blood clot formation (with concomitant triggering of fibrinolysis). Furthermore, we describe that COVID-19 diseased lungs undergo severe extracellular matrix restructuring, which was corroborated on the histopathological level. However, although undergoing an injury, diseased lungs seem to have impaired proliferative and tissue repair signalling, with several key kinase-mediated signalling pathways being less active. This might provide a mechanistic link to post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC; "Long COVID"). Overall, we emphasize the importance of histopathological patient stratification when interpreting molecular COVID-19 data.

### Keywords
Covid, Pneumonia, Lung, Ards

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist at Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, TU Wien
Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna

Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics TU Wien  Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Tamara Tomin

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics TU Wien  Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria


