### Accession
PXD037490

### Title
Synaptic vesicle proteins and ATG9A self-organize in distinct vesicle phases within synapsin condensates

### Description
Ectopic expression in fibroblasts of synapsin 1 and synaptophysin is sufficient to generate condensates of vesicles highly reminiscent of synaptic vesicle (SV) clusters and with liquid-like properties. We show that unlike synaptophysin, other major integral SV membrane proteins fail to form condensates with synapsin, but coassemble into the clusters formed by synaptophysin and synapsin in this ectopic expression system. Another vesicle membrane protein, ATG9A, undergoes activity-dependent exo-endocytosis at synapses, raising questions about the relation of ATG9A traffic to the traffic of SVs. We have found that both in fibroblasts and in nerve terminals ATG9A does not coassemble into synaptophysin-positive vesicle condensates but localizes on a distinct class of vesicles that also assembles with synapsin but into a distinct phase. Our findings suggest that ATG9A undergoes differential sorting relative to SV proteins and also point to a dual role of synapsin in controlling clustering at synapses of SVs and ATG9A vesicles

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins from BioID and vesicles enrichment experiments were buffered with 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) pH 7.5. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. Excessive iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiotheritol. Protein mixtures were diluted in 1:6 ratio (v/v) using ultrapure water prior to digestion using sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington Biochemical) at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were subsequently desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM) (1) for LC-MS/MS analysis. Desalted peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and loaded onto HPLC-MS/MS system for analysis on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an FAIMS Pro Interface system and Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The stationary phase buffer was 0.1 % formic acid, and mobile phase buffer was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Chromatography for peptide separation was performed using increasing organic proportion of acetonitrile (5 – 40 % (v/v)) over a 120 min gradient) on a self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using Reprosil Gold 120 C-18, 1.9 μm particle size resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mass spectrometry analyzer operated in data independent acquisition mode at a mass range of 300–2000 Da, compensation voltages of -50/-70 CVs with survey scan of 120,000 and 15,000 resolutions at MS1 and MS2 levels, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins from BioID and vesicles enrichment experiments were buffered with 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) pH 7.5. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. Excessive iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiotheritol. Protein mixtures were diluted in 1:6 ratio (v/v) using ultrapure water prior to digestion using sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington Biochemical) at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were subsequently desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM) (1) for LC-MS/MS analysis. Desalted peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and loaded onto HPLC-MS/MS system for analysis on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an FAIMS Pro Interface system and Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The stationary phase buffer was 0.1 % formic acid, and mobile phase buffer was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Chromatography for peptide separation was performed using increasing organic proportion of acetonitrile (5 – 40 % (v/v)) over a 120 min gradient) on a self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using Reprosil Gold 120 C-18, 1.9 μm particle size resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mass spectrometry analyzer operated in data independent acquisition mode at a mass range of 300–2000 Da, compensation voltages of -50/-70 CVs with survey scan of 120,000 and 15,000 resolutions at MS1 and MS2 levels, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synaptophysin, Synapsin, Atg9a, Sypnatic vesicle

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Pietro De Camilli
Yale University School of Medicine


