### Accession
PXD002537

### Title
A quantitative proteomic analysis of in vitro assembled chromatin

### Description
The structure of chromatin is critical for many aspects of cellular physiology and is considered to be the primary medium to store epigenetic information. It is defined by the histone molecules that constitute the nucleosome, the positioning of the nucleosomes along the DNA and the non-histone proteins that associate with it. These factors help to establish and maintain a largely DNA sequence-independent but surprisingly stable structure. Chromatin is extensively disassembled and reassembled during DNA replication, repair, recombination or transcription in order to allow the necessary factors to gain access to their substrate. Despite such constant interference with chromatin structure, the epigenetic information is generally well maintained. Surprisingly, the mechanisms that coordinate chromatin assembly and ensure proper assembly are not particularly well understood. Here, we use SWATH-MS to describe the kinetics of in vitro assembled chromatin supported by an embryo extract prepared from preblastoderm Drosophila melanogaster embryos. This system allows easy manipulation of distinct aspects of chromatin assembly such as post-translational histone modifications, the levels of histone chaperones and the concentration of distinct DNA binding factors. Our findings support the idea that chromatin assembly factors and factors important for chromatin structure bind chromatin in an ordered manner, which is -at least in part- regulated by histone deacetylation. We are able to identify functional clusters of proteins based on their different binding kinetics. Whereas many proteins bind exclusively during the onset of chromatin assembly, a few proteins show a clear tendency towards matured chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
We prapared protein extracts from D.melanogster embryos (DREX), that contain histons, histone chaperones and other factors required for chromatin assembly. Biotin-labeled, linearized DNA was incubated with the DREX. The assembly reaction was stopped at different time points to measure protein affinity to DNA in contrast to the degree of chromatin assembly and maturation. Using label-free quantitation of proteins by mass spectrometry, we determined the abundance of assembly factors in the DREX and bound to newly-synthesized chromatin upon assembly. Therefore, we performed tryptic digest of DREX in solution and on bead digestion of DNA-associated proteins for the assembly reactions. \ MS data were acquired on an orbitrap mass spectrometer and a quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer using data-dependent acquisiton mode. To measure time-resolved binding of chromatin factors, we employed SWATH-MS technology on a  quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer. Furthermore, we analyzed the histone modification pattern using a targeted MRM-high resolution methodology on the quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer to determine the abundance of several histone modification in comparison to heavy spike-in standards and cell treatment with trichostatin A.

### Data Protocol
To identify chromatin assembly factors, data-dependent acquisition was employed on the mass spectrometer. For this approach, MS data were searched against a flybase transcript database (vs. 5.24) using Andromeda search algorithm in MaxQuant. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) using iBAQ values was employed to distinuish chromatin binding proteins from non-binders.  For time-resolved protein quantiation, a ion library was generated from data-depedent MS data from the quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer. Triplicates for chromatin assembly reactions fro three different time periods were measured using a SWATH-MS method with variable SWATH-windows. Peak areas for proteins were extraced using the previously generated ion library from Protein Pilot (using same parameters as for MaxQuant searches) and protein abundances were calculated between controls, samples and the different assembly reactions, respectively, using PERSEUS statistical software vs. 1.5.1.6. Settings for SWATH MS protein quantiation were: 11 peptides/protein with at least 7 mapping fragment ion signals, a confidence interval of 99 % and FDR rate of 2 %.

### Publication Abstract
The structure of chromatin is critical for many aspects of cellular physiology and is considered to be the primary medium to store epigenetic information. It is defined by the histone molecules that constitute the nucleosome, the positioning of the nucleosomes along the DNA and the non-histone proteins that associate with it. These factors help to establish and maintain a largely DNA sequence-independent but surprisingly stable structure. Chromatin is extensively disassembled and reassembled during DNA replication, repair, recombination or transcription in order to allow the necessary factors to gain access to their substrate. Despite such constant interference with chromatin structure, the epigenetic information is generally well maintained. Surprisingly, the mechanisms that coordinate chromatin assembly and ensure proper assembly are not particularly well understood. Here, we use label free quantitative mass spectrometry to describe the kinetics of in vitro assembled chromatin supported by an embryo extract prepared from preblastoderm Drosophila melanogaster embryos. The use of a data independent acquisition method for proteome wide quantitation allows a time resolved comparison of in vitro chromatin assembly. A comparison of our in vitro data with proteomic studies of replicative chromatin assembly in vivo reveals an extensive overlap showing that the in vitro system can be used for investigating the kinetics of chromatin assembly in a proteome-wide manner.

### Keywords
Acetylation; affinity proteomics; chromatin function or biology; label-free quantification ; macromolecular assemblages

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhdernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel.:  --49 89 2180 75420 Fax.: --49 89 2180 75440 e-mail: imhof@lmu.de

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhdernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel.:  --49 89 2180 75420 Fax.: --49 89 2180 75440 e-mail: imhof@lmu.de


