### Accession
PXD014275

### Title
The impact of Bisphenol A on immunity and asthmatic inheritance  revealed from a major proteomics study

### Description
Environmental estrogens, such as bisphenol A (BPA) that is normally used in the manufacture of food and beverage containers, pose increasingly worrisome hazards to human and wildlife health. The adverse effects of BPA are multifaceted; while close attention has been paid to their effect on the immune response system, especially the possible etiology of asthma in children and adults. The underlined mechanism of how BPA influences the biological pathways that alters the normal immune response system is unknown. Here, we report to use various proteomics and biological approaches to identify BPA-targeting proteins and protein pathways in human colonic and CD4+T cell lines and CD4+T cells extracted from mouse spleens. The outcomes of this study revealed that the cellular respiration, phagosome maturation and especially the Sirtuin signaling pathways are among the top canonic or KEGG pathways perturbed by BPA and they are proteome-phenotypic inheritable to multi-generations. Most importantly, a protein palmitoyltransferase, ZDHHC1, was identified as one of the top proteins upregulated by BPA; and further, it was found that ZDHHC1 forms a heterodimer with STING. This novel finding constitutes a mechanistic model better describing how BPA and E2, as well as vitamin D3, are engaged in the immune response of asthma by up-regulating the expression of ZDHHC1 through histone modifications and its down-stream STING signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The purpose of this study was to identify a potentially novel mechanism of BPA’s impact on the development of allergic asthma through proteomics. Since T-cell activation is critical to initiation and maintenance of airway inflammation in patients with asthma, we were interested in studying the proteome of CD4+T cells that were isolated from the spleens of BPA exposed mice.  Animals without BPA exposure were used as controls.  We had two adult Female mice (F0), one was exposed to BPA by drinking water containing 10μg/mL BPA (B0) and the other one was non-exposed to BPA by drinking water free of BPA (N0). Their mates, the male mice, were not exposed to BPA. The pups (F1-F3) were also not exposed to BPA.  F1-F3 stands for the first, second, and third generation female off-springs of F0 mice among which B1-B3 mice were the corresponding off-springs of B0 mouse while N1-N3 mice were the off-springs of N0 mouse.  We had varying numbers of mice in each generation ranged from one up to four. Spleens of these mice were excised for extraction of CD4+T cells and their whole cell lysates were subjected to proteomic analysis using labeling-free quantification (LFQ).  Protein pathways were analyzed by IPA and STRING based on the LFQ data to identify consensus pathways perturbed by BPA in all animals. In addition, IPA was used to identify upstream regulators that are either activated or inhibited by BPA. Proteomics study of human Caco-2 cells in-vitro treated with BPA was performed by TMT-10 labeling (eight labels was actually used). From these experiments, a protein pathway matching the in vivo (CD4+T cells) pathway was identified and a BPA-targeting protein, ZDHHC1, was identified with the greatest interest.  Up-regulation of ZDHHC by BPA was validated by Western-blot (WB) in Caco-2 cells and in both human CD4+T cells (in vitro) and mouse CD4+T cells.  The mechanism for upregulation of ZDHHC1 by BPA and its correlation with immunity in allergic asthma was proposed.  Figure S1 is a flow chart to briefly summarize the above-stated experimental processes. At least three technical repeats (three LC-MS/MS runs) were performed for LFQ of mouse CD4+T cells;  four biological repeats (two within one set of TMT10 labeled samples and two separated TMT10 experiments) and up to six technical repeats (TMT10-N and TMT10-C were used to label one sample and three LC-MS/MS runs) were performed for Caco-2 TMT10.  The significance of identifying proteins was calculated by p-values (LFQ) with PEAKS or q-values (TMT10) with Thermo Discoveror 2.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified through the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform (Thermo) using Sequest HT (employing the Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database, release date 7/2015, containing 45,391 entries or mouse Swiss-Prot Homo database). The Sequest search parameters were: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT10 modification of peptide N terminus and lysine were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications; trypsin was the protease selected and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for the precursor ions was 10 ppm, and for the MS/MS, 0.01 Da. Only peptides with a minimum length of four amino acids were considered, and peptides were filtered for a maximum false discovery rate of 1%. At least one unique peptide with posterior error probability of less than 0.05 was accepted for quantification using the TMT4N reporter ions, and proteins were grouped. LFQ analysis was carried out using the PEAKS 8.5 software. The criteria for searching proteins were the same as for the TMT4N proteomic data. Statistical analysis: Volcano plots of proteomics data, correlation coefficient analysis and its associated presentation graphics were performed in R, version 3.4.1, as described previously. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to identify protein functions/pathways or upstream regulators significantly influenced by BPA. STRING was used for protein-protein interaction pathways and networks (PPIPNs) analysis using the list of proteins showing significant changes in expression.

### Publication Abstract
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a ubiquitous component in the manufacturing of plastic. It is commonly found in food and beverage containers. Because of its broad exposure and evidence that it may act as an estrogen-like molecule, many have studied its potential effects. For example,&#xa0;epidemiological studies have found an association between in utero BPA exposure and onset of childhood asthma. Our previous work suggested BPA treated mice induced asthma-like symptoms in both mothers and their&#xa0;pups. In order&#xa0;to better understand theconsequences of BPA exposure&#xa0;and potential mechanisms, we used a proteomics approach. Using both CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from an in vivo model of BPA exposure and an in vitro epithelial cell model, we identified activation of both innate and adaptive immune signaling following BPA&#xa0;exposure. Furthermore, our proteomic results from our multigenerational mouse model study implicates aberrant immune activation across several generations. We propose the following; BPA can active an innate viral immune response by upregulating a probable palmitoyltransferase&#xa0;ZDHHC1, and its binding partner stimulator of interferon-gamma (STING). It also has additional histone epigenetic perturbations, suggesting a role for epigenetic inheritance of these immune perturbations.

### Keywords
Bisphenol a, Immune response, Proteomics, Asthma

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology School of Medicine University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Kangling Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kangling Zhang
Department of Pharmacology School of Medicine University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston


