### Accession
PXD013038

### Title
CDK1 and CDK2 regulate NICD1 turnover  and the periodicity of the segmentation clock

### Description
All vertebrates share a segmented body axis. Segments form from the rostral end of the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) with a periodicity that is regulated by the segmentation clock. The segmentation clock is a molecular oscillator that exhibits dynamic clock gene expression across the PSM with a periodicity that matches somite formation. Notch signalling is crucial to this process. Altering Notch intracellular domain (NICD) stability affects both the clock period and somite size. However, the mechanism by which NICD stability is regulated in this context is unclear. We identified a highly conserved site crucial for NICD recognition by the SCF E3 ligase, which targets NICD for degradation. We demonstrate both CDK1 and CDK2 can phosphorylate NICD in the domain where this crucial residue lies and that NICD levels vary in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Inhibiting CDK1 or CDK2 activity increases NICD levels both in vitro and in vivo, leading to a delay of clock gene oscillations and an increase in somite size.

### Sample Protocol
Upon separation by SDS-PAGE on NuPAGE™ 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gels (Thermo Scientific) and staining with Instant Blue (Expedeon), protein bands were excised from gels. Samples were reduced with 10mM DTT at 50°C for 30 min and alkylated with 100mM IAA at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. Digestion was carried out by adding sequencing grade chymotrypsin (Sigma) at a ratio of 1 to 50 (enzyme to substrate) and incubating O/N at 30°C. Peptides were extracted with 100% ACN containing 2.5% formic acid and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by LC-MS-MS using a linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system. Peptides were typically injected onto a Thermo Scientific 15cm Easy spray column (Part No. ES800), with a flow of 300 nl/min and eluted over a 40 min linear gradient of 97% solvent A (3% DMSO, 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 3% DMSO, 0.08% formic acid in H2O).

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo), using Mascot 2.4.1 (www.matrixscience.com), and searching against the Swissprot and MRC-PPU (University of Dundee) databases. Scaffold (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was also used to examine the Mascot result files. Allowance was made for the following modifications: fixed, Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable, Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M) and Phosphorylation (S, T and Y). Error tolerances were 10ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Phospho-sites were assigned according to Proteome Discoverer ptmRS when the phospho-RS site probability was greater than or equal to 90%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Fbxw7, Notch, Cell cycle, Somitogenesis, Signalling

### Affiliations
Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD15EH, Scotland, UK.
University of Dundee

### Submitter
francesca anna carrieri

### Lab Head
Dr Jacqueline Kim Dale
Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD15EH, Scotland, UK.


