### Accession
PXD026371

### Title
Exocrine and connective tissue signatures in early pancreatic adenocarcinoma foci and their surrounding tissue

### Description
This project is reporting on microdissection proteomics of human operable, non-neoadjuvant treated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) with deep coverage of histologically neoplastic and adjacent healthier exocrine glands as well as stromal regions surrounding both. Through proteomic analysis, the parenchymal sample types differed significantly, with the malignant regions characterized by a broad downregulation of digestive enzymes. Instead, the stromal areas were alike, dominated by extracellular matrix proteins and lower expression of most metabolic pathways compared to the exocrine areas. Cholesterol synthesizing enzymes were more abundant in the tumor than stroma, as confirmed by an independent PDAC dataset and immunohistochemistry of PDAC microarrays. However, this was not accompanied by intratumor lipid deposition. Pathways most prognostic for survival were unexpectedly enriched in the histologically healthier exocrine glands, with a specific prognostic marker. Systematic analysis of pancreatic cancer transcriptomes from The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed that increased transcriptional complexity confers poor prognosis in PDAC.

### Sample Protocol
For the deparaffinization of FFPE tissues, antigen retrieval, and protein extraction, FFPE derived protein extracts were digested using the S-trap method following the manufactures’ instructions with a few modifications (Kuras M et al. J Proteome Res. 2018;18:548-556.). FFPE samples were incubated with 10 μL of 1:50 diluted EnVision FLEX Target Retrieval Solution High pH (Agilent Dako) at 97 °C for 10 minutes with shaking (500 RPM). Then, the samples were subjected to a brief centrifugation at 14,000 g at 4 °C for 3 minutes followed by removal of the EnVision solution and the paraffin. These steps were repeated two–three times or until the samples were paraffin free. The protein extraction was performed by adding 20 μL of extraction buffer per section, 100 mM TEAB containing 25 mM DTT, and 10 w/v% SDS (pH 8). The samples were then incubated at 99 °C for 1 h with shaking (500 RPM) to induce antigen retrieval and to break the amino acid cross-links. The samples were then centrifuged to remove the Tris–HCl buffer. Then, 50 μL of extraction buffer 100 mM AmBic was added per each samples. The samples were then sonicated to reduce viscosity and shear the DNA in the Bioruptor Plus UCD-300 (Diagenode) for 20 cycles (15 s on and 15 s off) at 4 °C followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 18 °C for 10 minutes for clarification of the lysates.  After extraction and reduction, protein determination was performed using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The protein determination for the samples containing SDS included the addition of ionic detergent compatibility reagent (Thermo Scientific). For the different experiments, 50, 100, or 150 μg of proteins were digested, and all digestions were performed in triplicate. The lysates were alkylated by adding 50 mM iodoacetamide followed by a 30 minutes incubation at RT in the dark. This step was followed by the addition of 1.2% phosphoric acid (final concentration) to acidify the samples. Then, S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB) was added to each sample to a final volume of eight times the volume of the lysate. Digestion was performed on the S-Trap Micro Spin Columns (ProtiFi).  Briefly, for the tryptic digestion, the samples were loaded onto the S-Trap filter followed by a short centrifugation. The captured proteins were washed with S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged between each wash. After that, the S-Trap column was moved into a new receiver tube/plate. Digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) containing trypsin in a 1:50 w/w ratio (enzyme/protein) was added on top, and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The following day, the peptides were eluted first with digestion buffer. The second elution was performed with 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and the final elution consisted of 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. The eluted peptides were then acidified with 50% formic acid to a final pH of ∼3 and dried down in a centrifugal evaporator. For proteomics analysis, the nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source. The peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN with 0.1% TFA, and their concentration was measured with Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific).  Approximately 1 μg of peptides was injected and loaded onto a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper) and then separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific). A flow rate of 300 nL/minutes and a column temperature of 45 °C were used. The solvents used for the nonlinear gradient were A (0.1% formic acid) and B (0.08% formic acid in 80% ACN).  For the detail of LC gradients and data acquisition methods, a 145 minutes method was used, with a gradient developing from 2% to 25% of solvent B in 115 minutes, then increasing to 32% in the next 10 minutes, and to 45% in 7 minutes, and then further increasing to 90% in 8 minutes, staying at 90% for the last 5 minutes. The samples were analyzed with a top 20 DDA (data-dependent acquisition) method. Full MS-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, with a range of 375-1500 m/z, a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), a target AGC value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The twenty most intense peaks (charge state ≥ 2) were fragmented in the HCD cell (NCE of 28) and MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z), a target AGC value of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The precursors were isolated with 1.2 m/z window, ion selection threshold was set to 8e3 and the dynamic exclusion was 40 seconds. All samples were analyzed in a random order. HeLa protein digest standard (200 fmol, Pierce) was run regularly as a QC standard to check the system performance.

### Data Protocol
All raw DDA-LC-MS/MS files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT against the UniProtKB human database (downloaded 2020-03-06, canonical and isoforms).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoplastic region, Stromal region, Parenchyma region, Pancreatic cancer, Lipid storage, Exocrine, Lipid metabolism, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Division of Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Department of Clinical Sciences (Lund), Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Yonghyo Kim

### Lab Head
Dr György Marko-Varga
Division of Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Department of Clinical Sciences (Lund), Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


