### Accession
PXD022144

### Title
Targeted quantification of detergent-insoluble RNA-binding proteins in Alzheimer’s disease reveals disease-specific coaggregation signatures

### Description
Core spliceosome and related RNA-binding proteins aggregate in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain even in early asymptomatic stages (AsymAD) of disease. To assess the specificity of RNA-binding protein aggregation in AD, we developed a targeted mass spectrometry approach to quantify broad classes of RNA-binding proteins with other pathological proteins including Tau and amyloid beta (Aβ) in detergent insoluble fractions from AD brain and that of other dementias. In total, we quantified 870 peptides from 385 detergent-insoluble RNA-binding proteins across 44 cortical tissues including controls, AsymAD, AD, and Parkinson’s Disease (PD). Relative levels of specific insoluble RNA-binding proteins across different disease groups correlated with accumulation of Aβ and Tau aggregates. RNA-binding proteins, including splicing factors with homology to the basic-acidic dipeptide repeats of U1-70K, preferentially aggregated in AsymAD and AD. In contrast, PD brain aggregates were relatively depleted of many RNA-binding proteins compared to AsymAD and AD groups. Correlation network analyses resolved 29 distinct modules of co-aggregating proteins including modules linked to spliceosome assembly, nuclear speckles and RNA splicing. Modules related to spliceosome assembly and nuclear speckles progressively increased in insolubility across progressive AD stages, whereas the RNA splicing module was decreased specifically in PD. Collectively, this work identifies classes of RNA-binding proteins that distinctly co-aggregate in detergent-insoluble fractions across neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and sample preparation A total of 30 µg of each sample was prepared in 100 µl of 8M urea buffer (10mM-Tris, 100 mM NaH2PO4, pH 8.5 with 1X HALT) for digestion. Proteins were reduced by DTT (final concentration of 1 mM) at room temperature for 30 min followed by alkylation with IAA (final concentration of 5 mM) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were then digested with Lys-C (enzyme ratio, 1:100) overnight at room temperature. The next day, samples were diluted 5 times to a final concentration < 2 M urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (enzyme ratio, 1:50) overnight at room temperature. Resulting peptides were desalted using an HLB column (10 mg, OASIS®) prior to LC-MS/MS. A global pooled standard (GPS) sample was prepared for PRM analysis by pooling 10% of tryptic peptides from each case into a single tube. Then, 0.75 pmol/µl of 6 × 5 LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix from Promega (6 peptides × 5 concentrations) was added into each of the 50 samples (44 case samples and 6 GPS technical replicates injected at different points throughout the sequence of 50 runs) before LC-MS/MS. The reference mix serves as an internal control to enable removal of any systematic variance. It is a mixture of 30 peptides: 6 sets of 5 isotopologues of the same peptide sequence, where the isotopologues of each peptide are present in a series of tenfold differences in molar abundance ranging from 0.0001X (lightest peptide) to 1X (heaviest peptide).  Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) To create the RBP inclusion list for PRM quantification, the global pooled standard (GPS) sample was first deeply profiled on an Orbitrap Fusion using the DDA method[42]. Raw files were processed by Maxquant (Version 1.5.7.4), using a human whole proteome sequence FASTA file downloaded from UniProt (UP000005640, date: 02-16-2016). The search engine Andromeda was used. Protein methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), protein N‐terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da), phosphorylation (S/T/Y, +79.9663 Da) and lysine ubiquitination (K, +114.0429 Da) were searched for as variable modifications (up to five allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to two missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration, and a ±4.5 ppm tolerance was applied after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of six residues, and 0.6 Da tolerance for ion trap HCD MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%. Following database searches, the identified peptides were used to build a PRM list of proteins that have gene ontologies related to RNA binding by filtering for gene symbols present in gene ontologies of ‘spliceosome’, ‘ribonucleoprotein’, ‘mRNA processing’, ‘RNA binding’, ‘small nuclear ribonucleoprotein and Sm protein’, in addition to  the U1-70K interactome list generated by our group[8]. Peptides (and proteins) that were not suitable for protein quantification by unique peptide were removed.  PRM analysis of peptides from the custom RBP list was then performed using a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), operated under Xcalibur software 3.0.63, equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and coupled to a nano-Acquity system (Waters). Digested peptides were loaded and separated on a self-packed 1.9 µm C18 analytical column (New Objective, 70 cm × 75 µm inner diameter; 360 µm outer diameter). Elution was performed over a 160 min gradient at a rate of 240 nL/min with buffer B ranging from 1% to 99% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). The Q-Exactive Plus MS was operated in PRM mode using an inclusion list, consisting of m/z values of targeted peptides (Supplemental Table 2). A normalized collision energy of 30% was employed for fragmentation. The following MS conditions were used: spray voltage, 2.0kV; heated capillary temperature, 300°C; isolation windows, 1.6 m/z; resolution set to 17,500 at m/z 200; and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1×10^5.

### Data Protocol
PRM data analysis Before importing Thermo raw files into Skyline software (Version 3.6), a spectral library was built. The library relied on global pooled standard (GPS) sample analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer described above with the same normalized collision energy as used for PRM analysis. For each peptide, three to six of the strongest product ions were selected in Skyline. Skyline software settings included: Precursor mass analyzer, centroided; MS1 mass accuracy of 20 ppm; Product mass analyzer, centroided; MS/MS mass accuracy of 20 ppm; Retention time filtering, including all matching scans. All product ion peak areas were calculated by Skyline, and endogenous peptide quantification was based on the normalized peak areas of at least 3 product ions. MS/MS spectra of example peptides are included in Supporting Information (Supplemental Fig.S2).  Data Normalization  Quantitative proteomic data including PRM can be affected by a variety of systematic biases, defined as non-biological signal, e.g. that generated by drift of the MS instrument from tuning parameters or chromatographic drift. Normalization of measured peptide or protein abundances must be robust to contend with this technical bias in LC-MS data, including ionization efficiency drift, LC column and signal drift, and the interplay of these with static data acquisition timing [43]. Thus, to correct for technical bias in comparisons between samples, it is necessary to normalize abundance data. Systematic technical variance occurring across MS runs was removed by data normalization of the linear drift of internal standard peptide signals as described [44]. Originally, there was signal depreciation of standard peptides in the dataset across the series of 50 injections (Supplemental Fig.S3). To control for signal attenuation, we applied a correction factor to each peptide peak area, thereby calculating normalized peptide peak areas (Supplemental Table S3). Normalized protein abundances were then calculated by summing corrected intensity peptide values (Supplemental Table S5). Finally, these normalized protein abundances were log2-transformed and regressed for age, sex and PMI and used to compare protein insolubility across disease groups (Supplemental Table S6). As described above, a peptide reference mix from Promega was added as internal control for normalization. Since the amount of standard peptides in each sample were fixed at known quantities, the variation in signal intensity for these peptide standard curves generated across all samples was due to unwanted technical drift. We chose the reference peptide (with peptide molar abundance of 0.01x) to calibrate normalization of drift slope to 0 using four reference peptides (#2-5), which had linear signal changes across the sequence of MS runs and had the highest coefficient of determination values (R2) across all 50 samples. Correction factors for normalizing peptide/protein intensities were calculated using peak area.  First, we averaged each of the four reference peptide peak areas (intensities) I-bar P2, I-bar P3, I-bar P4, and I-bar P5 across all 50 injections, and then normalized each of the sample-reference-peptide peak areas A-bar ij (i=2-5, j=1-50) to an average of 1 by dividing A-bar ij by each corresponding peptide’s average intensity: Intensity Ratio (IRij)== A-bar ij /I-bar Pi      A scatter plot including normalized intensity ratio of peptides 2-5 across 50 runs, where the x-axis represented MS injections 1 to 50 and the y-axis represented the intensity ratios as calculated above, showed a linear relationship between injection number and intensity ratio with the following best-fit regression line: y=-0.0171x+1.4289, R² = 0.769 This confirmed that peptide intensity across MS injections decreased due to signal depreciation. The average intensity ratio (I-bar Rj) of each injection (x=1 to 50) was calculated using the equation above. Then, intensity ratios of all run positions were adjusted so that a fit line would have a slope of zero, and we divided 1 by each I-bar Rj to obtain a multiplier correction factor, in turn applied to all original peptide intensities for each injection position j:  correction factor=1/ I-bar Rj

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Insoluble proteins, Alzheimer’s disease, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm) mass spectrometry, Human brains, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


