### Accession
PXD009850

### Title
Impacts of HLA-B57 micropolymorphism (MRM)

### Description
Comparison of peptide ligands of major histocompatibility class (MHC) I isolated by immunoaffinity purification from the C1R (Class I reduced) B-lymphoblastoid cell line, transfected with the MHC class I alleles HLA-B*57:01, HLA-B*57:03 and HLA-B*58:01.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen pellets of 10^8 cells were lysed using NP-40. The MHC complexes were isolated from the lysate using solid phase bound W6/32 monoclonal antibody and eluted with 10% acetic acid. MHC/peptide mixtures were fractioned by RP-HPLC, collecting 500 μL fractions (A5-A14).  UV absorbance of eluted material was monitored at 215 nm.  The relative amount of HLA purified was measured as the area under the curve for the β2m. 3 fraction pools (A5, A8, A11; A6, A9, A12; A7, A10, A13) were generated and vacuum concentrated prior to reconstitution in 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.  MRM detection was performed using an SCIEX QTRAP 5500 mass spectrometer, equipped with a Tempo nanoLC (Eksigent) autosampler and cHiPLC nanoflex (Eksigent).  Samples were loaded onto a trap column (200 µm x 0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL packed with 3 µm particles, nominal pore size 120 Å) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min in 98 % buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), 2 % buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in water) for 10 min. Samples were eluted from the trap column and over a cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18- packed with 3 µm particles, nominal pore size 120 Å) at 300 nL/min using the following gradient conditions: 0–3 min 2–10% B, 3–62 min 10–50% B, 62–65 min 40–80% B, 65–70 min hold at 80% B, 70–73 min 80–2% B, followed by equilibration at 2% B for 7 min. The QTRAP 5500 was operated in MRM mode in unit resolution for Q1 and Q3, coupled to an IDA criterion set to trigger an EPI scan (10,000 Da/sec; rolling CE; unit resolution) following any MRM transition exceeding 600 counts. Triggering MRM transitions were ignored for the subsequent 6 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The detection of all 3-4 transitions overlapping at a particular retention time, accompanied by MRM triggered-MS/MS fragmentation in at least one experiment (manually interrogated), was used as an indicator of peptide presence. Fragment ion intensity rankings were compared to a spectral library generated from IDA data for three HLA allotypes (PXD008570, PXD008571 and PXD008572) using Skyline 64bit 3.5.0.9319 (MacCoss Laboratory64) and calculated as a dot product value. Peptides detected in a sample without MS/MS validation were considered valid if the RT was +/-1.5 min of the average RT for MS/MS validated appearances of that peptide and the dot product value was greater than 0.7. Relative peptide abundance was calculated as the total area under the curve for the detected transitions using Skyline software, normalised to the amount of purified HLA from which the sample was derived, allowing comparison between samples in the absence of absolute quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Immunophenotypic differences between closely related human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles have been associated with divergent clinical outcomes in infection, autoimmunity, transplantation and drug hypersensitivity. Here we explore the impact of micropolymorphism on peptide antigen presentation by three closely related HLA molecules, HLA-B*57:01, HLA-B*57:03 and HLA-B*58:01, that are differentially associated with the HIV elite controller phenotype and adverse drug reactions. For each allotype, we mine HLA ligand data sets derived from the same parental cell proteome to define qualitative differences in peptide presentation using classical peptide binding motifs and an unbiased statistical approach. The peptide repertoires show marked qualitative overlap, with 982 peptides presented by all allomorphs. However, differences in peptide abundance, HLA-peptide stability, and HLA-bound conformation demonstrate that HLA micropolymorphism impacts more than simply the range of peptide ligands. These differences provide grounds for distinct immune reactivity and insights into the capacity of micropolymorphism to diversify immune outcomes.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Mhc, Mrm, Hla-b57

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Patricia Illing

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W. Purcell
Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia


