### Accession
PXD033603

### Title
The salivary proteome in relation to oral mucositis in autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation recipients: a labelled and label-free proteomics approach-TMTdata

### Description
Decreased salivary flow rates and/or changes in protein composition reported after autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) reduces the protective function of saliva. This might be associated with the development of oral mucositis (OM), an inflammation of the oral mucosa as a result of chemotherapy before ASCT which affects patients? quality of life and risk factor for systemic infections. In this study, a TMT-labelled proteomics experiment, a label-free quantification (LFQ) proteomics experiment and a DIA-MS proteomics experiment were used to identify differences in the salivary proteome between patients with ulcerative OM (uOM; WHO score ? 2) and those without (nOM). For the TMT-labelled experiment, saliva samples of 5 uOM and 5 nOM were pooled at different time points: baseline, 1, 2, and 3 weeks after ASCT and 3 months after ASCT. A different salivary proteome was suggested by a distinct clustering of the OM pools at baseline, week 2 and week 3 after ASCT.

### Sample Protocol
A pilot TMT 10-plex experiment and a label-free (DDA/DIA) approach were used in this study. All saliva samples used for both proteomics experiments were selected from multiple myeloma patients receiving autologous HSCT (ASCT) after high-dose melphalan (200 mg/m2) who were included in the multicenter, longitudinal H-OME study, a Dutch extension of the Orastem study. The H-OME study (funded by Dutch Cancer Society, ACTA 2014-7468; trial register NTR5760) was approved by the Medical Research Ethical Committee (NL52117.018.15) and conducted according to GCP guidelines and the declaration of Helsinki. All patients signed informed consent before participation.  During the H-OME study, OM was scored 3 times a week during the hospitalization phase using the WHO scoring system. Patients with a score of ≥2 (indicating ulcerative OM) during this period were considered as OM patients. Stimulated whole-mouth saliva samples were collected at multiple time points: before ASCT during the focal dental evaluation (baseline), once a week during the hospitalization phase for the ASCT and 3 and 12 months after ASCT, as previously described.  Five OM and 5 nOM patients (OM: median age 57 (33 – 63 year); nOM: median age 53 (52 – 56 years)) were selected for this experiment based on the availability of a large volume of saliva, and of all time points (excluding 12 months follow-up as these samples were not yet available). Equal volumes of stimulated whole-mouth saliva samples from 5 OM and 5 nOM patients were pooled for each time point, resulting in 10 pools (Figure 1). Those pools were reduced (in gel), alkylated, digested with trypsin and subsequently labeled with a unique TMT 10-plex label (Thermo Fisher Scientific; for experimental details see File S1). All uniquely labeled pools were combined into one and separated by isoelectric focusing. Fractions were combined (fraction 1 and 7, fractions 2 and 8 and so on) to yield 6 fractions for LC/MS/MS analysis. An extended 120 min gradient chromatographic separation (EASY NanoLCsystem; Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) for each combined fraction was used instead of a normal 60 min run to increase the resolution. Electrospray ionization used an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and for peptide identification and reporter ion fragmentation, the top 10 precursor ions (intensity-based selected in data-dependent switching mode) were sequenced by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mgf files using MSConvertGUI of ProteoWizard using peak picking filtering by the Vendor algorithm and default settings. For peptide and protein identification, mgf files were searched against the Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database (pig trypsin (P00761) was added) with the MS-GF+ (v2018.04.09) and OMSSA algorithms in SearchGUI 3.3.4 and PeptideShaker 1.16.29 [16-19]. The validated proteins at a 1% false-negative rate were further analyzed with Reporter 0.7.20 using default settings to obtain quantitative results. From the output, the ratios were used for data analysis. To explore patterns between the OM and nOM pools and the different time points, a principal component analyses (PCA) and a heatmap were generated using RStudio (version 1.2.5001) on log2 transformed ratios from Reporter. Distance calculation for the heatmap was based on a correlation measurement as described in equation 3 in Key (2012).  Per timepoint, fold changes of the ratios for the OM and nOM pools were calculated and log2 transformed. Z-scores were calculated and a score of ≤ -2.0 or ≥ 2.0 was used as a threshold to identify proteins that were either up- or down-regulated in the OM pool at a specific time point. Those proteins were further analyzed using Reactome in a pathway analysis. Uniprot was used for the proteins that were not identified in Reactome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tmt-ms, Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, Multiple myeloma, Oral mucositis, Dia-ms, Saliva, Label-free quantification, Tmt-labelled proteomics

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department of Hematology The Netherlands

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole M.A. Blijlevens
Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department of Hematology The Netherlands


