### Accession
PXD037776

### Title
E4F1 and ZNF148 are transcriptional activators of the A57C and wildtype TERT promoter

### Description
Point mutations within the TERT promoter are the most common recurrent somatic non-coding mutation identified across different cancer types, including glioblastoma, melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and bladder cancer. They are most abundant at C146T and C124T and more rare at A57C, with the latter originally described as a familial case but subsequently shown also to occur somatically. All three mutations create de novo ETS (E-twenty-six specific) binding sites and result in the reactivation of the TERT gene, allowing cancer cells to achieve replicative immortality. Here, we employed a systematic proteomics screen to identify transcription factors preferentially binding to the C146T, C124T and A57C mutations. While we confirmed binding of multiple ETS factors to the mutant C146T and C124T sequences, we identified E4F1 a an A57C-specific binder and ZNF148 as a TERT WT binder that is excluded from the TERT promoter by the C124T allele. Both proteins are activating transcription factors that bind specifically to the A57C and wildtype (at position 124) TERT promoter sequence in corresponding cell lines and upregulate TERT transcription and telomerase activity.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, U87MG cells were cultured in DMEM (-Arg, -Lys) for SILAC (Thermo Scientific), supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS (PAN-Biotech) and 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco), in addition to either non-labelled 42 mg/L 12C614N4-Arginine and 73 mg/L 12C614N2-Lysine or heavy-labelled 42 mg/L 13C615N4-Arginine and 73 mg/L 13C615N2-Lysine. The cell lines were cultured for at least two weeks in SILAC media prior to experiments and heavy SILAC labelled input material was quality controlled to ensure a SILAC incorporation rate of >98%. For DNA in vitro reconstitution pull-downs, 25 μl of 100 μM respective forward and reverse strand oligonucleotides were denatured at 80ºC and re-annealed via gradual cooling. Double-stranded oligonucleotides were then concatemerized with 100 U T4 polynucleotide kinase (Thermo Scientific) and 20 Weiss U T4 DNA ligase (Thermo Scientific), biotinylated with desthiobiotin-ATP (Jena Bioscience) by 60 U Klenow fragment exo- (Thermo Scientific) and finally purified with Microspin G-50 columns (GE Healthcare). 0.25 mg (Western blot) or 0.75 mg (MS) Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Scientific) were washed twice with WB1000 buffer (1 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630 and 1 mM EDTA). The purified DNA probes were then immobilised on the streptavidin-coated magnetic beads for 30 min at RT on the rotating wheel. 300 μg of nuclear protein extracts alongside 40 μg of sheared salmon sperm DNA (Thermo Scientific), diluted in PBB buffer [(50 mM Tris,150 mM NaCl, 0.25% IGEPAL CA-630, 5 mM MgCl2 1 mM DTT and 1× cOmplete protease inhibitor (Merck)] were added and incubated on the rotating wheel for 2 h at 4ºC. The beads were washed thrice with PBB, and bound protein were eluted in 2× Laemmli buffer and boiled for 5 min at 95ºC. Protein samples were separated on a 4-12% NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gels (Thermo Scientific) or 12% Bis-Tris protein gel (Thermo Scientific) for 1 h (Western blot) or 30 min (MS) at 170 V in 1× NuPAGE MOPS SDS running buffer (Thermo Scientific). The Colloidal blue staining kit (Thermo Scientific) was used to stain protein samples destined for downstream mass spectrometry analysis. Each lane was separated into four fractions. Gel pieces were then cut into approximate 1×1 mm pieces and destained twice with destaining buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% ethanol), followed by dehydration with acetonitrile (ACN) and dried further in a speed vac. Reduction buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM DTT) was then added to rehydrate and reduce the samples at 56°C for 1 h. Reduction buffer was then replaced with alkylation buffer [50 mM NH4HCO3 and 55 mM ICH2CONH2 (Sigma-Aldrich)] and samples were alkylated in the dark for 45 min at RT. The gel pieces were then washed with ABC buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3), ACN, ABC buffer and ACN twice again, before drying further with speed vac until the pieces were ‘dice-like bouncy.’ The protein samples were then incubated in digestion buffer [50 mM NH4HCO3 and 10 μg/mL Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega)] overnight at 37°C. Proteins were extracted and the supernatants combined by incubating gel pieces in extraction buffer [35 mM ABC buffer, 30% ACN, 3% Trifluoroacetic acid], ACN, extraction buffer and ACN twice again. The combined supernatants were concentrated in a speed vac (Eppendorf) for roughly two hours before being transferred to pre-equilibrated stage tips. Stage tips were prepared by installing two C18 layers (Waters) inside a 200 μL pipette tip. The tips were washed with methanol and 80% ACN supplemented with 0.5% formic acid, then equilibrated by washing with 0.5% formic acid twice. After loading the combined supernatants, the tips were centrifuged followed by a wash with 0.5% formic acid. Tryptic peptides were eluted from stage tips with 80% ACN supplemented with 0.5% formic acid into a plate. Peptides were analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% ACN in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
Point mutations within the <i>TERT</i> promoter are the most recurrent somatic noncoding mutations identified across different cancer types, including glioblastoma, melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and bladder cancer. They are most abundant at -146C &gt; T and -124C &gt; T, and rarer at -57A &gt; C, with the latter originally described as a familial case, but subsequently shown also to occur somatically. All three mutations create de novo E26-specific (ETS) binding sites and result in activation of the <i>TERT</i> gene, allowing cancer cells to achieve replicative immortality. Here, we used a systematic proteomics screen to identify transcription factors preferentially binding to the -146C &gt; T, -124C &gt; T, and -57A &gt; C mutations. Although we confirmed binding of multiple ETS factors to the mutant -146C &gt; T and -124C &gt; T sequences, we identified E4F1 as a -57A &gt; C-specific binder and ZNF148 as a <i>TERT</i> wild-type (WT) promoter binder that showed reduced interaction with the -124C &gt; T allele. Both proteins are activating transcription factors that bind specifically to the -57A &gt; C and WT (at position 124) <i>TERT</i> promoter sequence in corresponding cell lines, and up-regulate <i>TERT</i> transcription and telomerase activity. Our work describes new regulators of <i>TERT</i> gene expression with possible roles in cancer.

### Keywords
Tert promoter mutations, Znf148, E4f1, Telomerase

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore


