### Accession
PXD016838

### Title
PRG-1 Immunoprecipitation in C. Elegans

### Description
Co-Immunoprecipitation of PRG1 in Caenorhabditis elegans.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of PRG1 in C. elegans.  Digestion with Lys-C and Trypsin. Pulldown incubation was 4 hours with with endogenous bait with Pierce magnetic beads.

### Data Protocol
Analysis undertaken using MaxQuant through local server.

### Publication Abstract
Membraneless organelles are sites for RNA biology including small non-coding RNA (ncRNA) mediated gene silencing. How small ncRNAs utilise phase separated environments for their function is unclear. We investigated how the PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway engages with the membraneless organelle P granule in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proteomic analysis of the PIWI protein PRG-1 reveals an interaction with the constitutive P granule protein DEPS-1. DEPS-1 is not required for piRNA biogenesis but piRNA-dependent silencing: deps-1 mutants fail to produce the secondary endo-siRNAs required for the silencing of piRNA targets. We identify a motif on DEPS-1 which mediates a direct interaction with PRG-1. DEPS-1 and PRG-1 form intertwining clusters to build elongated condensates in vivo which are dependent on the Piwi-interacting motif of DEPS-1. Additionally, we identify EDG-1 as an interactor of DEPS-1 and PRG-1. Our study reveals how specific protein-protein interactions drive the spatial organisation and piRNA-dependent silencing within membraneless organelles.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Prg-1

### Affiliations
Principal Investigator
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Scott Greig

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Principal Investigator


