### Accession
PXD033015

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 phosphoproteomics - ACE2-A549 and Vero

### Description
Multiple coronavirus have emerged independently in the past 20 years and caused lethal human diseases. Although vaccine development targeting these viruses has been accelerated substantially, there remain patients requiring treatment who cannot be vaccinated. Understanding the common host factors necessary for the life cycle of coronaviruses may reveal conserved therapeutic targets. Here, we used the known substrate specificities of mammalian protein kinases to deconvolute the sequence of phosphorylation events mediated by three host protein kinase families (SRPK, GSK-3, and CK1) that phosphorylate a cluster of serine and threonine residues on the viral N-protein in a highly coordinated way. We showed that these kinases were critical for the viral replication cycle, suggesting that inhibitors of one or more of these protein kinases could be useful for treating patients with COVID-19 infections. These phosphorylation sites are highly conserved across coronaviruses, indicating that inhibitors of these protein kinases might be broadly effective in treating multiple viral diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis, digestion, and preparation for mass spectrometry analysis Cultured cells were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and scraped into lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), with 2X phosphatase inhibitors (Cell Signaling Technology #5870). Samples were probe tip sonicated, and subsequently reduced with 5 mM DTT for 50 min at 55 °C, alkylated for 30 min with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5 mM DTT. Samples were diluted to 2M urea with digestion dilution buffer (20 mM pH 8.5 HEPES containing 1mM CaCl2) and digested at 37oC with 20 µg of Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako-Chem) overnight. Samples were then diluted to 1 M urea and digested for 5 hours with 20 µg of trypsin (Pierce). After digestion, peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged at 500 x g for 20 min, and purified over SepPak C18 columns. After elution, peptides were quantified with a MicroBCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Total protein sample preparation Fifty micrograms of peptides from each sample were labeled with isobaric tandem-mass-tag (TMT) 11 plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.5) with 30% acetonitrile (v/v) and 250 g of TMT reagent. The reaction was quenched for 15 min by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Samples were combined, dried, purified over SepPak C18 columns, and dried again. Samples were then resuspended in 40 μL of basic reverse phase (bRP) buffer A (10 mM NH4HCO2, pH10, 5% ACN) and separated on a Zorbax Extended C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 µm, no. 763750-902, Agilent) with a gradient of 10 to 40% bRP buffer B (10 mM NH4HCO2, pH10, 90% ACN). Ninety-six fractions were collected and combined into 24 fractions for analysis. Each fraction was dried and desalted over a C18 stop and go extraction tip (STAGE-Tip) before analysis by mass spectrometry.  IMAC phosphopeptide sample preparation High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kits (Thermo) were used to enrich phosphopeptides from 1 mg of peptides for each sample. After elution from the IMAC column, enriched samples were dried, labeled with TMT, and bRP fractionated as described earlier but with a gradient of 5-40% bRP buffer B. The resulting 24 fractions were desalted over a C18 STAGE-Tip.  LC–MS analysis of total protein fractions Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~40 cm of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, approximately 1 μg was loaded onto the column. Peptides were separated with a 2.5-hour gradient of 6 to 30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 550 nL/min. Each analysis used an SPS-MS3-based TMT method, which reduces ion interference compared to MS2 quantification. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum [Orbitrap analysis, resolution 60,000; 350-1400 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target 4.0 × 105, maximum injection time: 50 ms]. Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap; AGC 2.0 × 104; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 120 ms). After acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, an MS3 spectrum was collected using a method in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 3.5 × 105, maximum injection time 150 ms, isolation window 1.2 Th, resolution was 50,000 at 200 Th).  LC–MS analysis of phosphopeptide-enriched fractions For phosphopeptide analysis, the same MS and HPLC instruments were used as described earlier. For each analysis, approximately 500 ng of enriched peptides were loaded on the column and run over a 120-minute gradient of 2 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. MS1 spectra were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with a scan range of 300 to 1500 m/z using a AGC target of 4.0  105 with a maximum inject time of 25 ms. Peptides for MS2 analysis were isolated using the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.5 m/z. MS2 spectra were generated using Higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 40%. Fragments were collected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 with a first mass of 110m/z, an AGC target of 5.0e4, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Total protein data processing and analysis Mass spectra were processed with Comet-base software pipeline. The resulting data were searched with a fully tryptic database containing both human Swissprot consensus entries and isoforms downloaded Feb 2020, and SARS-CoV-2 pre-release entries from Uniprot (June 2020), enabling a static modification of lysine and N-termini with TMT (229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethylation (57.0215 Da) of cysteine, along with variable oxidation (15.9949 Da) of methionine. Vero data were searched with a fully tryptic database containing Chlorocebus sabaeus entries from Uniprot (June 2020) and SARS-CoV-2 pre-release entries from Uniprot (June 2020). Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. The product ion tolerance was set to 1.0 Th. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using previously described linear discriminant analysis. Filtered PSMs were collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of < 1%. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. MS3 spectra with TMT reporter ion summed signal-to-noise ratios less than 100 were excluded from quantitation.   Phosphorylation data processing and analysis When searching phosphorylation data, a variable modification for phosphorylation (79.9663 Da) was allowed on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, the product ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Th. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was performed to set a PSM FDR of < 1 %. Filtered PSMs were collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of < 1%. Phosphorylation sites were evaluated using an AScore method. Sites with an AScore > 13 were considered localized. PSMs with TMT reporter ion summed signal-to-noise ratios less than 100 were excluded from quantitation.  Quantification and normalization of TMT data For each entry (protein or phosphorylation site), the level in each TMT channel was calculated as the log-transformation of the ratio to the median value of all 9 TMT channels (3 mock, 3 infected and 3 treated) of that entry. Then, every sample was median-normalized so the log-TMT-ratio was centered at zero. The amounts of phosphorylated proteins were normalized to the total amount of protein by subtracting the log-TMT-ratio of the corresponding protein from the log-TMT-ratio of the phosphorylation site.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple coronaviruses have emerged independently in the past 20 years that cause lethal human diseases. Although vaccine development targeting these viruses has been accelerated substantially, there remain patients requiring treatment who cannot be vaccinated or who experience breakthrough infections. Understanding the common host factors necessary for the life cycles of coronaviruses may reveal conserved therapeutic targets. Here, we used the known substrate specificities of mammalian protein kinases to deconvolute the sequence of phosphorylation events mediated by three host protein kinase families (SRPK, GSK-3, and CK1) that coordinately phosphorylate a cluster of serine and threonine residues in the viral N protein, which is required for viral replication. We also showed that loss or inhibition of SRPK1/2, which we propose initiates the N protein phosphorylation cascade, compromised the viral replication cycle. Because these phosphorylation sites are highly conserved across coronaviruses, inhibitors of these protein kinases not only may have therapeutic potential against COVID-19 but also may be broadly useful against coronavirus-mediated diseases.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Tomer Yaron

### Lab Head
Dr Lewis C. Cantley
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA


