### Accession
PXD014892

### Title
Conotoxin Exploitation from Conus betulinus

### Description
Employing Conus betulinus as a representative, we sequenced and assembled the first Conus genome. After integration of multi-omics data, we provide novel insights into the genetic central dogma of conotoxins, assuming a number ratio of ~1:1:10s for genes/transcripts/peptides.

### Sample Protocol
1.Field survey and sampling 2.The mRNA sequence analysis. 3.Protein extraction, separation and LC-ESI-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS data were converted to MGF files by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience; London, UK) against the byssal transcriptome-annotated database (see more details in the section 4.2.). Mascot parameters were set as follows: Trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme with a maximum of one missed cleavages permitted per peptide; fixed modifications of Carbamidomethyl(C); variable modifications consisting of Oxidation (M),Deamidatioin (N, Q) and Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q); peptide charge, 2+, 3+, and 4+; 20 ppm of peptide mass tolerance; 0.05 Da of fragment masstolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Although there are various Conus species with publicly available transcriptome and proteome data, no genome assembly has been reported yet. Here, using Chinese tubular cone snail (C. betulinus) as a representative, we sequenced and assembled the first Conus genome with original identification of 133 genome-widely distributed conopeptide genes. After integration of our genomics, transcriptomics, and peptidomics data in the same species, we established a primary genetic central dogma of diverse conopeptides, assuming a rough number ratio of ~1:1:1:10s for the total genes: transcripts: proteins: post-translationally modified peptides. This ratio may be special for this worm-hunting Conus species, due to the high diversity of various Conus genomes and the big number ranges of conopeptide genes, transcripts, and peptides in previous reports of diverse Conus species. Only a fraction (45.9%) of the identified conotopeptide genes from our achieved genome assembly are transcribed with transcriptomic evidence, and few genes individually correspond to multiple transcripts possibly due to intraspecies or mutation-based variances. Variable peptide processing at the proteomic level, generating a big diversity of venom conopeptides with alternative cleavage sites, post-translational modifications, and N-/C-terminal truncations, may explain how the 133 genes and ~123 transcripts can generate thousands of conopeptides in the venom of individual C. betulinus. We also predicted many conopeptides with high stereostructural similarities to the putative analgesic &#x3c9;-MVIIA, addiction therapy AuIB and insecticide ImI, suggesting that our current genome assembly for C. betulinus is a valuable genetic resource for high-throughput prediction and development of potential pharmaceuticals.

### Keywords
Conus; genome; conotoxins; multi-omics; transcript; proteomics; peptide

### Affiliations
BGI
Professor and president of BGI Academy of Marine Sciences

### Submitter
He Yanbin

### Lab Head
Dr Qiong shi
Professor and president of BGI Academy of Marine Sciences


