### Accession
PXD037244

### Title
PDI-catalyzed oxidative protein folding mediates senescence by induction of ER-derived oxidative stress

### Description
Protein homeostasis is linked with aging and aging associated diseases. Oxidative protein folding occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and produces H2O2 as a byproduct. The role of oxidative protein folding in human stem cells aging remains unknown. Here, we succeed to knockout protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), a key oxidoreductase for catalyzing oxidative protein folding, in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). Deletion of PDI does not affect the self-renewal of hESCs but significantly delays hMSCs senescence. Mechanistically, knockout of PDI slows down the rate of oxidative protein folding and decreases the leakage of ER-derived H2O2 into the nucleus, therefore alleviating oxidative stress and the secretory-associated senescence phenotype (SASP). Among the SASP-related genes, SERPINE1 is identified as a key driver for cell senescence. These findings establish a novel link between oxidative protein folding and aging. The previously unrecognized function of PDI in regulating cell senescence provides a potential target for aging and aging-related disease intervention.

### Sample Protocol
hMSCs were harvested and lysed with 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor). The cell lysates were centrifuge at 12,000 g  for 10 min at 4°C, and protein quantification was measured with a BCA kit.

### Data Protocol
Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between PDI-/- vs. PDI+/+ were calculated by statistical analysis using unpaired Student’s t-test, with the cut-off for P-value < 0.05 and absolute average log2fold change  > 0.3.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative protein folding occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to generate disulfide bonds, and the by-product is hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> ). However, the relationship between oxidative protein folding and senescence remains uncharacterized. Here, we find that the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), a key oxidoreductase that catalyzes oxidative protein folding, accumulated in aged human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and deletion of PDI alleviated hMSCs senescence. Mechanistically, knocking out PDI slows the rate of oxidative protein folding and decreases the leakage of ER-derived H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> into the nucleus, thereby decreasing the expression of SERPINE1, which was identified as a key driver of cell senescence. Furthermore, we show that depletion of PDI alleviated senescence in various cell models of aging. Our findings reveal a previously unrecognized role of oxidative protein folding in promoting cell aging, providing a potential target for aging and aging-related disease intervention.

### Keywords
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hmscs); hydrogen peroxide (h2o2); oxidative  29 protein folding; protein disulfide isomerase (pdi); senescence

### Affiliations
CAS（Chinese Academy of Sciences）
17812007228

### Submitter
ji zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Qianzhao Ji
CAS（Chinese Academy of Sciences）


