### Accession
PXD028810

### Title
The tongue squamous carcinoma cell line Cal27 primarily employs integrin α6β4-containing type II hemidesmosomes for adhesion which contribute to anticancer drug sensitivity

### Description
Integrins are heterodimeric cell surface glycoproteins used by cells to bind to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and regulate tumor cell proliferation, migration and survival. A causative relationship between integrin expression and resistance to anticancer drugs has been demonstrated in different tumors, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Using a Cal27 tongue squamous cell carcinoma model, we have previously demonstrated that de novo expression of integrin αVβ3 confers resistance to several anticancer drugs (cisplatin, mitomycin C and doxorubicin) through a mechanism involving downregulation of active Src, increased cell migration and invasion. In the integrin αVβ3 expressing Cal27-derived cell clone 2B1, αVβ5 expression was also increased, but unrelated to drug resistance. To identify the integrin adhesion complex (IAC) components that contribute to the changes in Cal27 and 2B1 cell adhesion and anticancer drug resistance, we isolated IACs from both cell lines. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics analysis indicated that both cell lines preferentially use integrin α6β4, which is classically found in hemidesmosomes. The anticancer drug resistant cell clone 2B1 demonstrated an increased level of α6β4 accompanied with increased deposition of a laminin-332-containing ECM. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy demonstrated the formation of type II hemidesmosomes by both cell types. Furthermore, suppression of α6β4 expression in both lines conferred resistance to anticancer drugs. Taken together, our results identify a key role for α6β4-containing type II hemidesmosomes in regulating anticancer drug sensitivity.

### Sample Protocol
Integrin adhesion complexes were isolated as previously described (Jones et al., 2015; Paradžik et al., 2020). For each cell line, five biological replicates were analyzed. In short, cells (1 x 106 for Cal27 and 9,4 x 105 for 2B1) were plated on 10 cm diameter cell culture dishes (at least six dishes per cell line) and after 72 hours washed with DMEM-HEPES and incubated with Wang and Richard’s reagent for 10 min (6 mM DTBP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). DTBP was quenched by 0.03 M Tris-HCl (pH 8) and cells were lysed using modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6; 150 mM NaCl; 5 mM disodium EDTA, pH 8; 1% (w/v) Triton X-100, 2.5 % (w/v) SDS, 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate). Cell bodies were removed by high-pressure washing and remaining adhesion complex components were collected by scraping into the adhesion recovery solution (125 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 1% (w/v) SDS; 150 mM dithiothreitol). Isolated IACs were acetone precipitated and processed for either MS or WB analysis. For MS analysis, samples were prepared using in-gel trypsin digestion, (Jones et al., 2015; Paradžik et al., 2020), and analyzed using a modified version of the LC-MS/MS method, as previously described (Horton et al., 2015). Briefly, an UltiMateR 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, United States) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) with electrospray ionization was used. Peptide mixtures were eluted for 44 min using a gradient containing 92% of solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 8% up to 33% of solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Solvent flow was set to 300 nL per minute. To identify proteins, data were searched against the human Uniprot database (version 2018_01) using Mascot (Matrix science, version 2.5.1). Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.50 Da and parent ion tolerance was 5 PPM. Protein identifications were further refined using Scaffold (Proteome software). Protein (99%) and peptide (90%) probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) as incorporated by Scaffold including a minimum of four spectral counts per protein. Spectral counts were used as a measure of protein abundance.

### Data Protocol
A protein–protein interaction network of the proteins identified with a minimum four spectral counts in at least three out of five biological replicates was constructed using STRING (v. 11.0, medium confidence of minimum required interaction score = 0.40) (Szklarczyk et al., 2019) and visualized with Cytoscape (version 3.7.1) (Shannon et al., 2003; Doncheva et al., 2019). Proteins were manually assigned to functional groups using the Uniprot database (Apweiler et al., 2004). For functional annotation and enrichment calculation, Database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID), version 6.8 (Huang et al., 2009a, 2009b) was used by utilizing DAVID_CC subontology list (Benjamini–Hochberg corrected P-value < 0.05, EASE score < 0.1, at least four identified proteins). To visualize the enrichment, REViGO tool was used (with allowed similarity: small (0.5), semantic similarity measure to use: Resnik-normalized) (Supek et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Integrins are heterodimeric cell surface glycoproteins used by cells to bind to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and regulate tumor cell proliferation, migration and survival. A causative relationship between integrin expression and resistance to anticancer drugs has been demonstrated in different tumors, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Using a Cal27 tongue squamous cell carcinoma model, we have previously demonstrated that <i>de novo</i> expression of integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;3 confers resistance to several anticancer drugs (cisplatin, mitomycin C and doxorubicin) through a mechanism involving downregulation of active Src, increased cell migration and invasion. In the integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;3 expressing Cal27-derived cell clone 2B1, &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5 expression was also increased, but unrelated to drug resistance. To identify the integrin adhesion complex (IAC) components that contribute to the changes in Cal27 and 2B1 cell adhesion and anticancer drug resistance, we isolated IACs from both cell lines. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics analysis indicated that both cell lines preferentially, but not exclusively, use integrin &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4, which is classically found in hemidesmosomes. The anticancer drug resistant cell clone 2B1 demonstrated an increased level of &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4 accompanied with increased deposition of a laminin-332-containing ECM. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy demonstrated the formation of type II hemidesmosomes by both cell types. Furthermore, suppression of &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4 expression in both lines conferred resistance to anticancer drugs through a mechanism independent of &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;3, which implies that the cell clone 2B1 would have been even more resistant had the upregulation of &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4 not occurred. Taken together, our results identify a key role for &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4-containing type II hemidesmosomes in regulating anticancer drug sensitivity.

### Keywords
Integrin αvβ3, Integrin α6β4, Laminin-332, Keratins 5/14, Anticancer drug sensitivity, Adhesome, Integrin crosstalk, Hemidesmosome

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Cell Biology and Signalling, Division of Molecular Biology, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Ana Tadijan

### Lab Head
Dr Andreja Ambriović-Ristov
Laboratory for Cell Biology and Signalling, Division of Molecular Biology, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia


