### Accession
PXD021774

### Title
Translation in human mature erythrocytes

### Description
It is generally believed that human mature erythrocytes do not possess functional ribosomes, and therefore cannot synthesize proteins. However, this dogma is not consistent with the long life of mature erythrocytes in the circulatory system. The mass-spectrometry analysis was done on highly pure preparation of human mature erythrocytes to identify the proteome.  Results of the analysis show that there is no contamination from other cell types.  We also demonstrate translation by polysome profiling, metabolic labelling and RiboPuromycylation. RNA-seq and quantitative RT-PCR assays revealed that HBA (alpha globin) and HBB (beta globin) transcripts are selectively translated. RNA-seq and translatome analyses revealed the presence of all necessary translation factors and aminoacyl tRNA synthetases.

### Sample Protocol
The gel pieces washed with water and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel using trypsin, by adding 5 μL 10 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight digestion at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 μL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans.  The data were analyzed by using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search against the human UniProtKB sequence database and a database generated with the sequences of the ribosomal proteins of interest, respectively using the Sequest program integrated in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software package V2.3.

### Publication Abstract
It is generally believed that human mature erythrocytes do not possess functional ribosomes and therefore cannot synthesize proteins. However, the absence of translation is not consistent with the long lifespan of mature erythrocytes. They stay viable and functional for about 115 d in the circulatory system. Here, using a highly pure preparation of human mature erythrocytes, we demonstrate the presence of translation by polysome profiling, [<sup>35</sup>S]methionine labeling, and RiboPuromycylation. [<sup>35</sup>S]methionine labeling revealed that the translation in mature erythrocytes is about 10% of that observed in reticulocytes. We could observe polysomes by transmission electron microscopy in these cells. RNA-seq and quantitative real-time PCR performed on polysome fractions of these cells revealed that <i>HBA</i> (&#x3b1;-globin) and <i>HBB</i> (&#x3b2;-globin) transcripts are translated. Using a luciferase-based reporter assay and mutational studies, we show that the sequence of the 5' untranslated region is crucial for the translation of these transcripts. Furthermore, mature erythrocytes showed reduced expression of globin proteins (&#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-) when treated with translation inhibitors. Overall, we provide multiple lines of evidence for translation of globin mRNAs in human mature erythrocytes.

### Keywords
Globin, Translation, Rna, Erythrocytes

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Indian Institute of Science

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Sandeep M Eswarappa
Indian Institute of Science


