### Accession
PXD015548

### Title
Physical and functional interaction between SET1/COMPASS complex component CFP-1 and a Sin3S HDAC complex in C. elegans

### Description
The CFP1 CXXC zinc finger protein targets the SET1/COMPASS complex to nonmethylated CpG rich promoters to implement tri-methylation of histone H3 Lys4 (H3K4me3). Although H3K4me3 is widely associated with gene expression, the effects of CFP1 loss vary, suggesting additional chromatin factors contribute to context dependent effects. Using a proteomics approach, we identified CFP1 associated proteins and an unexpected direct link between C. elegans CFP-1 and an Rpd3/Sin3 small (SIN3S) histone deacetylase complex.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations with CFP-1::GFP were performed starting from 4 mg total protein embryonic extract from the strain containing the two transgenes CFP-1::GFP and HA::WDR-5.1. Eluates were boiled in LDS sample buffer and proteins were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies), stained with Coomassie blue R-250 before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Casabona MG et al., Proteomics, 2013). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6) through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Caenorhabditis elegans taxonomy), classical contaminants database (homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases.

### Publication Abstract
The CFP1 CXXC zinc finger protein targets the SET1/COMPASS complex to non-methylated CpG rich promoters to implement tri-methylation of histone H3 Lys4 (H3K4me3). Although H3K4me3 is widely associated with gene expression, the effects of CFP1 loss vary, suggesting additional chromatin factors contribute to context dependent effects. Using a proteomics approach, we identified CFP1 associated proteins and an unexpected direct link between Caenorhabditis elegans CFP-1 and an Rpd3/Sin3 small (SIN3S) histone deacetylase complex. Supporting a functional connection, we find that mutants of COMPASS and SIN3 complex components genetically interact and have similar phenotypic defects including misregulation of common genes. CFP-1 directly binds SIN-3 through a region including the conserved PAH1 domain and recruits SIN-3 and the HDA-1/HDAC subunit to H3K4me3 enriched promoters. Our results reveal a novel role for CFP-1 in mediating interaction between SET1/COMPASS and a Sin3S HDAC complex at promoters.

### Keywords
Chromatin, C. elegans, Interactomics, Set1/compass complex

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


