### Accession
PXD012735

### Title
Zebrafish, LC-MS/MS -  Profiling of Histidine Phosphoproteome in Danio rerio by TiO2 Enrichment

### Description
Histidine phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification that is known to regulate signal transduction in prokaryotes. In an effort to help elucidate the heretofore hidden vertebrate phosphoproteome, this report presents a global phosphorylation analysis of Danio rerio (zebrafish) larvae. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a TiO2 affinity technique. A total of 68 unique phosphohistidine sites were detected on 63 proteins among 1076 unique phosphosites on 708 proteins. This report provides the first phosphohistidine dataset obtained from zebrafish.

### Sample Protocol
zebrafish was lysised in the 8M urea, protein lysate was reduced by 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM ABC at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated in the 25 mM immediately alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA) at a concentration of 60 mM in 25 mM ABC at 25°C for 30 min. And then trypsin digestion. Phosphopeptdies were enriched by the TiO2 enrichment technology.

### Data Protocol
The obtained mass spectra were searched with MaxQuant 1.3.0.0 against a D. rerio database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000437). In the parameter section, “phosphorylation” was added as a variable modification, digestion mode was “trypsin/p”, mascot score >20 and the false discovery rate (FDR) <1%. In the produced protein list, proteins were filtered as following: proteins score < 40, phosphorylation localization probability < 70%, protein with “contamination” or “only identified by side” were all removed from the protein list.

### Publication Abstract
Histidine phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification that is known to regulate signal transduction in prokaryotes. However, functional studies in eukaryotes have been largely neglected due to the labile nature of N-linked phosphorylated amino acids. In an effort to help elucidate the heretofore hidden vertebrate phosphoproteome, this report presents a global phosphorylation analysis of Danio rerio (zebrafish) larvae. Phosphopeptide enrichment is performed using a TiO<sub>2</sub> affinity technique. A total of 68 unique phosphohistidine sites are detected on 63 proteins among 1076 unique phosphosites on 708 proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012735. This report provides the first phosphohistidine dataset obtained from zebrafish.

### Keywords
Embryo, Lc-ms/ms, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Kyungpook National University
Lab of Toxicology,College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

### Submitter
Yan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
Lab of Toxicology,College of Pharmacy, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.


