### Accession
PXD020593

### Title
Mutations Causing a Developmental Ciliopathy Disrupt Integrator Complex Assembly

### Description
IPs of integrator complex proteins from human and fly

### Sample Protocol
IPs of integrator complex proteins from human and fly

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted using ProteomeDiscoverer (Thermo Fisher, version 2.2.0388). Deisotoping was not performed. All MS/MS spectra were searched against the appropriate database,either Uniprot Drosophila database (version 04 -04-2018) or Uniprot Human database (reviewed 06272018), using Sequest. Searches were performed with a parent ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.60 Da. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavages. Fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and deamidation were specified in Sequest. Sample were further process with Scaffold 4 including a search with TandemX! search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Oral-facial-digital (OFD) syndromes are a heterogeneous group of congenital disorders characterized by malformations of the face and oral cavity, and digit anomalies. Mutations within 12 cilia-related genes have been identified that cause several types of OFD, suggesting that OFDs constitute a subgroup of developmental ciliopathies. Through homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing of two families with variable OFD type 2, we identified distinct germline variants in INTS13, a subunit of the Integrator complex. This multiprotein complex associates with RNA Polymerase II and cleaves nascent RNA to modulate gene expression. We determined that INTS13 utilizes its C-terminus to bind the Integrator cleavage module, which is disrupted by the identified germline variants p.S652L and p.K668Nfs*9. Depletion of INTS13 disrupts ciliogenesis in human cultured cells and causes dysregulation of a broad collection of ciliary genes. Accordingly, its knockdown in Xenopus embryos leads to motile cilia anomalies. Altogether, we show that mutations in INTS13 cause an autosomal recessive ciliopathy, which reveals key interactions between components of the Integrator complex.

### Keywords
Human, Fly, Lcms

### Affiliations
UT-Medical Branch
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX

### Submitter
William Russell

### Lab Head
Dr Bill Russell
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, UTMB, Galveston, TX


