### Accession
PXD044387

### Title
Comparison of the proteome and of the phosphoproteome of S. cerevisiae cells harvested with different strategies

### Description
The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a powerful model system that is widely used to investigate many cellular processes. The harvesting of yeast cells is the first step in almost every experimental procedure. Here, yeast cells are isolated from their growth medium, collected, and used for successive experiments or analysis. The two most common methods to harvest S. cerevisiae are centrifugation and filtration. Understanding, if and how centrifugation and filtration affect yeast physiology is essential with respect to downstream data interpretation. Here, we profile and compare the proteomes and the phosphoproteomes, using isobaric label-based quantitative mass spectrometry, of three common methods used to harvest S. cerevisiae cells: low-speed centrifugation, high-speed centrifugation, and filtration. Our data suggest that while the proteome was stable across the tested conditions, hundreds of phosphorylation events were different between centrifugation and filtration. Our analysis shows that under our experimental conditions, filtration may cause both cell wall and osmotic stress at higher levels compared to centrifugation, and implying harvesting method-specific stresses. Thus, considering that the basal activation levels of specific stresses may differ under certain harvesting conditions is an important, but often overlooked aspect of experimental design.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion, TMT labeling and sample processing. Samples were digested using Lys-C (overnight at 24°C) and trypsin (6 h at 37°C). 1 µg of each enzyme was used per 100 µg of protein. A final volume of 30% acetonitrile was added to each digest followed by the addition of specified tandem mass tag (TMTpro) labeling reagents. 50 µg of peptide for each sample were labeled with 100 µg of TMTpro reagents as follows: low-speed triplicates: 126,127n,127c; high- speed triplicates: 128n,128c,129n; filtration triplicates:129c,130n,130c. Samples were incubated for one hour at room temperature. Before continuing sample processing, ~1 µg of peptide was collected from each sample, mixed, and desalted via StageTip to verify labeling efficiency (ensuring that it is >97%).

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all S. cerevisiae entries from UniProt. The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphopeptide analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, also as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. For phosphorylation analysis, site localization was determined using the AScore algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The budding yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is a powerful model system that is widely used to investigate many cellular processes. The harvesting of yeast cells is the first step in almost every experimental procedure. Here, yeast cells are isolated from their growth medium, collected, and used for successive experiments or analysis. The two most common methods to harvest <i>S. cerevisiae</i> are centrifugation and filtration. Understanding if and how centrifugation and filtration affect yeast physiology is essential with respect to downstream data interpretation. Here, we profile and compare the proteomes and the phosphoproteomes, using isobaric label-based quantitative mass spectrometry, of three common methods used to harvest <i>S. cerevisiae</i> cells: low-speed centrifugation, high-speed centrifugation, and filtration. Our data suggest that, while the proteome was stable across the tested conditions, hundreds of phosphorylation events were different between centrifugation and filtration. Our analysis shows that, under our experimental conditions, filtration may cause both cell wall and osmotic stress at higher levels compared to centrifugation, implying harvesting-method-specific stresses. Thus, considering that the basal activation levels of specific stresses may differ under certain harvesting conditions is an important, but often overlooked, aspect of experimental design.

### Keywords
Yeast, Phosphoproteome analysis, Stress, Proteome analysis, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School Department of cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Department of cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA


