### Accession
PXD001987

### Title
TMT-labeled quantitative protein profiling of hippocampus during human aging

### Description
Human hippocampus is one of the critical brain regions affected by aging. However, a fully understanding of aging-related changes in protein profiles in human hippocampus has not been well described, especially for the Chinese population. With the newly founded human brain bank in Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, we performed a 4-plex TMT labeled proteomic study in the hippocampus of postmortem human brains. The ages of death ranged from 22-98, and were grouped into 4 aging groups: 20-50, 50-70, 70-90, and over 90 (n=4 each). None of the donors was diagnosed with neurodegenerative diseases according to their medical history. Our data identified 4582 proteins, among which 99 proteins were upregulated and 42 proteins were downregulated during the aging process.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Tissues were prepared as described elsewhere. Briefly, tissues were homogenized in ice-cold homogenization buffer containing 8 M urea (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1×cocktail, 1 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, PMSF). Cell debris was then removed via centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min at 12,000 rpm. The clarified supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 ml tube and protein concentration was determined using Nanodrop2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT labeling Equal protein (25 μg/case) amounts from the separate supernatants (protein dissolved in 8 M urea) were combined to yield four pooled extracts, each containing a total of 100 μg of protein. Protein was treated with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 55 oC followed by 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark at room temperature, and digested with 1:100 (w/w) endopeptidase Lys-C overnight at 37 oC. Samples were diluted with PBS (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of 1.0 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin. The next day, samples were acidified with 1% formic acid(FA) and desalted by a reversed-phase column Oasis HLB (Waters, Milford, MC, USA), then dried with a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. In each experiment, peptides were labeled with TMT reagents: 126 = group A, 127 = group B, 128 = group C and 129 = group D. Briefly, TMT reagents (0.8 mg dissolved in 40 μL of 99.9% acetonitrile) were added to the solution and the labeling (derivatization) reaction continued for 1 h at room temperature and terminated by 5 μL of 5% hydroxylamine for 5 min. All the labeled peptides from 4 pools were mixed together and desalted, dried as before and dissolved in 100 μL 0.1% FA. High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) separation Fractionation of the labeled peptides was performed as described previously{Gokce, 2011 #114}. Briefly, the TMT-labeled peptides (100 μL in 0.1% FA) were transferred to MS tubes for HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific). A Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (1 mL/min, 4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 μm, Waters) was used. Column temperature was maintained at 45 °C with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min, and detection was performed by UV absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected in 50 tubes for every 1.5 min. The fractions were dried and mixed into 20 tubles, then dissolved in 20 𝜇L 0.1% FA for further liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis. Peptide analysis by LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS was analyzed by the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The labeled digestion fractions were separated by a 60 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min. UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used, which was directly interfaced with a Thermo Q Exactive Benchtop mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA). To manipulate the Q Exactive mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode Xcalibur 2.1.2 software was requisitioned. A single full-scan mass spectrum in orbitrap (400-1,800 m/z, 60,000 resolution) was followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scan at 27% normalized collision energy (HCD). TMT-4 labelling proteomics method: TMT-126=group A(age 20-50), TMT127=group B(age50-70), TMT128=group C(70-90) and TMT129=group D(age over 90), the samples were mixed together after labelling, then separated into 20 fractions by HPLC, for this reason, we produced 20 raw data(MS140697-H 1-20), there is no direct relationship between the raw data and groups.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the selected human FASTA database from uniprot (released on July 9, 2014) using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo, USA). The search criteria were followed software setting with some alterations as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT plex (K and any N-terminal) were set as the static modifications, the oxidation (M) was set as the dynamic modification, precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. Relative protein quantification was also performed according to manufacturer’s instructions on the reporter ion intensities per peptide. Quantitative precision was expressed as protein ratio variability. The ratio of proteins in each group(127/126, 128/126 and 129/126) was adjusted using the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) ratio as the internal control. The upregulation and downregulation thresholds were set at 1.25 and 0.80, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The hippocampus appears commonly affected by aging and various neurologic disorders in humans, whereas little is known about age-related change in overall protein expression in this brain structure. Using the 4-plex tandem mass tag labeling, we carried out a quantitative proteomic study of the hippocampus during normal aging using postmortem brains from Chinese subjects. Hippocampal samples from 16 subjects died of non-neurological/psychiatric diseases were divided into 4 age groups: 22-49, 50-69, 70-89, and &gt;90. Among 4582 proteins analyzed, 35 proteins were significantly elevated, whereas 25 proteins were downregulated, along with increasing age. Several upregulated proteins, including transgelin, vimentin, myosin regulatory light polypeptide 9, and calcyphosin, were further verified by quantitative Western blot analysis of hippocampal tissues from additional normal subjects. Bioinformatic analysis showed that the upregulated and downregulated proteins were largely involved in several important protein-protein interaction networks. Proteins in the electron transport chain and synaptic vesicle fusion pathway were consistently downregulated with aging, whereas proteins associated with Alzheimer's disease showed little change. Our study demonstrates substantial protein profile changes in the human hippocampus during aging, which could be of relevance to age-related loss of hippocampal functions.

### Keywords
Human, Aging, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China


