### Accession
PXD028347

### Title
Inactivation of the response regulator AgrA has a pleiotropic effect on biofilm formation, pathogenesis and stress response in Staphylococcus lugdunensis

### Description
Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a coagulase-negative Staphylococcus that emerges as an important opportunistic pathogen. However, little is known about the regulation underlying the transition from commensal to virulent state. Based on knowledge of S. aureus virulence, we suspected that the agr quorum sensing system may be an important determinant for the pathogenicity of S. lugdunensis. We investigated the functions of the transcriptional regulator AgrA using the agrA deletion mutant. AgrA played a role in cell pigmentation: ∆argA mutant colonies were white while the parental strains were slightly yellow. Compared to the wild-type strain, the ∆argA mutant was affected in its ability to form biofilm and was less able to survive in mice macrophages. Moreover, the growth of ∆agrA was significantly reduced by the addition of 10 % NaCl or 0.4 mM H2O2 and its survival after 2 h in presence of 1 mM H2O2 was more than 10-fold reduced. To explore the mechanisms involved beyond these phenotypes, the ∆agrA proteome and transcriptome were characterized by mass spectrometry and RNA-Seq. We found that AgrA controlled several virulence factors as well as stress-response factors, which are well correlated with the reduced resistance of the ∆agrA mutant to osmotic and oxidative stresses. These results were not the consequence of the deregulation of RNAIII of the agr system, since no phenotype or alteration of the proteomic profile has been observed for the ∆RNAIII mutant. Altogether, our results highlighted that the AgrA regulator of S. lugdunensis played a key role in its ability to become pathogenic.

### Sample Protocol
The total protein extraction and the mass-spectrometry were done as described previously (16). Briefly, 200 mL of S. lugdunensis N920143 and ΔagrA mutant cell cultures were centrifuged (6000 g) for 15 min at 4 °C, washed twice with recovery buffer (Tris HCl 50 mM, Na2SO4 50 mM, glycerol 15 %), and incubated for 12 hours at −80 °C. Cells were disrupted using the Fast Prep instrument (MP Biomedical LLC, Santa Ana, CA, USA) for 3 min at 6.5 m/s followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 10,000 g at 4 °C to remove the cell debris. Proteins were prepared from three independent biological samples and the quantification was realized with the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Five μg of each protein extract were digested with trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37 °C. After protein or peptide desalting and concentration, the chromatography step was performed on a NanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) ultrahigh-pressure Nano flow chromatography system. Mass spectrometry experiments were carried out on a TIMS-TOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) and spectra were acquired in the positive mode in the mass range from 100 to 1700 m/z. These data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 and the MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot S. lugdunensis database. Bioinformatic analysis and visualization were performed in Perseus. Three sample tests were performed using Student’s t-test with a Permutation-based FDR of 0.05. The LC-MS/MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier XXX (submission in progress) (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride).

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a coagulase-negative Staphylococcus that emerges as an important opportunistic pathogen. However, little is known about the regulation underlying the transition from commensal to virulent state. Based on knowledge of S. aureus virulence, we suspected that the <i>agr</i> quorum sensing system may be an important determinant for the pathogenicity of <i>S. lugdunensis</i>. We investigated the functions of the transcriptional regulator AgrA using the <i>agrA</i> deletion mutant. AgrA played a role in cell pigmentation: &#x394;<i>argA</i> mutant colonies were white while the parental strains were slightly yellow. Compared with the wild-type strain, the &#x394;<i>argA</i> mutant was affected in its ability to form biofilm and was less able to survive in mice macrophages. Moreover, the growth of &#x394;<i>agrA</i> was significantly reduced by the addition of 10% NaCl or 0.4&#x2009;mM H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and its survival after 2 h in the presence of 1&#x2009;mM H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> was more than 10-fold reduced. To explore the mechanisms involved beyond these phenotypes, the &#x394;<i>agrA</i> proteome and transcriptome were characterized by mass spectrometry and RNA-Seq. We found that AgrA controlled several virulence factors as well as stress-response factors, which are well correlated with the reduced resistance of the &#x394;<i>agrA</i> mutant to osmotic and oxidative stresses. These results were not the consequence of the deregulation of RNAIII of the <i>agr</i> system, since no phenotype or alteration of the proteomic profile has been observed for the &#x394;RNAIII mutant. Altogether, our results highlighted that the AgrA regulator of <i>S. lugdunensis</i> played a key role in its ability to become pathogenic. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Although belonging to the natural human skin flora, Staphylococcus lugdunensis is recognized as a particularly aggressive and destructive pathogen. This study aimed to characterize the role of the response regulator AgrA, which is a component of the quorum-sensing <i>agr</i> system and known to be a major element in the regulation of pathogenicity and biofilm formation in Staphylococcus aureus. In the present study, we showed that, contrary to S. aureus, the <i>agrA</i> deletion mutant produced less biofilm. Inactivation of <i>agrA</i> conferred a white colony phenotype and impacted <i>S. lugdunensis</i> in its ability to survive in mice macrophages and to cope with osmotic and oxidative stresses. By global proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we identified the AgrA regulon, bringing molecular bases underlying the observed phenotypes. Together, our data showed the importance of AgrA in the opportunistic pathogenic behavior of <i>S. lugdunensis</i> allowing it to be considered as an interesting therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Agra, Agr system, Transcriptional regulation

### Affiliations
Proteogen platform
Plateforme Proteogen SF ICORE 4206, US EMerode Université de Caen Normandie Esplanade de la paix, 14032 Caen cedex

### Submitter
benoit bernay

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Bernay
Plateforme Proteogen SF ICORE 4206, US EMerode Université de Caen Normandie Esplanade de la paix, 14032 Caen cedex


