### Accession
PXD031162

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of childhood ALL cell lines for proteoform detection

### Description
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common childhood cancer, and it has a 5-year survival rate of 85% for European children. But for subsets of patients who fail to respond to standard of care chemotherapeutics, treatment options are limited, and clinical prognosis is poor. To establish a novel platform and methodology to better characterize ALL subtypes and identify their pharmacologic vulnerabilities, we performed thermal proteome profiling of 20 childhood ALL cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were resuspended to a density of 100*10e6 cells/mL and distributed as 100 μL aliquots into 0.2-mL PCR tubes with a total of 8 aliquots per cell line. Each of the aliquots were heated for 3 min to the respective temperatures (41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63°C), followed by a 3-min incubation time at RT. Afterwards, cells were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were thawed at 25°C and lysed by this freeze-thawing cycle repeated for another two times. Cell debris and precipitated proteins were removed by centrifugation at 21000 g and 4°C for 40 min. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and protein concentrations were determined. Equal volumes of each condition that correspond to 100 μg protein in the 37°C sample were transferred to new tubes and subjected to the following digestion. First, the samples were diluted to contain 50 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS and 5 mM TCEP. Reduction was performed at 65°C for 30 min. The samples were then cooled down to RT and alkylated with 15 mM of chloroacetamide for 30 min. The proteins were digested overnight with 1 to 40 Lys-C to protein-ratio and consecutively with Trypsin at a 1 to 25 enzyme to protein ratio. The digested peptides were labeled by TMTpro 16-plex using 0.6 mg of the respective label for each sample. Of note, the labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of the samples. Two cell lines per TMTpro 16-plex set was used. After pooling, a sample clean-up step using a solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) was performed and purified samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Aliquots of approximately 400 µg peptides were pre-fractionated by means of HiRIEF using gel strips with pI range of 3-10 as well as 3,7-4,9 resulting in 42 and 72 fractions respectively. Collected fractions were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and subjected to an LC-MS/MS measurement. Online LC-MS was performed as previously described 73 using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each of the samples was dissolved in 20 μL solvent A and 10 μL were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% FA; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, a curved gradient from 3 to 8% B (in 2 min, curve of 4) and from 8% to 45% B (in 148 min, curve of 5) was used followed by a steep increase to 99% B in 2 min. FTMS master scans were performed in a mass range of 3000-1500 m/z applying a resolution of 60 000 (and mass range 300-1500 m/z), followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window and 0.5 m/z isolation offset. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v2.08) (Granholm et al., 2014), where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 99 in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities. Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
The complexity of the functional proteome extends considerably beyond the coding genome, resulting in millions of proteoforms. Investigation of proteoforms and their functional roles is important to understand cellular physiology and its deregulation in diseases but challenging to perform systematically. Here we applied thermal proteome profiling with deep peptide coverage to detect functional proteoform groups in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines with different cytogenetic aberrations. We detected 15,846 proteoforms, capturing differently spliced, cleaved and post-translationally modified proteins expressed from 9,290 genes. We identified differential co-aggregation of proteoform pairs and established links to disease biology. Moreover, we systematically made use of measured biophysical proteoform states to find specific biomarkers of drug sensitivity. Our approach, thus, provides a powerful and unique tool for systematic detection and functional annotation of proteoform groups.

### Keywords
All, Lc-msms, Tpp, Proteoforms, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Rozbeh Jafari
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Stockholm, Sweden.


