### Accession
PXD000991

### Title
Method to identify novel proteoform peptides from salivary supernatant.

### Description
We describe the use Galaxy framework to facilitate complete proteogenomic analysis for a representative salivary dataset. We demonstrate how Galaxy’s many features make it a unique and ideal solution for proteogenomic analysis.   We highlight Galaxy’s flexibility by creating a modular workflow incorporating both established and customized software and processing steps that improve depth and quality of proteogenomic results.  We demonstrate Galaxy’s accessibility, via the easy sharing of complete, and even complex (approximately 140 steps), proteogenomic workflows, which can be used and customized by others via a public instance of the framework (usegalaxyp.org).  Our results provide a blueprint for the establishment of the Galaxy framework as an ideal solution for the emerging field of proteogenomics.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatant from saliva that was collected and pooled from six healthy subjects was used for this analysis. Proteins were treated with Proteominer™ (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) for dynamic range compression and were subjected to multidimensional peptide fractionation after trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
msconvert and MGF formatter were used to convert RAW files into intermediate mzml files and MGF files for ProteinPilot search. In brief, multiple RAW files associated with the set of fractions were merged into a single file that was used for MS database searching within ProteinPilot and subsequent steps such as PSM evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics combines large-scale genomic and transcriptomic data with mass-spectrometry-based proteomic data to discover novel protein sequence variants and improve genome annotation. In contrast with conventional proteomic applications, proteogenomic analysis requires a number of additional data processing steps. Ideally, these required steps would be integrated and automated via a single software platform offering accessibility for wet-bench researchers as well as flexibility for user-specific customization and integration of new software tools as they emerge. Toward this end, we have extended the Galaxy bioinformatics framework to facilitate proteogenomic analysis. Using analysis of whole human saliva as an example, we demonstrate Galaxy's flexibility through the creation of a modular workflow incorporating both established and customized software tools that improve depth and quality of proteogenomic results. Our customized Galaxy-based software includes automated, batch-mode BLASTP searching and a Peptide Sequence Match Evaluator tool, both useful for evaluating the veracity of putative novel peptide identifications. Our complex workflow (approximately 140 steps) can be easily shared using built-in Galaxy functions, enabling their use and customization by others. Our results provide a blueprint for the establishment of the Galaxy framework as an ideal solution for the emerging field of proteogenomics.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Saliva, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA

### Submitter
Pratik Jagtap

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy Griffin
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA


