### Accession
PXD041975

### Title
Identification of the protein interaction network of STAG2 protein isoforms with inclusion and exclusion of exon32

### Description
This study involves the identification of specific interactors for STAG2ex32+ and STAG2ex32delta. Plasmids expressing YFP-STAG2 isoforms were transfected into HCT116OsTIR cells using untransfected cells as mock control. 40h post transfection, whole cell lysates were extracted and STAG2 isoforms were immunoprecipiated using GFP-TRAP. An unspecific GFP-TRAP pulldown was also conducted using lysates from untransfected cells to assess for unspecific protein binding to the beads (Mock). Significant proteins were determined by label-free quantification and statistical analysis using MaxQuant and MSstats.

### Sample Protocol
STAG2 immunoprecipitation samples were analysed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Three biological replicate experiments were carried out for MS and each included three samples of HCT116OsTIR cells, untransfected (Control), transfected with pcDNA3-YFP-STAG2ex32+ or pcDNA3-YFP-STAG2ex32delta for 40h. Cells were fractionated for whole cell lysates (WCL) and to immunoprecipitated YFP-STAG2 proteins with GFP-TRAP beads. To maximise IP material for MS, 40ul of GFP-TRAP was used for each immunoprecipitation with 95% of WCL isolated from each treatment condition. The entire IP eluates were loaded into a pre-cast SDS-PAGE gel (4–20% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gel, 10-well, 50 µL) and proteins were run for approximately 1 cm to prevent protein separation. Protein bands were excised and diced, and proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) at 37°C for 20 min, alkylated with 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 50 mM TEAB at ambient temperature for 20 min in the dark. Proteins were then digested with 150 ng trypsin, at 37°C for 4 h followed by a second trypsin addition and an additional overnight incubation at room temperature. After digestion, peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and 50 mM TEAB washes. Samples were evaporated to dryness at 30°C and resolubilised in 0.1% formic acid. nLC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap Plus interfaced to a NANOSPRAY FLEX ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific). Sixty percent of each sample from each of the replicates was loaded as 10 µL injections. Peptides were separated on a 27 cm fused silica emitter, 75 µm diameter, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 200 C18-AQ, 2.4 µm resin (Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid over 60 min, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.8 kV applied immediately prior to the analytical column via a microtee built into the nanospray source with the ion transfer tube heated to 320°C and the S-lens set to 60%. Precursor ions were measured in a data-dependent mode in the orbitrap analyser at a resolution of 70,000 and a target value of 3e6 ions. The ten most intense ions from each MS1 scan were isolated, fragmented in the HCD cell, and measured in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17 where they were searched against the human UniProtKB database including the STAG2ex32delta and the YFP sequences (http://www.uniprot.org/, downloaded 06/11/2020) using default settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. To ensure high confidence identifications, PSMs, peptides, and proteins were filtered at a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Label-free quantification in MaxQuant was used with LFQ minimum ratio count set to 2 with ‘FastLFQ’ (LFQ minimum number of neighbours = 3, and LFQ average number of neighbours = 6) and ‘Skip normalisation’ selected. In Advanced identifications, ‘Second peptides’ was selected and the ‘match between runs’ feature was not selected. For statistical protein quantification analysis, the ‘proteinGroups.txt’ and ‘evidence.txt’ output files from MaxQuant were loaded into the MSstats statistical framework (version 3.14.0) run through RStudio (version 1.1.456, R version 4.0). Contaminants and reverse sequences were removed and data was log2 transformed. To find differential abundant proteins across conditions, paired significance analysis consisting of fitting a statistical model and performing model-based comparison of conditions. The group comparison function was employed to test for differential abundance between conditions. Unadjusted p-values were used to rank the testing results and to define regulated proteins between groups.

### Publication Abstract
Most studies of cohesin function consider the Stromalin Antigen (STAG/SA) proteins as core complex members given their ubiquitous interaction with the cohesin ring. Here, we provide functional data to support the notion that the SA subunit is not a mere passenger in this structure, but instead plays a key role in the localization of cohesin to diverse biological processes and promotes loading of the complex at these sites. We show that in cells acutely depleted for RAD21, SA proteins remain bound to chromatin, cluster in 3D and interact with CTCF, as well as with a wide range of RNA binding proteins involved in multiple RNA processing mechanisms. Accordingly, SA proteins interact with RNA, and R-loops, even in the absence of cohesin. Our results place SA1 on chromatin upstream of the cohesin ring and reveal a role for SA1 in cohesin loading which is independent of NIPBL, the canonical cohesin loader. We propose that SA1 takes advantage of structural R-loop platforms to link cohesin loading and chromatin structure with diverse functions. Since SA proteins are pan-cancer targets, and R-loops play an increasingly prevalent role in cancer biology, our results have important implications for the mechanistic understanding of SA proteins in cancer and disease.

### Keywords
Ap-ms

### Affiliations
UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK
UCL

### Submitter
Silvia Surinova

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Surinova
UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK


