### Accession
PXD028793

### Title
Peptidomic changes in the milk of water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) with intramammary infection by non-aureus staphylococci

### Description
Infectious mastitis by non-aureus staphylococci (NAS) is a significant issue in dairy buffalo farming. In a herd with subclinical NAS mastitis, we identified Staphylococcus microti as the predominant species by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. To assess milk protein integrity and investigate potential disease markers, we characterized 12 NAS-positive and 12 healthy quarter milk samples by shotgun peptidomics combining peptide enrichment and high-performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We observed significant changes in the milk peptidome. Out of 789 total peptides identified in each group, 49 and 44 were unique or increased in NAS-positive and healthy milk, respectively. In terms of sequence, these belonged mainly to caseins in NAS-positive milk, followed by milk fat globule membrane proteins (MFGMP) and by the immune defense/antimicrobial proteins osteopontin, lactoperoxidase, and serum amyloid A. In healthy milk, the differential peptides belonged mainly to MFGMP, followed by caseins. In terms of abundance, peptides from MFGMP and immune defense protein were higher in NAS-positive milk, while peptides from caseins were higher in healthy milk. These findings highlight the impact of NAS on buffalo milk quality and mammary gland health, even when clinical signs are not evident, and underscore the need for clarifying the epidemiology and relevance of the different NAS species in this dairy ruminant.

### Sample Protocol
The study was carried out on quarter milk samples collected from a commercial water buffalo dairy farm located in Campania, Southern Italy, with an increased bulk tank somatic cell count related to NAS IMI. The farm maintained an average X milking buffaloes in free-stall barns with deep-bedded cubicles with straw. All the animals were fed with a balanced Total Mixed Ration in feed alleys with headlocks. Lactating cows were milked twice a day in a double-10 herringbone parlour milking.  The farm was free of brucellosis and paratuberculosis. Milk samples were collected following the National Mastitis Council guidelines. Before sampling, teats were cleaned with a pre-dipping foam containing lactic acid, and the apex was scrubbed and disinfected with alcohol. The first streams of milk were discharged, and 20 mL was collected aseptically from each quarter into sterile vials. The milk samples were kept at 4°C until they reached the laboratory (within the day) at the IZS in Portici for bacteriological assays and somatic cell count. The milk samples were processed for peptidomic analysis. Briefly, milk was defatted by centrifugation and processed for the depletion of high-molecular-weight proteins on centrifugal filters. The filtrate was precipitated, and peptides were dried, dissolved in 1% (v/v) formic acid and desalted before MS analysis. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis of peptides was carried out with duplicate runs for each sample. Briefly, LC-ESI-MS/ MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 directly connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptide mixtures were enriched on 75 μmID × 150 mm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column and separated employing the following LC gradient: 4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min, 4–28% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 130 min, 28–40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 20 min, 40–95% ACN in 0.1% formic for 2 min and 95–4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. MS spectra of eluting peptides were collected over an m/z range of 375–1500 using a resolution setting of 120,000, operating in the data-dependent mode to automatically alternate between Orbitrap-MS and Orbitrap-MS/MSacquisition. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 20 most abundant ions in each MS scan using a normalized collision energy of 30%, and an isolation window of 1.7 m/z. Rejection of +1 and unassigned charge states were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw label-free MS/MS files from Thermo Xcalibur software (version 4.1) were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with the Sequest algorithm against the proteome of Bubalus bubalis from NCBI 01-08-2019 and Staphylococcus from Uniprot 18-06-2019. Only peptides with high FDR confidence were considered (FDR 0.01 strict, FDR 0.05 relaxed) to remove false-positive matches. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length (6 amino acids) and m/z accuracy (8 ppm). The quality of a match between sequence and observed peaks was provided by a high cross-correlation score (≥1.5). PSM confidence was set to High. Unspecific digestion was chosen, and neither fixed nor variable modifications were set. The resulting peptides and protein hits were further screened accepting only those hits listed as high confidence and with an Xcorr ≥ 1.5. Only peptides present and quantified in 66,6% of the repeats were positively identified and used for statistical analysis. Peptides were considered increased or decreased if they showed a significant Welch t-test difference (cut-off at 1% permutation-based FDR) or if they were present with a frequency ≥ 66,6% in either NAS-positive or healthy milk group but less than 66,6% in the other group. Statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/). Peptide sequences were analyzed manually for C-terminal amino acids. The potential proteases generating the cuts were classified based on the MEROPS database by evaluating the specificities of the main proteases generating the cuts.

### Publication Abstract
Mastitis by non-aureus staphylococci (NAS) is a significant issue in dairy buffalo farming. In a herd with subclinical NAS mastitis, we identified Staphylococcus microti as the predominant species. To assess milk protein integrity and investigate potential disease markers, we characterized 12 NAS-positive and 12 healthy quarter milk samples by shotgun peptidomics combining peptide enrichment and high-performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We observed significant changes in the milk peptidome. Out of 789 total peptides identified in each group, 49 and 44 were unique or increased in NAS-positive and healthy milk, respectively. In NAS-positive milk, the differential peptides belonged mainly to caseins, followed by milk fat globule membrane proteins (MFGMP) and by the immune defense/antimicrobial proteins osteopontin, lactoperoxidase, and serum amyloid A. In healthy milk, these belonged mainly to MFGMP, followed by caseins. In terms of abundance, peptides from MFGMP and immune defense protein were higher in NAS-positive milk, while peptides from caseins were higher in healthy milk. These findings highlight the impact of NAS on buffalo milk quality and mammary gland health, even when clinical signs are not evident, and underscore the need for clarifying the epidemiology and relevance of the different NAS species in this dairy ruminant.

### Keywords
Nano-lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Università degli studi di Milano 
department of veterinary medicine

### Submitter
Francesca  Grassi Scalvini

### Lab Head
Dr Francesca Grassi Scalvini
department of veterinary medicine


