### Accession
PXD025011

### Title
Integrative cell type-specific multi-omics approaches reveal impaired programs of glial cell differentiation in mouse culture models of DM1

### Description
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a neuromuscular disorder caused by a non-coding CTG repeat expansion in the DMPK gene. This mutation generates a toxic CUG RNA that interferes with the RNA processing of target genes in multiple tissues. Despite debilitating neurological impairment, the pathophysiological cascade of molecular and cellular events in the central nervous system has been less extensively characterized than the molecular pathogenesis of muscle/cardiac dysfunction. Particularly, the contribution of different cell types to DM1 brain disease is not clearly understood. We first used transcriptomics to compare the impact of expanded CUG RNA on the transcriptome of primary neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes derived from DMSXL mice, a transgenic model of DM1. RNA sequencing revealed more frequent expression and splicing changes in glia than neuronal cells. In particular, primary DMSXL oligodendrocytes showed the highest number of transcripts differentially expressed, while DMSXL astrocytes displayed the most severe splicing dysregulation. Interestingly, the expression and splicing defects of DMSXL glia recreated molecular signatures suggestive of impaired cell differentiation: while DMSXL oligodendrocytes failed to upregulate a subset of genes that are naturally activated during the oligodendroglia differentiation, a significant proportion of missplicing events in DMSXL oligodendrocytes and astrocytes increased the expression of RNA isoforms typical of precursor cell stages. Together these data suggest that expanded CUG RNA in glial cells affects preferentially differentiation-regulated molecular events. This hypothesis was corroborated by gene ontology (GO) analyses, which revealed an enrichment for biological processes and cellular components with critical roles during cell differentiation. Finally, we combined exon ontology with phosphoproteomics and cell imaging to explore the functional impact of CUG-associated spliceopathy on downstream protein metabolism. Changes in phosphorylation, protein isoform expression and intracellular localization in DMSXL astrocytes demonstrate the far-reaching impact of the DM1 repeat expansion on cell metabolism. Our multi-omics approaches provide insight into the mechanisms of CUG RNA toxicity in the CNS with cell type resolution, and support the priority for future research on non-neuronal mechanisms and proteomic changes in DM1 brain disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment by titanium dioxide (TiO2) Proteins were first reduced with 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) final concentration at 60°C for 1 h. Then, proteins were digested using a FASP method (filter aided sample preparation) according to (Lipecka et al., 2016). Phosphopeptide enrichments were carried out using Titansphere TiO2 Spin tips (3 mg/200 μL, Titansphere PHOS-TiO, GL Sciences Inc.) on the digested proteins for each biological replicate. Briefly, the TiO2 Spin tips were conditioned with 20 µL of solution A (80% acetonitrile, 0,4% TFA), centrifuged at 3,000 g for 2 min and equilibrated with 20 µL of solution B (75% acetonitrile, 0,3% TFA, 25% lactic acid) followed by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 2 min. Peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of solution A, mixed with 100 µL of solution B and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 10 min. Sample was applied back to the TiO2 Spin tips twice more in order to increase the adsorption of the phosphopeptides to the TiO2. Spin tips were washed sequentially with 20 µL of solution B and twice with 20 µL of solution A. Phosphopeptides were eluted by the sequential addition of 50 µL of 5% NH4OH and 50 µL of 5% pyrrolidine. Centrifugation was carried out at 1,000 g for 5 min. Phosphopeptides were purified using GC Spin tips (GL-Tip, Titansphere, GL Sciences Inc.). Briefly, the GC Spin tips were conditioned according to manufacturer instruction, then eluted phosphopeptides from the TiO2 Spin tips were added to the GC Spin tips and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 min. GC Spin tips were washed with 20 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water solution C. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 70 µL of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA solution A (1,000 g for 5 min) and vacuum dried.  NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification Samples were resuspended in 35 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific) and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 min), 40% to 80% (6 min). At 127 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Phosphopeptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-8 acquisition method. Phosphopeptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 1 x 106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 2 x 105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 1.800 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (release 27-07-2017, 16923 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-term acetylation and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) were set as variable modifications. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. The phosphopeptides output table and the corresponding logarithmic intensities were used for subsequent statistical analysis using he Perseus software platform. Significant phosphorylation changes were considered for further analysis if the phosphosite was detected only in all the samples of one of the genotypes (but in none of the other) or when fold change between genotypes > 1.4 and p-value (corrected for multiple comparisons) < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myotonic dystrophy, Ontology, Splicing, Phosphoproteomics, Astrocytes, Neurons, Transcriptomics, Oligodendrocytes, Lc-ms/ms, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche en Myologie, F-75013 Paris, France.
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Mário Gomes-Pereira
Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche en Myologie, F-75013 Paris, France.


