### Accession
PXD031484

### Title
A Bacterial Mannose Binding Lectin as a Tool for the Enrichment of C-and O- Mannosylated Peptides

### Description
C-mannosylated peptides are easily detected by mass spectrometry (MS) from purified proteins but not from complex biological samples. Enrichment of specific glycopeptides by lectin affinity prior to MS analysis has been widely applied to support glycopeptide identification, but was up till now not available for C-mannosylated peptides. Here we used the α-mannose-specific Burkholderia cenocepacia lectin A (BC2L-A) and show that, in addition to its previously demonstrated high-mannose N-glycan binding capability, this lectin is able to retain C- and O-mannosylated peptides. We evaluated the binding abilities of BC2L-A to standard peptides. In conclusion, BC2L-A enabled specific enrichment of C- and O-mannosylated peptides and might have superior properties over other lectins for binding to α-mannose-terminating glycans.

### Sample Protocol
pMT-UNC5-TSR2 alone or together with C-mannosyltransferase DPY-19, were expressed in Drosophila S2 cells. The purified proteins from 10 ml culture were applied to C18 solid phase extraction (SPE, Empore C18-SD 7mm/3ml, 3M), eluted in 50% acetonitrile (ACN), dried and suspended in 100 µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) and 7 M urea. Disulfide bridges were reduced by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), incubation for 45 min at 56 °C followed by alkylation with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by 5 mM DTT for 15 min. After 5x dilution with 100 mM AMBIC, Trypsin Gold (Promega) was added and incubated at 37 °C over-night. The digestion was stopped with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and purified by C18 SPE, as described above (for Fig. 1) or purified by C18 chromatography (Xbridge TM Prep C18 5 µm, 10 x 50 mm column, Waters) (for Fig. 3). In short, the sample was applied in 3% ACN/0.05 % TFA followed by elution with a 30 ml gradient to 50 % ACN/0.05 % TFA in order to obtain the di- or unmannosylated peptide. Elution fraction comprising peptides were evaporated. After evaporation, the purified peptides were resuspended in BC2L-A buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 100 µM CaCl2) and applied to lectin affinity chromatography. The BC2L-A chromatography started with a 5 column volume (CV) wash in BC2L-A buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 100 µM CaCl2). After sample injection, the column was washed with 5-7 CV BC2L-A buffer A and fractions were collected. For the elution, the flow was switched to buffer B (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) for 5-8 CV. Column reconditioning was performed by a 10 CV wash of BC2L-A buffer A. The same procedure was carried out for ConA, but with different buffers. ConA buffer A comprised 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MnCl2 and ConA buffer B included additionally 0.1 M methyl α-D-mannoside. The ConA column was reconditioned by a 10 CV wash with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl. Samples were resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA, injected onto a nano trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and subsequently separated on a C18 nano separation column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm, Thermo Scientific) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). The chromatographic system was connected online via a nanoelectrospray source (Nanospray Flex™ ion source, NSI, Thermo Scientific) to the LTQ Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in positive ion mode. Full MS scans were acquired between m/z 300–2,000, at a resolution of 30,000 using the orbitrap mass analyzer. Fragment ions were generated in a data-dependent mode where the top five highest intensity precursors (charge state z≥2) were selected for sequential higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. HCD spectra were acquired with a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 20 on the orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
For identification and relative quantification of (glyco)peptides, the Byonic software platform v3.10.4 (Protein Metrics Inc.) was used. The following parameters were used for the search with a FASTA sequence corresponding to the recombinantly expressed proteins: 5 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 20 ppm fragment ion mass tolerance; semispecific tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214 Da); variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and tryptophane (+15.9949 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.9840 Da), up to 5 hexose residues attached to serine and threonine (+162.0528 Da) for O-mannosylation, up to 3 hexose residues attached to tryptophan (+162.0528 Da) for C-mannosylation, either a fucose (+146.0579 Da) or fucose and glucose (+308.1107 Da) residue attached to serine and threonine for O-fucosylation. A score threshold of 100 was used for the initial filtering of results. MS-based relative peptide quantification was achieved by comparison of the area under the curve (AUC) derived from extracted-ion chromatograms of the respective precursor ions (XIC on MS-level).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) easily detects C-mannosylated peptides from purified proteins but not from complex biological samples. Enrichment of specific glycopeptides by lectin affinity prior to MS analysis has been widely applied to support glycopeptide identification but was until now not available for C-mannosylated peptides. Here, we used the &#x3b1;-mannose-specific <i>Burkholderia cenocepacia</i> lectin A (BC2L-A) and show that, in addition to its previously demonstrated high-mannose N-glycan binding capability, this lectin is able to retain C- and O-mannosylated peptides. Besides testing binding abilities to standard peptides, we applied BC2L-A affinity to enrich C-mannosylated peptides from complex samples of tryptic digests of HEK293 and MCF10A whole cell extracts, which led to the identification of novel C-mannosylation sites. In conclusion, BC2L-A enabled specific enrichment of C- and O-mannosylated peptides and might have superior properties over other mannose binding lectins for this purpose.

### Keywords
O-mannosylation, Lectin, Lc-msms, C-mannosylation, Proteomics, Glycosylation, N-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems
Bioprocess Engineering
Bio/Process Analytics

Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems Bioprocess Engineering Bio/Process Analytics

### Submitter
Valerian Grote

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Hoffmann
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems Bioprocess Engineering Bio/Process Analytics


