### Accession
PXD020342

### Title
Automated capillary isoelectric focusing-tandem mass spectrometry for top-down proteomics

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based top-down proteomics (TDP) delineates proteoforms in cells and requires high-resolution proteoform separation. Herein, for the first time, we employed an automated capillary isoelectric focusing-tandem MS (cIEF-MS/MS) system for large-scale TDP of complex proteomes. Single-shot cIEF-MS/MS identified 771 proteoforms from an Escherichia coli (E. coli) proteome consuming only nanograms of proteins. Coupling two-dimensional size exclusion chromatography (SEC)-cIEF, named “gel-free 2D-PAGE”, to ESI-MS/MS enabled the identification of nearly 2000 proteoforms from the E. coli proteome. Label-free quantitative TDP of zebrafish male and female brains using the SEC-cIEF-MS/MS quantified thousands of proteoforms and revealed sex-dependent proteoform profiles in brains. We discovered several proteolytic proteoforms of pro-opiomelanocortin and prodynorphin with significantly higher abundance in male brains as potential endogenous hormone proteoforms. Multi-level quantitative proteomic analyses (TDP and  bottom-up proteomics (BUP)) of the brains revealed that majority of proteoforms having statistically significant difference in abundance between genders (TDP) showed no abundance difference at the corresponding protein group level (BUP), which highlights the importance of delineating proteins in a proteoform-specific manner for accurately understanding protein function.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli (strain K-12, substrain MG1655) was cultured in Lysogeny broth (LB) medium at 37 °C with 225 rpm shaking until the OD600 value reached to 0.7. The bacteria were collected by centrifugation (4,000 rpm, 10 min), then washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Afterward, the E. coli pellet was suspended in the lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, protease inhibitor (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor (Roche), and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). The cells were lysed for 1 minute using a homogenizer 150 (Fisher Scientific) and then sonicated on ice for 10 minutes with a Branson Sonifier 250 (VWR Scientific). The E. coli lysate was centrifuged at 18,000 g for 10 minutes to collect the supernatant containing extracted proteins. The concentration of total proteins was measured by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit (Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 500 μg of E coli proteins was denatured in lysis buffer at 37 °C for 30 minutes, reduced at 37 °C for 30 minutes after adding 1 μL of 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich), and then alkylated at room temperature for 20 min after adding 2.5 μL of 1M iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich). The reaction was quenched with an addition of 1 μL of 1 M DTT solution. The buffer exchange of protein sample was conducted by centrifugation with Microcon-30 kDa centrifugal filter (Merck Millipore) at 14,000 g for 10 minutes and then washing three times with 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 6.9). Finally, the proteins retained on the centrifugal filter membrane were re-dissolved in 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 6.9) for SDS-PAGE gel analysis and SEC fractionation. The zebrafish (AB/Tuebingen line, 11 months old) brain tissues (5 males and 5 females) were provided by Professor Jose Cibelli’s laboratory at Department of Animal Science of Michigan State University. The whole protocol for collecting zebrafish brains were operated in compliance with national and institutional guidelines for animal research. All the experimental procedures were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Michigan State University. The collected brains were gently washed by PBS to remove the blood, and stored at -80 °C. The zebrafish brains were lysed with mammalian cell-PE LB™ buffer (G-Biosciences) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). The protein extraction, denaturation, reduction, alkylation, and buffer exchange experiments were performed using the same protocol applied to the E. coli sample.

### Data Protocol
Database search for proteoform identification and quantification  The MS raw files were converted to the mzXML files using Msconvert (Kessner et al, 2008), and further deconvoluted to the Msalign files using TopFD (TOP-down mass spectrometry feature detection), followed by database search using TopPIC (Top-down mass spectrometry based proteoform identification and characterization) (Kou et al, 2016). UniProt databases of E. coli (UP000000625) and zebrafish (UP000000437) were used. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57) was set as a fixed modification and the maximum number of unexpected modifications was 2. The mass error of the precursor and product ions was within 15 ppm. The maximum and minimum mass shifts of unknown modifications were 500 Da and -500 Da, respectively. The false discovery rates (FDRs) were estimated using the target-decoy approach (Keller et al, 2002; Elias et al, 2007). The data of six E. coli fractions were combined and filtered with a 5% proteoform-level FDR. The data of eight zebrafish fractions including four fractions of male brains and four fractions of female brains were also filtered with a 5% proteoform-level FDR.  When performing label-free quantification of proteoforms expressed in male and female brains of zebrafish, the feature intensity of a proteoform was calculated as sum of intensities of its corresponding peaks from all scans and charge states as described in our previous work (Lubeckyj et al, 2019). For each SEC fraction, only the proteoforms which were reported with feature intensities in all triplicate cIEF-MS/MS runs were further considered for relative quantification.  Bottom-up proteomics database search The database search was performed using MaxQuant software (Cox et al, 2008). The RAW files were searched against UniProt database of zebrafish (UP000000437). TMT6plex-Lys126, TMT6plex-Lys127, TMT6plex-Lys128, TMT6plex-Lys129, TMT6plex-Lys130, TMT6plex-Lys131, TMT6plex-Nter126, TMT6plex-Nter127, TMT6plex-Nter128, TMT6plex-Nter129, TMT6plex-Nter130, TMT6plex-Nter131 were chosen as isobaric labels for reporter ion MS2. The other parameters were set as default. The FDRs were evaluated through the target-decoy database search with default FDR settings. The result from database search was further analyzed by Perseus software (Tyanova et al, 2016) to determine the differentially expressed proteins between male and female brains of zebrafish.

### Publication Abstract
Top-down proteomics (TDP) aims to delineate proteomes in a proteoform-specific manner, which is vital for accurately understanding protein function in cellular processes. It requires high-capacity separation of proteoforms before mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem MS (MS/MS). Capillary isoelectric focusing (cIEF)-MS has been recognized as a useful tool for TDP in the 1990s because cIEF is capable of high-resolution separation of proteoforms. Previous cIEF-MS studies concentrated on measuring the protein's mass without MS/MS, impeding the confident proteoform identification in complex samples and the accurate localization of post-translational modifications on proteoforms. Herein, for the first time, we present automated cIEF-MS/MS-based TDP for large-scale delineation of proteoforms in complex proteomes. Single-shot cIEF-MS/MS identified 711 proteoforms from an <i>Escherichia coli</i> (<i>E. coli</i>) proteome consuming only nanograms of proteins. Coupling two-dimensional size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)-cIEF to ESI-MS/MS enabled the identification of nearly 2000 proteoforms from the <i>E. coli</i> proteome. Label-free quantitative TDP of zebrafish male and female brains using SEC-cIEF-MS/MS quantified thousands of proteoforms and revealed sex-dependent proteoform profiles in brains. Particularly, we discovered several proteolytic proteoforms of pro-opiomelanocortin and prodynorphin with significantly higher abundance in male zebrafish brains as potential endogenous hormone proteoforms. Multilevel quantitative proteomics (TDP and bottom-up proteomics) of the brains revealed that the majority of proteoforms having statistically significant difference in abundance between genders showed no abundance difference at the protein group level. This work represents the first multilevel quantitative proteomics study of sexual dimorphism of the brain.

### Keywords
Endogenous hormone proteoforms/gel-free 2d-page/multi-level proteomics/ sexual dimorphism/zebrafish brain

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


