### Accession
PXD021374

### Title
Snapshots of native pre-50S ribosomes reveal a biogenesis factor network and evolutionary specialization

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a fundamental multi-step cellular process that culminates in the formation of the ribosomal subunits, whose production and modifications are steered and regulated by numerous biogenesis factors. In this study, we analyze unperturbed native prokaryotic ribosome biogenesis by isolating bona fide pre-50S subunits by using an E. coli strain, producing the affinity tagged biogenesis factor ObgE from its native gene locus. Our integrative structural approach reveals a network of interacting biogenesis factors consisting of YjgA, RluD, RsfS and ObgE on the immature pre-50S subunit. In addition, our study provides mechanistic insight into how the GTPase ObgE, in concert with other biogenesis factors, facilitates the maturation of the 50S functional core and reveals both conserved and divergent evolutionary features of ribosome biogenesis between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Purified 50S ribosomal subunits (sample T3), affinity purified pre-50S-ObgE-StrepII precursors without (sample T1) and with (sample T2) subsequent sucrose gradient centrifugation, respectively, were analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry. Protein samples were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8 solution. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. For lysis, proteins were incubated with 2% (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at room temperature for 3 hours, diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution for final urea concentration of 2M and incubated with 2% (w/w) trypsin (Promega) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 hours. Peptides were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber, 2003 PMID:12585499). Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid, dried and ressuspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A). Peptide concentration was determined based on 280nm UV light absorbance. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed employing an EASY nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made 15 cm long C18 microcolumns (75 µm ID, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm resin, Dr. Maisch, Germany) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Denmark) of an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer without the FAIMS module installed and in application mode “Peptide” (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 1 hour with a 9% to 55.2% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid. Settings for data dependent mass spectrometry analysis were as follows: positive polarity, one full scan (resolution, 60000; m/z, 350-1600) followed by top 20 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution, 15000; m/z, 100-1000; AGC target, 100%. injection time, 22 ms; isolation width, 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy, 28). Ions with an unassigned charge state, singly charged ions, and ions with charge state higher than six were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded within 30 seconds. Samples were measured in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) (Cox, 2008 PMID: 19029910) with default parameters. Briefly, search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation as variable modifications used for identification and quantification. Peptide mass tolerance was 20 and 4.5 ppm for first and main search, respectively. Database search was performed with Andromeda embed in MaxQuant (Cox, 2011 PMID: 21254760) against UniProt/Swiss-Prot Escherichia coli database (Strain: K12 / MG1655 / ATCC 47076) (downloaded on July 2019) with common contaminant sequences provided by MaxQuant. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. Match between runs was turned on.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome biogenesis is a fundamental multi-step cellular process that culminates in the formation of ribosomal subunits, whose production and modification are regulated by numerous biogenesis factors. In this study, we analyze physiologic prokaryotic ribosome biogenesis by isolating bona fide pre-50S subunits from an Escherichia coli strain with the biogenesis factor ObgE, affinity tagged at its native gene locus. Our integrative structural approach reveals a network of interacting biogenesis factors consisting of YjgA, RluD, RsfS, and ObgE on the immature pre-50S subunit. In addition, our study provides mechanistic insight into how the GTPase ObgE, in concert with other biogenesis factors, facilitates the maturation of the 50S functional core and reveals both conserved and divergent evolutionary features of ribosome biogenesis between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Lc-msms, Bacteria, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Proteome Dynamics, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


