### Accession
PXD024280

### Title
SCAI orchestrates DNA interstrand crosslink repair downstream of FANCI-FANCD2 ubiquitylation

### Description
By covalently linking Watson and Crick strands, DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly toxic lesions that block DNA replication and threaten genome integrity. The Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway orchestrates ICL repair during DNA replication, with ubiquitylated FANCI-FANCD2 (ID2) marking the activation step that triggers incisions on one DNA strand to unhook the ICL. ICL unhooking generates a two-ended double-strand break (DSB) on one of the daughter molecules, while leaving a gap comprising the ICL-adduct on the other. Restoration of the adducted molecule by DNA polymerase zeta-mediated translesion synthesis (TLS) creates a template required for repair of the DSB via homologous recombination (HR), but how these processes are coordinated to ensure faithful ICL repair is not known. Here, we uncover a crucial role for SCAI in promoting ICL repair downstream of ID2 activation. Using Xenopus egg extracts and human cells, we show that SCAI forms a complex with DNA polymerase zeta and localizes to ICLs during DNA replication. SCAI-deficient cells are exquisitely sensitive to ICL-inducing drugs and display principal hallmarks of FA gene inactivation, including broken and radial chromosome accumulation. In the absence of SCAI, DSB intermediates are preferentially re-ligated by illegitimate DNA polymerase theta-dependent microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ). Consistently, the hypersensitivity of SCAI-deficient cells to ICLs can be reverted by suppressing FA pathway activation. Our work establishes SCAI as a critical mediator of ICL resolution via the FA pathway, acting at the interphase of the TLS and HR steps to prevent erroneous repair and chromosomal instability.

### Sample Protocol
CHROMASS experiments were performed as previously described (Räschle et al., 2015). Briefly, isolated sperm chromatin was left untreated or exposed to UV-C (2000 J/m2) in quadruplicate. The sperm chromatin was then incubated at a final concentration of 16 ng/μl in non-licensing extracts. 11 µl of reactions were stopped after 30 min with 60 μl of ELB buffer supplemented with 0.2% Triton-X, and chromatin spin down was performed as described above. The chromatin pellet was then resuspended in 50 μl denaturation buffer (8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), and transferred to a new low binding tube. Cysteines were reduced (1 mM DTT for 15 min at RT) and alkylated (5 mM chloroacetamide for 40 min at RT protected from light). Proteins were first digested with 0.5 μg LysC (2.5 h at RT) and then with 0.5 μg sequencing-grade trypsin at 30 °C overnight. Peptides were acidified by addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid, reducing pH to <4, followed by addition of 400 mM NaCl, and purified by StageTip (C18 material). For this, StageTips were first activated in 100% methanol, then equilibrated in 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, and finally washed twice in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded on the equilibrated StageTips and washed twice with 50 μl 0.1% formic acid. StageTip elution was performed with 80 μl of 25% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, eluted samples were dried to completion in a SpeedVac at 60°C, dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid, and stored at −20°C until MS analysis.  SCAI immunoprecipitations were performed using IgG, SCAI-N or SCAI-C antibodies. Benzonase was added 1:100 to extracts and IPs were washed 3x with ELB buffer supplemented with 500 mM NaCl and 0.25% NP-40 and 3x with ELB buffer supplemented with 500 nM NaCl. Beads were then dried using an ultrafine tip, after which 300 μl of ice-cold 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. Subsequently, 0.5 μg sequence-grade trypsin was added, and samples were incubated shaking at 1,200 rpm at 4 °C for 1 h. Samples were then allowed to warm to RT and incubated overnight while shaking at 1,200 rpm. Digested peptides were cleared by centrifugation through 0.45 μm spin filters, after which tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and chloroacetamide were added to final concentrations of 5 and 10 mM, respectively. Samples were incubated in the dark, shaking at 350 rpm and 30 °C for 30 min, prior to acidification by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (vol/vol). Peptides were purified via StageTip as described above.  MS samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out. The analytical gradient was 57.5 min ranging from 8% to 28% buffer B for CHROMASS samples, or 57.0 min ranging from 7% to 28% buffer B for SCAI-IP samples. The column was heated to 40 °C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using either a NanoSpray Flex ion source (Thermo). Spray voltage set at 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275 °C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Measurements were performed with a full scan range of 300-1,750 m/z, MS1 resolution of 60,000, MS1 AGC target of 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (CHROMASS) or 80 s (SCAI-IP). MS2 AGC target was set to 200,000 and minimum MS2 AGC target to 20,000. For CHROMASS runs, MS2 maximum injection time was 90 ms, MS2 resolution was 45,000, and loop count was 9. For SCAI-IP runs, MS2 maximum injection time was 60 ms, MS2 resolution was 30,000, and loop count was 14. CHROMASS samples were measured as two technical replicates using identical instrument settings.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), v. 1.5.3.30. CHROMASS data and SCAI-IP data were processed in separate computational runs. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of theoretical spectral libraries, the Xenopus laevis FASTA database was downloaded from UniProt on the 10th of February 2018. In silico digestion of proteins to generate theoretical peptides was performed with trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. Allowed variable modifications were oxidation of methionine (default), protein N-terminal acetylation (default) for all samples. Maximum variable modifications per peptide were reduced to 3. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled (Cox et al., 2014), with “Fast LFQ” disabled for all data, and “Skip normalization” enabled for SCAI-IP data. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR data filtering at the PSM- and protein-levels was applied (default). Second peptide search was enabled. Matching between runs was enabled, with an alignment window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are cytotoxic lesions that threaten genome integrity. The Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway orchestrates ICL repair during DNA replication, with ubiquitylated FANCI-FANCD2 (ID2) marking the activation step that triggers incisions on DNA to unhook the ICL. Restoration of intact DNA requires the coordinated actions of polymerase &#x3b6; (Pol&#x3b6;)-mediated translesion synthesis (TLS) and homologous recombination (HR). While the proteins mediating FA pathway activation have been well characterized, the effectors regulating repair pathway choice to promote error-free ICL resolution remain poorly defined. Here, we uncover an indispensable role of SCAI in ensuring error-free ICL repair upon activation of the FA pathway. We show that SCAI forms a complex with Pol&#x3b6; and localizes to ICLs during DNA replication. SCAI-deficient cells are exquisitely sensitive to ICL-inducing drugs and display major hallmarks of FA gene inactivation. In the absence of SCAI, HR-mediated ICL repair is defective, and breaks are instead re-ligated by polymerase &#x3b8;-dependent microhomology-mediated end-joining, generating deletions spanning the ICL site and radial chromosomes. Our work establishes SCAI as an integral FA pathway component, acting at the interface between TLS and HR to promote error-free ICL repair.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Fanci, Icl, Fancd2, Chromass, Dna damage, Interstrand crosslink repair, Scai

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


