### Accession
PXD015546

### Title
A ChIRP-MS analysis of HOTAIR in HeLa

### Description
We employed ChIRP in combination with proteomic strategy to systematically discover HOTAIR-interacting proteins. Three independent biological replicates of ChIRP-MS experiment were performed, alongside negative controls.

### Sample Protocol
Comprehensive identification of RNA-binding proteins (ChIRP) Cells were harvested and crosslinked by 3% formaldehyde. About 20 million cells were used for one ChIRP experiment. Cells were dissolved in cell lysis buffer (RIPA lysis buffer, Medium, Beyotime, add 1 mM PMSF (Thermo Fisher Scientific), protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and SUPERase.In RNase Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fresh before use, 100 mg cell pellet/1 mL lysis buffer) and incubated on rotator at 4 °C for 20 min, after which sonicate was used to break DNA in cell lysate to 1-2 kb fragments. High speed centrifugation was used to remove cellular debris. Sample were precleared with 30 µL/sample washed streptavidin C1 beads (Invitrogen) on rotator at 37 °C for 30 min. For RNase treatment control, we added RNase A to the lysate (10 μg/mL final concentration). Then 2 × volume hybridization buffer and ChIRP probes were added to cleared samples and incubated at 37 °C with end to end rotation for 5 hours. C1 beads were washed 3 times on a magnet stand with cell lysis buffer (use 100 μL beads per 1 μL of 100 μM probes) prior to completion of hybridization. Then 1 mL of sample was used to resuspend and transfer beads into the reaction and then continue to mix samples at 37 °C for 30 min. The samples were washed 5 times with 500 μL wash buffer (2× SSC, 0.05% SDS, add 1 mM PMSF fresh before use. v/v to original beads volume). Proteins are eluted twice from beads in 100 μL biotin elution buffer (12.5 mM D-biotin, 7.5 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 75 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM EDTA, 0.015% SDS, 0.075% sarkosyl, and 0.02% Na-Deoxycholate.) at room temperature with mixing for 20 min, and then at 65 °C for 10 min. The proteins were precipitated in TCA overnight at 4 °C. The next day, we pelleted proteins and washed protein pellets once with cold acetone. 1× laemmli sample buffer was added to protein pellets and boiled for 30 min to reverse the cross-links. Final protein samples were separated in SDS-PAGE gels for silver staining, mass-spectrometry or western blots. Protein Separation and In-gel Digestion For LC-MS/MS analysis, proteins isolated via CHIRP were run on an SDS-PAGE gel and silver stained. Each lane of the gel was then cut into five sections and subdivided into cubes of 1 mm3 each. These samples were then subjected to in-gel digestion as discussed previously (2). A SpeedVac was then used to dry the combined peptide extracts from these gel segments. Nano liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)  Peptides were analyzed by NanoLC-Ultra HPLC system (Eksigent) coupled with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a nanoAcquity C18 column (180 μm x 20 mm, particle size 5 μm) (Waters). The trap was brought in-line with a C18 column (BEH 130 C18 100 μm x 100 mm, particle size 1.7 μm, Waters), and peptides were separated at 400 nl/min with a multi-stepped gradient of buffer B (0.16% FA, 80% ACN; 4 to 15% B for 30 min, 15-25% B for 60 min and 25-50% B for 50 min). The mass spectrometer was operated in the sensitive mode with the following parameters: capillary voltage 2400 V; capillary temperature 200 °h, normalized collision energy 35 V, activation time 30000 ms. Data were acquired by scan cycles of one FTMS (resolution: 60,000 at m/z 400; range: m/z 300 to 2000) in parallel with six MS/MS scans in the ion trap of the most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric was carried out using The MaxQuant Software v1.5.8.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The UniProt human protein database (UP000005640, 74349 sequences, release 2019_07) with decoy sequences was used. Database search parameters were: Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Deamidated (NQ); Precursor ion mass tolerance, 6 ppm after refinement by Maxquant; MS/MS mass tolerance, 0.5 Da; Enzyme specificity, trypsin/p; maximum missed cleavages, 2. Protein identification criteria were: 1) peptide length ≥ 6, 2) FDR ≤ 1% at both the PSM and protein levels. Unique peptides ≥ 2. To reliably identify proteins which interact with HOTAIR, datasets from 3 biological replicates and 3 negative controls were analyzed with SAINTexpress (v3.6.1) (4). Those prey proteins which included in both 3 biological replicates but not in any of negative replicate were determined to be high confidence hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hotair hela chirp-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of hydrobiology, CAS
Institution of Hydrobiology，CAS

### Submitter
Qian Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Ge Feng
Institute of hydrobiology, CAS


