### Accession
PXD014255

### Title
Cyclipostins and Cyclophostin analogs impair growth of Mycobacterium abscessus by inhibiting enzymes involved in many physiological processes

### Description
Mycobacterium abscessus is nowadays under the spotlight of the scientific community. This pathogenic mycobacteria is indeed responsible for a wide spectrum of infections involving mostly pulmonary infections in patients with cystic fibrosis. M. abscessus is intrinsically resistant to a broad range of antibiotics, including most antitubercular drugs, and is considered the most pathogenic and chemotherapy-resistant rapidly growing mycobacterium. Consequently, with very limited treatment options, the development of new therapeutic approaches to fight this pathogen are urgently needed.  38 new analogs of Cyclipostins & Cyclophostin (CyC), compounds naturally produced by Streptomyces species, have been synthesized. Their antibacterial activities against clinical isolates belonging to the M. chelonae-abscessus clade, as well as Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria have been evaluated by the REMA method. The intracellular activities of the CyC against intramacrophagic M. abscessus have also been investigated and compared to those of imipenem.  The CyCs displayed very low toxicity towards host cells and their inhibitory activity was exclusively restricted to mycobacteria. The best candidate, CyC17, showed a high selectivity for mycobacteria with MIC values (<2 up to 40 µg/mL) comparable to those of most classical antibiotics used to treat M. abscessus infections. Of importance, several CyCs were active against extracellular M. abscessus growth (i.e., CyC17 / CyC18β / CyC25 / CyC26) or against intracellular mycobacteria inside macrophages (i.e., CyC7α,β / CyC8α,β) with MIC values similar to or better than those of standard antibiotics.  Based on these results, we intended to identify the potential target enzymes of CyC17/CyC26 in M. abscessus by activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) approach coupled with mass spectrometry differential analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion1 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min). For peptide ionisation in the EASY-Spray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Velos was set up in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 300-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 10 abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion1 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Twelve new Cyclophostin and Cyclipostins analogues (<b>CyC</b><sub><b>19</b>-<b>30</b></sub>) were synthesized, thus extending our series to 38 <b>CyCs</b>. Their antibacterial activities were evaluated against four pathogenic mycobacteria (<i>Mycobacterium abscessus</i>, <i>Mycobacterium marinum</i>, <i>Mycobacterium bovis</i> BCG, and <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i>) and two Gram negative bacteria. The <b>CyCs</b> displayed very low toxicity toward host cells and were only active against mycobacteria. Importantly, several <b>CyCs</b> were active against extracellular <i>M. abscessus</i> (<b>CyC</b><sub><b>17</b></sub>/<b>CyC</b><sub><b>18&#x3b2;</b></sub>/<b>CyC</b><sub><b>25</b></sub>/<b>CyC</b><sub><b>26</b></sub>) or intramacrophage residing mycobacteria (<b>CyC</b><sub><b>7(&#x3b1;,&#x3b2;)</b></sub>/<b>CyC</b><sub><b>8(&#x3b1;,&#x3b2;)</b></sub>) with minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC<sub>50</sub>) values comparable to or better than those of amikacin or imipenem, respectively. An activity-based protein profiling combined with mass spectrometry allowed identification of the potential target enzymes of <b>CyC</b><sub><b>17</b></sub>/<b>CyC</b><sub><b>26</b></sub>, mostly being involved in lipid metabolism and/or in cell wall biosynthesis. Overall, these results strengthen the selective activity of the <b>CyCs</b> against mycobacteria, including the most drug-resistant <i>M. abscessus</i>, through the cumulative inhibition of a large number of Ser- and Cys-enzymes participating in key physiological processes.

### Keywords
Anti-mycobacterial agents, Total synthesis; drug susceptibility; activity based-protein profiling; proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique


