### Accession
PXD004338

### Title
Moving from unsequenced to sequenced genome: reanalysis of the proteome of Leishmania donovani

### Description
The kinetoplastid protozoan parasite, Leishmania donovani, is the causative agent of kala azar or visceral leishmaniasis. Kala azar is a severe form of leishmaniasis that is fatal in the majority of untreated cases. Studies on proteomic analysis of L. donovani thus far have been carried out using homology-based identification based on related Leishmania species (L. infantum, L. major and L. braziliensis) whose genomes have been sequenced. Recently, the genome of L. donovani was fully sequenced and the data became publicly available. We took advantage of the availability of its genomic sequence to carry out a more accurate proteogenomic analysis of L. donovani proteome using our previously generated dataset. This resulted in identification of 17,504 unique peptides upon database-dependent search against the annotated proteins in L. donovani. These peptides were assigned to 3999 unique proteins in L. donovani. 2296 proteins were identified in both the life stages of L. donovani, while 613 and 1090 proteins were identified only from amastigote and promastigote stages, respectively. The proteomic data was also searched against six-frame translated L. donovani genome, which led to 255 genome search-specific peptides (GSSPs) resulting in identification of 20 novel genes and correction of 40 existing gene models in L. donovani.

### Sample Protocol
Leishmania donovani promastigotes and amastigotes were lysed and separated by SDS-PAGE for In-gel digestion and In-solution digestion followed by SCX fractionation. All digested and fractionated peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometers interfaced with Agilent 1200 liquid chromatography system. Data acquired in a data dependent mode by selecting top 15 precursor for fragmentation using HCD. MS and MS/MS spectra acquired at 60,000 and 15,000 resolution at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
A non-redundant (nr) protein database of BPK282A1 strain of L. donovani (n = 8032) database available from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) as of February 20, 2012 was used. Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search engines were used to search L. donovani mass spectrometry data and searches were submitted through Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3). The search parameters used were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavage); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da; d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamination of asparagine, glutamine and acetylation of protein N-termini were included as variable modifications. Sequest and Mascot peptide data were extracted with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold. Unique peptide data obtained from both Sequest and Mascot search algorithms after protein database dependent searches were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania donovani, Protoemics and proteogenomics

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
733 N. Broadway Room 527, Miller Research Building Baltimore MD 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
733 N. Broadway Room 527, Miller Research Building Baltimore MD 21205 USA


