### Accession
PXD008844

### Title
High-resolution spatially-resolved proteome mapping using automated, sacrificial liquid-mediated sample transfer from laser microdissection to nanodroplet sample preparation

### Description
Method development for high-resolution spatially-resolved proteome mapping of tissue heterogeneity. Laser microdissection was coupled with nanodroplet sample preparation and ultrasensitive LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline and was separately processed using MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Current mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics approaches are ineffective for mapping protein expression in tissue sections with high spatial resolution because of the limited overall sensitivity of conventional workflows. Here we report an integrated and automated method to advance spatially resolved proteomics by seamlessly coupling laser capture microdissection (LCM) with a recently developed nanoliter-scale sample preparation system termed nanoPOTS (Nanodroplet Processing in One pot for Trace Samples). The workflow is enabled by prepopulating nanowells with DMSO, which serves as a sacrificial capture liquid for microdissected tissues. The DMSO droplets efficiently collect laser-pressure catapulted LCM tissues as small as 20 &#x3bc;m in diameter with success rates &gt;87%. We also demonstrate that tissue treatment with DMSO can significantly improve proteome coverage, likely due to its ability to dissolve lipids from tissue and enhance protein extraction efficiency. The LCM-nanoPOTS platform was able to identify 180, 695, and 1827 protein groups on average from 12-&#x3bc;m-thick rat brain cortex tissue sections having diameters of 50, 100, and 200 &#x3bc;m, respectively. We also analyzed 100-&#x3bc;m-diameter sections corresponding to 10-18 cells from three different regions of rat brain and comparatively quantified &#x223c;1000 proteins, demonstrating the potential utility for high-resolution spatially resolved mapping of protein expression in tissues.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Laser capture microdissection, Nanopots

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan T. Kelly
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


