### Accession
PXD005766

### Title
Proteomics to determine metallodrug targets and optimal drug combinations

### Description
The FITExP profiling approach was used to identify protein hits from cells incubated with RAPTA-T or RAPTA-EA. Validation experiments with paclitaxel and cisplatin underlined the reliability of the method and hit lists for both test compounds (and?) gave physiologically viable anti-cancer mechanisms. The hit proteins for paclitaxel match with those published and the ones obtained for cisplatin were related to DNA repair, which is in line with the principal mechanism of cisplatin cytotoxicity involving the formation of nuclear DNA lesions. RAPTA-T treatment leads to upregulation of multiple hits suggesting a broad mechanism of action involving both metastasis and tumorigenicity. In contrast, hit proteins identified after incubation with RAPTA-EA are linked to regulation of the oxidative stress response and are therefore thought to be conferred by the EA moiety in the drug. From a therapeutic standpoint, RAPTA-EA could be explored in cancers where EA alone has shown potency, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemias,91 or where EA combined with another agent shows synergy, such as the combination of EA with afatinib, an irreversible epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for breast cancers.92 On the other hand, due to its broad mechanism of action, RAPTA-T could potentially be more useful if used concomitantly with drugs that target specific cancer pathways and could also play a role in therapies for later stage cancers due to its anti-metastatic properties. Here, application of the FITExP allowed us to gauge the mechanistic pathways involved in the action of two novel ruthenium(II) metallodrugs with very different phenotypic characteristics and from this knowledge infer their role in therapy. Potentially, future application of the FITExP approach in this manner could be useful for identification of cancer chemotherapy drug combinations, where commonly cancer clinical trials fail at phase II where drug combinations are first tried and tested.

### Sample Protocol
Cell maintenance, treatment and preparation for expression profiling MDA-MB-231 (human mammary gland adenocarcinoma) and MCF-7 (human mammary gland adenocarcinoma cells) were obtained from the European Collection of Cell Cultures (Salisbury, UK). Cells were cultured in DMEM Glutamax medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, penicillin 100 units/mL Streptomycin 100 µg/mL (Invitrogen). Cells were incubated at 37 °C in a moist environment containing 5% CO2. For proteomic expression experiments, cells were seeded at a density of 5x105 cells in a 6-well plate for 24 h. Media was aspirated and cells were rinsed with 1X PBS before addition of fresh media containing solutions of compound (Paclitaxel, Cisplatin, RAPTA-EA and RAPTA-T, dosed at a concentration to achieve a cell kill of approximately 50% after 48 h). After 48 h, cells were detached with enzyme free cell dissociation solution and centrifuged at 200G for 5 min. Cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid N2 and stored at −80 °C before sample preparation for mass spectrometry.    Protein digestion Breast cancer cell pellets were thawed on ice and depending on the number of cells/pellet reconstituted in 100-200 µl 8 M Urea with 100 mM NaCl. Cells were disrupted by probe sonication (Vibra-Cell™ CV18, Sonics & Materials, Newtown, USA) two times for 5/5 second cycles over 20 s followed by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Solubilized proteins were transferred to fresh vials and the protein concentrations were determined using microBCA from Pierce (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). From each sample 10 µg extracted protein were dissolved in a final concentration of 0.1% ProteaseMax (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile in a total volume of 80 µl. The resulting protein solutions were incubated for 45 min at 37 °C while shaking followed by an additional soncication of 10 min at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged and directly subjected to a tryptic digestion protocol carried out by a liquid handling robot (MultiProbe II, Perkin Elmer). This included protein reduction in 5 mM DTT at 56 °C and alkylation in 15 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:30 and digestion was carried out over night at 37 °C. Samples were acidified by adding 6 µl concentrated formic acid, incubated for 30 min at room temperature and centrifuged for 20 min at 3000 rpm in order to remove undigested material.  LC-MS/MS Tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) and the resulting peptide mixture was injected into a nano-Ultimate system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 28 cm long in-house packed column (C18-AQ ReproSil-Pur®, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with the following gradient: 4−26% acetonitrile in 120 min, 26−95% ACN for 5 min and 95% ACN for 5 min all at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.   The MS acquisition method was comprised of one survey full scan ranging from m/z 300 to m/z 1650 acquired with a resolution of R= 140,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 5e6, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation scans from maximum sixteen most intense precursor ions with a charge state ≥ 2. Sequencing was performed with a target value of 2x105 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control, for which the isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 4 m/z. Scans were acquired with a resolution of R=17,500 and normalized collision energy was set to 26.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Fragmentation spectra were extracted using Raw2MGF (in-house developed software) and the resulting mascot generic files were searched against a SwissProt protein database (reversed protein sequences had been added to database for decoy search) using the Mascot 2.3.0 (Matrix Science Ltd.). Mascot was set up to search a concatenated SwissProt protein database (selected for Homo sapiens) with enzyme specificity set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, allowing cleavage before proline and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The allowed peptide mass deviation was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, N-termianl protein acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were defined as variable modifications.   Quantitative information was extracted using in-house developed label-free software Quanti v.2.5.3.122. Only reliably identified (FDR<0.01), unmodified peptides with unique sequences were considered and only proteins discovered with at least two such peptides were quantified. For each protein, one database identifier (ID) was selected, covering all the peptide sequences identified for this specific protein. If two proteins belonging to different protein groups had a partial sequence overlap, then all the peptides belonging to this overlap were ignored. The results were reported as a set of relative protein abundances A scaled such that the geometric mean of the abundance of each protein over all samples was 1.0.

### Publication Abstract
The emerging technique termed functional identification of target by expression proteomics (FITExP) has been shown to identify the key protein targets of anti-cancer drugs. Here, we use this approach to elucidate the proteins involved in the mechanism of action of two ruthenium(II)-based anti-cancer compounds, RAPTA-T and RAPTA-EA in breast cancer cells, revealing significant differences in the proteins upregulated. RAPTA-T causes upregulation of multiple proteins suggesting a broad mechanism of action involving suppression of both metastasis and tumorigenicity. RAPTA-EA bearing a GST inhibiting ethacrynic acid moiety, causes upregulation of mainly oxidative stress related proteins. The approach used in this work could be applied to the prediction of effective drug combinations to test in cancer chemotherapy clinical trials.

### Keywords
Drug targets, Fitexp, Cancer

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institute, Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Scheeles väg 2, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet, Sweden

### Submitter
Alexey Chernobrovkin

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Karolinska Institute, Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Scheeles väg 2, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden


