### Accession
PXD003155

### Title
Atxn2-Knock-Out mice show branched chain amino acids and fatty acids pathway alterations

### Description
Human Ataxin-2 (ATXN2) gene locus variants have been associated with obesity, diabetes mellitus type 1 and hypertension in genome-wide association studies, while mouse studies showed the knock-out of Atxn2 to lead to obesity, insulin resistance and dyslipidemia. Intriguingly, the deficiency of ATXN2 protein orthologues in yeast and flies rescues the neurodegeneration process triggered by TDP-43 and Ataxin-1 toxicity. To understand the molecular effects of ATXN2 deficiency by unbiased approaches, we quantified the global proteome and metabolome of Atxn2-knock-out mice with label-free mass spectrometry. In liver tissue, significant downregulations of the proteins ACADS, ALDH6A1, ALDH7A1, IVD, MCCC2, PCCA, OTC, together with bioinformatic enrichment of downregulated pathways for branched chain and other amino acid metabolism, fatty acids and citric acid cycle were observed. Statistical trends in the cerebellar proteome and in the metabolomic profiles supported these findings. They are in good agreement with recent claims that PBP1, the yeast orthologue of ATXN2, sequestrates the nutrient sensor TORC1 in periods of cell stress. Overall, ATXN2 appears to modulate nutrition and metabolism, and its activity changes are determinants of growth excess or cell atrophy.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digest of liver and cerebellum tissue was applied.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant data analysis of QExactive RAW files, Lable free quantification, Perseus, Prism, GSEA and String as secondary data analyses tools.

### Publication Abstract
Human Ataxin-2 (ATXN2) gene locus variants have been associated with obesity, diabetes mellitus type 1,and hypertension in genome-wide association studies, whereas mouse studies showed the knock-out of Atxn2 to lead to obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia. Intriguingly, the deficiency of ATXN2 protein orthologs in yeast and flies rescues the neurodegeneration process triggered by TDP-43 and Ataxin-1 toxicity. To understand the molecular effects of ATXN2 deficiency by unbiased approaches, we quantified the global proteome and metabolome of Atxn2-knock-out mice with label-free mass spectrometry. In liver tissue, significant downregulations of the proteins ACADS, ALDH6A1, ALDH7A1, IVD, MCCC2, PCCA, OTC, together with bioinformatic enrichment of downregulated pathways for branched chain and other amino acid metabolism, fatty acids, and citric acid cycle were observed. Statistical trends in the cerebellar proteome and in the metabolomic profiles supported these findings. They are in good agreement with recent claims that PBP1, the yeast ortholog of ATXN2, sequestrates the nutrient sensor TORC1 in periods of cell stress. Overall, ATXN2 appears to modulate nutrition and metabolism, and its activity changes are determinants of growth excess or cell atrophy.

### Keywords
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (atxn2); mass spectrometry; proteome profiling; metabolome profiling; multiple reaction monitoring (mrm); protein - protein interaction network (ppi) analysis; pathway analysis.

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPIMG), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPIMG), Berlin, Germany


