### Accession
PXD037433

### Title
Germline variant GFI1-36N affects DNA repair in AML cells resulting in sensitivity to DNA damage and repair therapy

### Description
Transcriptional repressor Growth factor independence 1 (GFI1) is a key regulator of haematopoiesis. We previously established that the germline variant GFI1-36N promotes acute myeloid leukemia (AML) development, however the mechanism is not full elucidated. Here using multi-omics approach, we show GFI1-36N expression impedes DNA repair in leukemic cells. We demonstrate the presence of GFI1-36N is associated with increased frequency of chromosomal aberrations and mutational burden in murine and human AML cells. In particular, GFI1-36N modulates DNA repair pathways, O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) and homologous recombination repair (HR). Mechanistically, GFI1-36N exhibits impaired binding to Ndrg1 promoter element compared to GFI1-36S (wild type), causing decreased NDRG1 levels consequently leading to suppression of MGMT expression, imprinted at the transcriptome and proteome, thus leaving the AML cells vulnerable to DNA damaging agents. Targeting MGMT via temozolomide and HR via olaparib caused specifically extensive lethality in in vitro and ex vivo human and AML samples expressing GFI1-36N. Whereas the effects were insignificant on non-malignant GFI1-36S or GFI1-36N cells. Further, mice transplanted with GFI1-36N leukemic cells treated with combination of temozolomide and olaparib had a significantly longer AML-free survival than mice transplanted with GFI1-36S leukemic cells. In summary, we show that GFI1-36N disturbs DNA repair activity via NDRG1-MGMT axis and thus provides critical insights into novel therapeutic option for AML presented with GFI1-36N variant.   Key Points Presence of GFI1-36N impedes Homologous DNA and MGMT DNA repair selectively in AML cells via the NDRG1-MGMT axis. Use of temozolomide and olaparib allows selectively targeting GFI1-36N leukemic cells.        Introduction  Gfi1 is a transcription factor which regulates the development of haematopoietic cells as well as neuronal and intestinal epithelial cells 1-5. We reported that a variant of GFI1, denominated GFI1-36N (characterized by an exchange of serine to asparagine at position 36), has a prevalence of 5-7% in a healthy control population but is found at an increased frequency of 10-15% among MDS and AML patients 6,7. The expression of germline variant GFI1-36N predisposes the carriers to develop de novo AML and MDS and correlates with a poor prognosis 6,7. Recently, we and other showed that malignant cells with GFI1-36N variant have increased H3K9-acetylation at target genes resulting in higher expression of genes required for cell survival and proliferation 8. GFI1 exerts its repressive role by recruiting histone-modifying enzymes (deacetylases HDAC1-3, demethylase LSD1, methyl transferase G9a) and regulates the accessibility of DNA to its target genes such as Hoxa9, Pbx1, Meis1, CSF1 and CSFR1 9-15. We also showed that GFI1 regulates apoptosis through its regulation of p53 in lymphoblastic leukemia 16 and we have demonstrated that GFI1 facilitates DNA repair 17. However, it is not known how these activities are affected in the GFI1-36N variant and whether the ability of GFI1 to regulate DNA repair pathways is maintained and how this might affect the development of myeloid malignancies.  In this study, we leveraged multi-omics profiling to gain mechanistic insights into the molecular architecture that drives leukemia in the presence of GFI1-36N. We provide evidence that GFI1-36N interferes with DNA in leukemic myeloid cells, which leads to a higher frequency of genetic aberrations in MDS/AML cells. We also show that GFI1-36N myeloid leukemic cells are more sensitive to targeting MGMT and HR repair deficient cells, which opens a new selective therapeutic window to treat AML/MDS.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, cells were thoroughly washed in plain PBS,  lysed in 1% SDC buffer (1% SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 40mM CAA and 10mM TCEP), incubated on ice for 20 minutes, boiled at 95°C, sonicated for 5mins on a Biorupter plus as describe previously 53. Samples were digested with proteases LysC (1:100 ratio) for 2 hours followed by Trypsin (1:100 ratio) overnight at 37°C. To the digested peptide volume, five times volume of Isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed to stop the digestion. The peptides were de-salted on equilibrated styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips, washed once in isopropanol/ 1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Purified peptides were eluted with 60 µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using Maxquant version 1.5.5.2 supported by Andromeda search engine. The data was searched for proteins and peptides using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot Human or Mouse (version 2016) fasta file with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at the levels of protein and peptide. No changes were made to the enabled default settings such as oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Trypsin as enzyme specificity. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids set. The proteins were assigned to the same protein groups if two proteins could not be discriminated by unique peptides. The label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithum and match between run feature was enabled for identification of peptide across runs based on mass accuracy and normalized retention times. For label free protein quantification, minimum ratio count was set to 2. The Maxquant output table was analyzed in Perseus or R programming, prior to the analysis contaminants marked as reverse hits, contaminants and only identified by site-modification were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Growth factor independence 1 (GFI1) is a DNA-binding transcription factor and a key regulator of hematopoiesis. GFI1-36N is a germ line variant, causing a change of serine (S) to asparagine (N) at position 36. We previously reported that the GFI1-36N allele has a prevalence of 10% to 15% among patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 5% to 7% among healthy Caucasians and promotes the development of this disease. Using a multiomics approach, we show here that GFI1-36N expression is associated with increased frequencies of chromosomal aberrations, mutational burden, and mutational signatures in both murine and human AML and impedes homologous recombination (HR)-directed DNA repair in leukemic cells. GFI1-36N exhibits impaired binding to N-Myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (Ndrg1) regulatory elements, causing decreased NDRG1 levels, which leads to a reduction of O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) expression levels, as illustrated by both transcriptome and proteome analyses. Targeting MGMT via temozolomide, a DNA alkylating drug, and HR via olaparib, a poly-ADP ribose polymerase 1 inhibitor, caused synthetic lethality in&#xa0;human and murine AML samples expressing GFI1-36N, whereas the effects were insignificant in nonmalignant GFI1-36S or GFI1-36N cells. In addition, mice that received transplantation with GFI1-36N leukemic cells treated with a combination of temozolomide and olaparib had significantly longer AML-free survival than mice that received transplantation with GFI1-36S leukemic cells. This suggests that reduced MGMT expression leaves GFI1-36N leukemic cells particularly vulnerable to DNA damage initiating chemotherapeutics. Our data provide critical insights into novel options to treat patients with AML carrying the GFI1-36N variant.

### Keywords
Aml, Gfi1n36, Gfi1, Leukemia, Proteome, Dna damage and repair

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling, DKFZ Heidelberg
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Ashok Kumar Jayavelu
Proteomics and Cancer Cell Signaling, DKFZ Heidelberg


