### Accession
PXD032222

### Title
Higher dimensional cross-linking with a tetra-reactive cross-linker

### Description
A tetrameric CID-cleavable cross-linker was synthesized and applied to BSA and isolated mitochondria from mouse hearts. A real-time instrument method was developed to dynamically target released peptides from cross-linked species, enabling their characterization through a series of ms3 scans.

### Sample Protocol
Intact mitochondria were isolated from mouse hearts. Mitochondria were then cross-linked by incubating in 10mM tetra-linker, and then were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. The samples were desalted and then fractionated by peptide size exclusion chomatrography. Two high mass fractions (A5, A6) were analyzed directly on a Velos-pro FTICR or additionally fractionated by strong cation exchange prior to analysis. All analyses were performed using an updated ReACT analysis to dynamically target up to 4 released peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW. Data were searched using Comet with the cross-linker modification as a required mod at an internal lysine. Mitochondria files were searched using the mitocarta 2.0, while the BSA data was searched against the uniprot Bovine database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington - Genome Sciences

### Submitter
Jared Mohr

### Lab Head
Dr James Bruce
University of Washington - Genome Sciences


