### Accession
PXD024939

### Title
ANALYSIS OF NETWORKS IN THE DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN CHRONIC SCHIZOPHRENIA: RELEVANCE OF ALTERED IMMUNE RESPONSE

### Description
The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is the association area in the anterior part of the frontal lobe and has a crucial role in cognitive functioning and negative symptoms in SZschizophrenia. However, limited information of altered protein networks is available in this region in schizophrenia. We performed a proteomic analysis using single-shot liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry of grey matter of postmortem DLPFC in chronic schizophrenia subjects (n=20) and healthy individuals (n=20) followed by bioinformatic analysis to identify altered protein networks in SZ.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared from tissue samples using buffer lysis containing ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM, B-glycerophosphate 1M, sodium orthovanadate 100 mM, sodium pyrophosphate 200 mM, sodium fluoride 200 mM, tris 100 mM and Rapi Gest surfactant (Waters). Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA) and 200 µg of total protein per each sample from control and SZ were used for mass spectrometry analysis. The lysate was reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol at 55 ºC for 30 min. and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. and quenched with additional 10mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature.  Peptide samples for mass spectrometer analysis were prepared from reduced and alkylated lysate by adapting a single‐pot solid‐phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) similar to Hughes et al., 2014 and using a KingFisher™ Flex ( Thermo Fisher) automated robotic magnetic bead handler [27]. Digestion was carried out  for 4 hours at 37C on the beads. Eluate was acidified with formic acid and freeze dried prior to resuspending in MS sample buffer. Peptides were resuspended in 3% Formic acid and 4% acetonitrile in water at a 1ug/uL concentration. The LC/MS-MS analysis was performed in Q-Exactive instrument (Thermofisher Scientific, CA, USA) using data-dependent Top 20 acquisition method. Peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse‐phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). A gradient of 3% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid was used delivered at 225 nl/min over 130 minutes, with a total 180-minute acquisition time. Peptides were analyzed  online on the orbitrap mass analyser using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition with all MS spectra being acquired and stored in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed and analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). MS/MS spectra were searched with Andromeda against the uniprot_UP000005640_20180526.fasta with common contaminants added.  The quantified proteins were imported into Perseus software platform (version 1.6.1.3)

### Publication Abstract
The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) has a crucial role in cognitive functioning and negative symptoms in schizophrenia. However, limited information of altered protein networks is available in this region in schizophrenia. We performed a proteomic analysis using single-shot liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry of grey matter of postmortem DLPFC in chronic schizophrenia subjects (n = 20) and unaffected subjects (n = 20) followed by bioinformatic analysis to identify altered protein networks in schizophrenia (PXD024939 identifier in ProteomeXchange repository). Our results displayed a proteome profile in the DLPFC of 1989 proteins. 43 proteins were found significantly altered in schizophrenia. Analysis of this panel showed an enrichment of biological processes implicated in vesicle-mediated transport, processing and antigen presentation <i>via</i> MHC class II, intracellular transport and selenium metabolism. The enriched identified pathways were MHC class II antigen presentation, vesicle-mediated transport, Golgi ER retrograde transport, Nef mediated CD8 downregulation and the immune system. All these enriched categories were found to be downregulated. Furthermore, our network analyses showed crosstalk between proteins involved in MHC class II antigen presentation, membrane trafficking, Golgi-to-ER retrograde transport, Nef-mediated CD8 downregulation and the immune system with only one module built by 13 proteins. RAB7A showed eight interactions with proteins of all these pathways. Our results provide an altered molecular network involved in immune response in the DLPFC in schizophrenia with a central role of RAB7A. These results suggest that RAB7A or other proteins of this network could be potential targets for novel pharmacological strategies in schizophrenia for improving cognitive and negative symptoms.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Schizophrenia, Prefrontal cortex

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Ricard Rodriguez-Mias

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington


