### Accession
PXD018895

### Title
Benchmarking of different methods for obtaining high quality secretomics data

### Description
The main drawback of secretome analyses are contaminating proteins derived from culture medium or proteins released from dying cells which are hard to distinguish from proteins actively secreted by cells. Therefore, several approaches have been applied allowing to remove contamination from secretome analysis. Here, we will compare these approaches and will evaluate their potential to determine proteins secreted by unconventional secretory pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Five replicates of conditoned medium and cells were processed for quantiative mass spectrometric analysis essentially as described in Grube et. al (PMID 29322779) and Baberg et al.(PMID 30716505). Briefly, condtioned medium was prepared by TCA preciptiation and cells lysed using an urea containg buffer. Following in-gel digestion, samples were further prepared for masss spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data was essentially processed as described in Grube et. al (PMID 29322779)with minor modifiacations. Mass spectrometric data was processed for protein identification and quantification by MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
Secretome analysis is broadly applied to understand the interplay between cells and their microenvironment. In particular, the unbiased analysis by mass spectrometry-based proteomics of conditioned medium has been successfully applied. In this context, several approaches have been developed allowing to distinguish proteins actively secreted by cells from proteins derived from culture medium or proteins released from dying cells. Here, three different methods comparing conditioned medium and lysate by quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify bona fide secreted proteins are evaluated. Evaluation in three different human cell lines reveals that all three methods give access to a similar set of bona fide secreted proteins covering a broad abundance range. In the analyzed primary cells, that is, mesenchymal stromal cells and normal human dermal fibroblasts, more than 70% of the identified proteins are linked to classical secretion pathways. Furthermore, 4-12% are predicted to be released by unconventional secretion pathways. Interestingly, evidence of release by ectodomain shedding in a large number of the remaining candidate proteins is found. In summary, it is convinced that comparative secretomics is currently the method of choice to obtain high-confident secretome data and to identify novel candidates for unconventional protein secretion which have been neglected so far.

### Keywords
Conditioned medium, Supernatant, Secreteome, Secretomics, Benchmarking

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf


