### Accession
PXD017697

### Title
Extensive protein group SUMO modification of repressive chromatin factors distinguishes pluripotent from somatic cells

### Description
Post-translational modification by SUMO is a key regulator of cell identity. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), SUMO impedes reprogramming to pluripotency, while in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), it represses the emergence of totipotent-like cells, suggesting that SUMO targets distinct substrates to preserve somatic and pluripotent states. Using MS-based proteomics, we show that the composition of endogenous SUMOylomes differs dramatically between MEFs and ESCs. In MEFs, SUMO2/3 targets proteins associated with canonical SUMO functions, such as splicing, and transcriptional regulators driving somatic enhancer selection. In contrast, in ESCs, SUMO2/3 primarily modifies highly interconnected repressive chromatin complexes, thereby preventing chromatin opening and transitioning to totipotent-like states. We also characterize several SUMO-modified pluripotency factors and show that SUMOylation of Dppa2 and Dppa4 impedes the conversion to 2-cell-embryo-like states. Altogether, we propose that rewiring the repertoire of SUMO target networks is a major driver of cell fate decision during embryonic development.

### Sample Protocol
Primary MEFs were isolated at 13.5 days post coitum. Pregnant females were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, male and female embryos were removed, and the fetal liver and head were excised. The remainder of the embryonic tissue was minced and incubated with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at 37 °C. MEFs were expanded and frozen at passage 1 for subsequent experiments. MEFs were grown in complete medium: DMEM + GlutaMAX (GIBCO) medium supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin. MEFs and ESCs were amplified to reach approximatively 250 million cells per replicate. In the case of MEFs, primary cells had a maximum number of passages of 5. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and collected on ice by gentle scraping. Cells were vigorously lysed using 10 pellet volumes of 6 M guanidine, 50 mM TRIS, buffered at pH 8.5, after which they were immediately snap frozen and stored at −80°C until further processing.  Sample preparation and SUMO-IP for native and endogenous mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed as described previously (Hendriks et al., Nature Communications, 2018). Briefly, lysates were digested with Lys-C, peptides were purified on C8 SepPak and lyophilized, after which they were dissolved in IAP buffer and immunoprecipitated using the 8A2 anti-SUMO2/3 antibody. To shorten the SUMO C-terminus to DVFQQQTGG, and to shorten the target peptides to a length feasible for MS analysis, second-stage digestion of SUMOylated peptides was performed with Endoproteinase Asp-N. High-pH fractionation of SUMOylated peptides was performed on StageTip, with quad-layer StageTips were prepared using four punch-outs of C18 material (Sigma-Aldrich, Empore™ SPE Disks, C18, 47 mm). StageTips were equilibrated using 100 μL of methanol, 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 200 mM ammonium, and two times 75 μL 50 mM ammonium. Samples were supplemented with 1/10th volume of 200 mM ammonium, just prior to loading on StageTip. The StageTips were subsequently washed twice with 75 μL 200 mM ammonium, and afterwards eluted as six fractions (F1-6) using 40 μL of 4, 7, 10, 13, 17, and 25% ACN in 50 mM ammonium. All fractions were dried to completion in LoBind tubes, using a SpeedVac for 2 h at 60°C, after which the dried peptides were dissolved using 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid.  All samples were analyzed on EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow of 250 nl/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, and an analytical gradient of 50 min. The buffer B ramp for the analytical gradient was as follows: F1: 13-24%, F2: 14-27%, F3-5: 15-30%, F6: 17-32%. The columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo) with the spray voltage set at 2 kV, an ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C, and an RF funnel level of 40%. All samples were measured as two technical replicates, with 5 μL of the sample per injection, and with different technical settings (“Normal” and “Sensitive”) to balance speed versus sensitivity. Raw files with an “x” appended to the file name correspond to those analyzed using “Sensitive” settings. For “Normal” analysis, full scan range was set to 400-1,600 m/z, MS1 resolution to 60,000, MS1 AGC target to 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time to 60 ms. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. MS2 resolution was set to 60,000, MS2 AGC target to 200,000, minimum MS2 GC target to 20,000, MS2 maximum injection time to 120 ms, and loop count to 7. For “Sensitive” analysis all settings were the same except MS1 resolution was set to 120,000, MS1 maximum injection time to 120 ms, MS2 maximum injection time to 500 ms, loop count to 4, and dynamic exclusion to 120 s.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data was analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software, version 1.5.3.30. All data was processed in a single computational run, and default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the mouse FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 23rd of July, 2018. The mature sequence of SUMO2 was inserted in the database to allow for detection of free SUMO. In silico digestion of theoretical peptides was performed with Lys-C, Asp-N, and Glu-N, allowing up to 8 missed cleavages. Variable modifications used were protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, peptide N-terminal pyroglutamate, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (STY), and Lys SUMOylation, with a maximum of 4 modifications per peptide. The SUMO mass remnant was defined as described previously (Hendriks et al., Nature Communications, 2018); DVFQQQTGG, H60C41N12O15, monoisotopic mass 960.4301, neutral loss b7-DVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-DV, b3-DVF, b4-DVFQ, b5-DVFQQ, b6-DVFQQQ, b7-DVFQQQT, b9-DVFQQQTGG, QQ, FQ, FQQ]. Label-free quantification was enabled, with “Fast LFQ” disabled. Maximum peptide mass was set to 6,000 Da. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR filtering was applied (default), and additional automatic filtering was ensured by setting the minimum delta score for modified peptides to 20, with a site decoy fraction of 2%. Matching between runs was enabled, with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment window of 20 min. For protein quantification, the same variable modifications were included as for the peptide search. Additional stringent manual filtering was performed for the processed data associated with the manuscript, which is not reflected in the raw MaxQuant output included here.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification by SUMO is a key regulator of cell identity. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), SUMO impedes reprogramming to pluripotency, while in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), it represses the emergence of totipotent-like cells, suggesting that SUMO targets distinct substrates to preserve somatic and pluripotent states. Using MS-based proteomics, we show that the composition of endogenous SUMOylomes differs dramatically between MEFs and ESCs. In MEFs, SUMO2/3 targets proteins associated with canonical SUMO functions, such as splicing, and transcriptional regulators driving somatic enhancer selection. In contrast, in ESCs, SUMO2/3 primarily modifies highly interconnected repressive chromatin complexes, thereby preventing chromatin opening and transitioning to totipotent-like states. We also characterize several SUMO-modified pluripotency factors and show that SUMOylation of Dppa2 and Dppa4 impedes the conversion to 2-cell-embryo-like states. Altogether, we propose that rewiring the repertoire of SUMO target networks is a major driver of cell fate decision during embryonic development.

### Keywords
Somatic, Chromatin, Sumo, Endogenous, Esc, Stem cells, Pluripotent, Mef

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


