### Accession
PXD038580

### Title
Dipsacus asperoides C. Y. Cheng et T. M. Ai, LC-MSMS

### Description
Pentacyclic triterpenes are a class of natural products that are present in Dipsacus asperoides with a long history of use. Pharmacological studies have shown that pentacyclic triterpenes have various biological activities. We have performed proteomic analysis in multiple tissues of this species to study the biosynthetic genes required for the production of pentacyclic triterpenes.

### Sample Protocol
Plant samples were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and then transformed in SDT buffer (4% SDS，100 mM Tris-HCl，1 mM DTT，pH7.6) was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. Proteins were quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA), and qualitied by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and then the proteins were stored at −80 °C for further analysis. Protein digestion by trypsin was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedures referred to in previous work (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges C18 bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma), and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and then reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The contents of peptides were determined by measuring at 280 nm with NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher) using an extinction coefficient of 1.1 for a 0.1% (g/L) solution.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse-phase trap column connected to a C18-reversed phase analytical column in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and the maximum injects time was set to 10 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was set as 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and the isolation width was 2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using the MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software for identification and quantitation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Dipsacus asperoides</i> is a traditional medicinal herb widely used in inflammation and fracture in Asia. Triterpenoid saponins from <i>D. asperoides</i> are the main composition with pharmacological activity. However, the biosynthesis pathway of triterpenoid saponins has not been completely resolved in <i>D. asperoides</i>. Here, the types and contents of triterpenoid saponins were discovered with different distributions in five tissues (root, leaf, flower, stem, and fibrous root tissue) from <i>D. asperoides</i> by UPLC-Q-TOF-MS analysis. The discrepancy between five tissues in <i>D. asperoides</i> at the transcriptional level was studied by combining single-molecule real-time sequencing and next- generation sequencing. Meanwhile, key genes involved in the biosynthesis of saponin were further verified by proteomics. In MEP and MVA pathways, 48 differentially expressed genes were identified through co-expression analysis of transcriptome and saponin contents, including two isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase and two 2,3-oxidosqualene &#x3b2;-amyrin cyclase, etc. In the analysis of WGCNA, 6 cytochrome P450s and 24 UDP- glycosyltransferases related to the biosynthesis of triterpenoid saponins were discovered with high transcriptome expression. This study will provide profound insights to demonstrate essential genes in the biosynthesis pathway of saponins in <i>D. asperoides</i> and support for the biosynthetic of natural active ingredients in the future.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Dipsacus asperoides c. y. cheng et t. m. ai

### Affiliations
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
The SATCM Key Laboratory for New Resources and Quality Evaluation of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China

### Submitter
Chaokang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Rufeng Wang
The SATCM Key Laboratory for New Resources and Quality Evaluation of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China


