### Accession
PXD021783

### Title
LC-MSMS analysis of apple canker pathogen Valsa mali

### Description
In order to explore the role of LaeA in secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters’ regulation, toxin production, and virulence of Valsa mali, TMT-based proteomic analysis of wildtype, LaeA deletion mutant and overexpression mutant were performed. Totally, 4,299 proteins (FDR < 0.01) were identified by searching against the Valsa mali protein sequence database.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction and purification of protein from mycelium was carried out according to the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone-sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)/phenol extraction method.  Protein samples were digested using sequencing-grade trypsin for 24 h at 37°C. Trypsin digested peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents, using 126-tag, 127N-tag, 127C-tag for the three biological replicates of the wildtype, 128N-tag, 128C-tag, 129N-tag for the three biological replicates of LaeA overexpression mutant and 129C-tag, 130N-tag, 130C-tag for the three biological replicates of LaeA deletion mutant, respectively. The tags labeled samples were then mixed followed by the first dimensional high pH reverse-phase (hpRP) separation of tryptic peptide mixtures using an Ultimate3000 MDLC platform (Thermo-Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, USA). A total of 12 fractions were collected and dried for further nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed by an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, California, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) coupled with auto-sampler injection and NanoLC RP (NanoLC, 75 µm id column). A 120-minutes NanoLC gradient on one LC fraction was used for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra were processed and searched using Sequest HT software within the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (PD1.4, Thermo). The V. mali protein sequence database containing 11,218 entries downloaded on NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) were used for database searches. The default search settings used for 10-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD1.4 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, fixed 10-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifcations of methionine oxidation and deamidation on  asparagines/glutamine residues. The peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance values were 10 ppm and 50 mDa, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered for maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 1.4 along with additional peptide confidence set to high. The TMT10plex quantification method within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software was used to calculate the reporter ratios with mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying the isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation. A protein ratio was expressed as a median value of the ratios for all quantifiable spectra of the unique peptides pertaining to that protein. A precursor co-isolation filter of 50% was also applied for minimizing ratio compression caused by co-isolation of precursor ions. For each relative ratio group, normalization on protein median was applied. The comparison between groups was undertaken with Micosoft Excel software.

### Publication Abstract
Apple Valsa canker is a destructive disease caused by the ascomycete <i>Valsa mali</i> and poses a serious threat to apple production. Toxins synthesized by secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters (SMBGCs) have been proven to be crucial for pathogen virulence. A previous study showed that <i>V. mali</i> genome contains remarkably expanded SMBGCs and some of their genes were significantly upregulated during infection. In this study, we focus on LaeA, a known regulator of secondary metabolism, for its role in SMBGC regulation, toxin production, and virulence of <i>V. mali</i>. Deletion of <i>VmLaeA</i> led to greatly reduced virulence with lesion length reduced by 48% on apple twigs. Toxicity tests proved that toxicity of secondary metabolites (SMs) produced by <i>VmLaeA</i> deletion mutant (&#x394;<i>VmlaeA</i>) was markedly decreased in comparison with wild-type (WT). Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of WT and &#x394;<i>VmlaeA</i> indicated that a portion of transporters and about half (31/60) SMBGCs are regulated by <i>VmLaeA.</i> Function analysis of eight gene clusters including <i>PKS7</i>, <i>PKS11</i>, <i>NRPS14</i>, <i>PKS16</i>, <i>PKS23</i>, <i>PKS31</i>, <i>NRPS/PKS33</i>, and <i>PKS39</i> that were differentially expressed at both transcriptional and translational levels showed that four of them (i.e., <i>PKS11</i>, <i>PKS16</i>, <i>PKS23</i>, and <i>PKS31</i>) were involved in pigment production and <i>NRPS14</i> contributed to virulence. Our findings will provide new insights and gene resources for understanding the role of pathogenicity-related toxins in <i>V. mali</i>.

### Keywords
Laea deletion, Valsa mali, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853


