### Accession
PXD001822

### Title
AP-MS of different isoforms of Axin

### Description
This project aims to identify and differentiate the interaction partners of  Axin1 isoforms including 1 wild type and 3 different mutants (L106R, L106R_F119R, deltaRGS)

### Sample Protocol
FLAG- tagged of different isoforms of Axin1 were expressed in the HEK203 cells. Following affinity purification (AP), proteins pulled down were digested and analysed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (MASCOT 2.4 as search engine) was used for identification and spectral counting of the pulled down proteins  validated with a FDR of 1%. The CRAPome was used to compare the multiple samples for proteins that are significantly enriched in a particular isoform of Axin1 against the empty vector (negative control)

### Publication Abstract
Signaling cascades depend on scaffold proteins that regulate the assembly of multiprotein complexes. Missense mutations in scaffold proteins are frequent in human cancer, but their relevance and mode of action are poorly understood. Here we show that cancer point mutations in the scaffold protein Axin derail Wnt signaling and promote tumor growth in vivo through a gain-of-function mechanism. The effect is conserved for both the human and Drosophila proteins. Mutated Axin forms nonamyloid nanometer-scale aggregates decorated with disordered tentacles, which 'rewire' the Axin interactome. Importantly, the tumor-suppressor activity of both the human and Drosophila Axin cancer mutants is rescued by preventing aggregation of a single nonconserved segment. Our findings establish a new paradigm for misregulation of signaling in cancer and show that targeting aggregation-prone stretches in mutated scaffolds holds attractive potential for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Ap-ms, Hek293, Proteomics, Axin1

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands
Utrecht Univeristy

### Submitter
Teck Yew Low

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands


