### Accession
PXD037699

### Title
Analysis of cellulose synthesis in a high‑producing acetic acid bacterium Komagataeibacter hansenii

### Description
Bacterial cellulose (BC) represents a renewable biomaterial with unique properties promising for biotechnology and biomedicine. Komagataeibacter hansenii ATCC 53,582 is a well-characterized high-yield producer of BC used in the industry. Its genome encodes three distinct cellulose synthases (CS), bcsAB1, bcsAB2, and bcsAB3, which together with genes for accessory proteins are organized in operons of different complexity. The genetic foundation of its high celluloseproducing phenotype was investigated by constructing chromosomal in-frame deletions of the CSs and of two predicted regulatory diguanylate cyclases (DGC), dgcA and dgcB. Proteomic characterization suggested that BcsAB1 was the decisive CS because of its high expression and its exclusive contribution to the formation of microcrystalline cellulose. BcsAB2 showed a lower expression level but contributes significantly to the tensile strength of BC and alters fiber diameter significantly as judged by scanning electron microscopy. Nevertheless, no distinct extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) from this operon was identified after static cultivation. Although transcription of bcsAB3 was observed, expression of the protein was below the detection limit of proteome analysis. Alike BcsAB2, deletion of BcsAB3 resulted in a visible reduction of the cellulose fiber diameter. The high abundance of BcsD and the accessory proteins CmcAx, CcpAx, and BglxA emphasizes their importance for the proper formation of the cellulosic network. Characterization of deletion mutants lacking the DGC genes dgcA and dgcB suggests a new regulatory mechanism of cellulose synthesis and cell motility in K. hansenii ATCC 53,582. Our findings form the basis for rational tailoring of the characteristics of BC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Cellular samples from K. hansenii ATCC 23769 and ATCC 53582 were taken after 3 days from cultures containing 6 U/mL cellulase (from T. reesei, Sigma Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), centrifuged for 10 min, 4 °C and 3,200g and washed twice in 1x PBS to remove contaminating medium components. Addition of cellulase helped to prevent cellulose biofilm formation in samples for proteomic analysis. Cells were lysed in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 5 min at 55 °C and subsequently neutralized by addition of 2 M Tris (pH = 8.2). A Bradford assay (Coomassie Plus Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was performed for quantification of the total protein concentration. A total of 50 μg of protein per sample were reduced (8.3 mM TCEP) and carbamidomethylated (36.7 mM CAA) for 5 minutes at 95 °C. Digestion of the proteins was carried out by adding trypsin (proteomics grade, Roche) at a 1/50 enzyme/protein ratio (w/w) and incubation at 37 °C overnight. Digests were acidified by addition of 3% (v/v) formic acid (FA), and desalted using self-packed StageTips (five disks per micro-column, ø 1.5mm, C18 material, 3M Empore). The peptide eluates were dried to completeness and stored at -80 °C. Before the LC-MS/MS measurement all samples were freshly re-suspended in 12 µl 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water and 25 µg of total peptide amount were injected into the mass spectrometer per measurement. For each bacterial strain four biological replicates were measured.  Liquid chromatography-based tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS: Peptides were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 (micro-flow configuration) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 25 µg of peptides were applied onto a commercially available Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 μm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and separated using a two-stepped gradient: In the first step, a 50 minutes linear gradient ranging from 3% to 24% solvent B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min was applied. In the second step, solvent B was further increased from 24% to 31% over a 10 minutes linear gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 full scans (360 – 1300 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, a normalized AGC target value of 100% and a maximum injection time of 50 msec. Peptide precursor selection for fragmentation was carried out using a fixed cycle time of 1.2 sec. Only precursors with charge states from 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy of 28%. The precursor isolation window width of the quadrupole was set to 1.1 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000, a fixed first mass of 100 m/z, a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 100% and maximum injection time of 40 msec.

### Data Protocol
Database searching: Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) (Tyanova et al. 2016) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011). MS2 spectra were searched against all protein sequences obtained from NCBI, searching for “ATCC 53582” and “ATCC 23769”, respectively (2,811 proteins and 2,972 proteins, downloaded 22. Nov 2021), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). The protein sequence database of K. hansenii ATCC 23769 was manually completed by adding the protein sequences for BcsAB1, BcsC1 and BcsC2 from UniProt. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. The match-between-run function was disabled. Estimations of protein mass fractions were carried out using the “intensity-based absolute quantification” (iBAQ) (Schwanhäusser et al. 2011) function implemented in MaxQuant. iBAQ values provide a quantification unit that is proportional to the absolute protein concentration in a given sample. By dividing the iBAQ value of a given protein through the summed iBAQ values of all proteins detected in a given sample protein mass fractions were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial cellulose (BC) represents a renewable biomaterial with unique properties promising for biotechnology and biomedicine. Komagataeibacter hansenii ATCC 53,582 is a well-characterized high-yield producer of BC used in the industry. Its genome encodes three distinct cellulose synthases (CS), bcsAB1, bcsAB2, and bcsAB3, which together with genes for accessory proteins are organized in operons of different complexity. The genetic foundation of its high cellulose-producing phenotype was investigated by constructing chromosomal in-frame deletions of the CSs and of two predicted regulatory diguanylate cyclases (DGC), dgcA and dgcB. Proteomic characterization suggested that BcsAB1 was the decisive CS because of its high expression and its exclusive contribution to the formation of microcrystalline cellulose. BcsAB2 showed a lower expression level but contributes significantly to the tensile strength of BC and alters fiber diameter significantly as judged by scanning electron microscopy. Nevertheless, no distinct extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) from this operon was identified after static cultivation. Although transcription of bcsAB3 was observed, expression of the protein was below the detection limit of proteome analysis. Alike BcsAB2, deletion of BcsAB3 resulted in a visible reduction of the cellulose fiber diameter. The high abundance of BcsD and the accessory proteins CmcAx, CcpAx, and BglxA emphasizes their importance for the proper formation of the cellulosic network. Characterization of deletion mutants lacking the DGC genes dgcA and dgcB suggests a new regulatory mechanism of cellulose synthesis and cell motility in K. hansenii ATCC 53,582. Our findings form the basis for rational tailoring of the characteristics of BC. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; BcsAB1 induces formation of microcrystalline cellulose fibers. &#x2022; Modifications by BcsAB2 and BcsAB3 alter diameter of cellulose fibers. &#x2022; Complex regulatory network of DGCs on cellulose pellicle formation and motility.

### Keywords
Markerless deletion, Bacterial cellulose, Komagataeibacter hansenii, Cellulose fiber, Acetic acid bacteria

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising


