### Accession
PXD019978

### Title
Effect of truncation mutants of the trypanosomatid  nuclear lamina  protein NUP-1 on the whole cell proteome in T. brucei

### Description
The nuclear lamina has multiple functions, including maintaining nuclear structural integrity and differential gene expression. Correct spatial and temporal lamina assembly is essential to meet these and other roles. Recently, it emerged that multiple lamina systems exist that are likely products of independent origins, while all these systems share remarkably analogous functions. Several lamina proteins are known in trypanosomes, two of which, NUP-1 and NUP-2, are essential, coiled-coil proteins with a  molecular mass 450 and 250 kDa, respectively. Sequence analysis indicates distinct quaternary structures when compared to the ~60 kDa lamin proteins of multiple lineages, including metazoa. To uncover organisational principles of the trypanosome lamina we generated NUP-1 deletion mutants (N=N-terminal domain; C= C-terminal domain; NC: fusion of the N- and C-terminal domain with entire repeat region deletedd))designed to identify domains of NUP-1 responsible for oligomerisation. We find that both N- and C-termini act as interaction domains and disruption of these interactions impacts additional components of the lamina, the nuclear envelope and nucleoporin TbNup98. By contrast there is remarkably little impact on transcription, crucially including silencing of telomeric variant surface glycoprotein genes. These data indicate that both terminal domains of NUP-1 have roles in assembling the trypanosome lamina and suggest an architecture distinct to the lamin system is based on a ‘hub and spoke’ configuration.

### Sample Protocol
T. brucei BSF cells expressing NUP-1 variants were cultured with 1.0 μg/ml of tetracycline overnight. Uninduced cells were used as controls. Cells were washed with PBS containing Complete protease inhibitors (Roche), extracted with 1x NuPAGE sample buffer and sonicated. Lysates containing 1×107 cells were fractionated on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Thermo Scientific) under reducing conditions at 100 V for 10 min. The migration portion was contained in one slice that was subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation using routine procedures. The eluted peptides were then analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2) on a ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at the University of Dundee FingerPrints Proteomics facility.

### Data Protocol
Protein mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (PMID:19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the predicted T. brucei brucei TREU927 proteome (PMID:19843604). Minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. When the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group. Sample layout: Control: raw file Crt1, Crt2, Crt3, Crt4 (experiment 11, 12, 13, 14); N-terminal domain: raw file N1, N2, N3 (experiment 21, 22, 23); C-terminal domain: raw file C1, C2, C3 (experiment 31, 32, 33);  N-and C-terminal domain fusion: raw file NC1, NC2, NC3 (experiment 41, 42, 43)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heterochromatin, Trypanosoma, Molecular assembly, Nuclear organisation, Lamina

### Affiliations
Mark C. Field Professor of Cell Biology and Parasitology Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee United Kingdom
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Mark C. Field
Mark C. Field Professor of Cell Biology and Parasitology Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee United Kingdom


