### Accession
PXD032240

### Title
Unbiased in vivo exploration of nuclear bodies-enhanced sumoylation reveals that PML orchestrates embryonic stem cell fate (II)

### Description
Membrane-less organelles are condensates formed by phase separation whose functions often remain enigmatic. Upon oxidative stress, PML scaffolds Nuclear Bodies (NBs) to regulate senescence or metabolic adaptation, but their role in pluripotency remains elusive. Here we establish that PML is required for basal SUMO2/3 conjugation in mESCs and oxidative stress-driven sumoylation in mESCs or in vivo. PML NBs create an oxidationprotective environment for UBC9-driven SUMO2/3 conjugation of PML partners, often followed by their poly-ubiquitination and degradation. Differential in vivo proteomics identified several members of the KAP1 complex as PML NB-dependent SUMO2-targets. The latter drives functional activation of this key epigenetic repressor. Accordingly, Pml-/- mESCs reexpress transposable elements and display features of totipotent-like cells, a process further enforced by PML-controlled SUMO2-conjugation of DPPA2. Finally, PML is required for adaptive stress responses in mESCs. Collectively, PML orchestrates mESC fate through SUMO2-conjugation of key transcriptional or epigenetic regulators, raising new mechanistic hypotheses about PML roles in normal or cancer stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing His10-SUMO2 were washed and collected in PBS. SUMO2 conjugates were purified as described in Hendriks and Vertegaal 2016. All the experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an inner-diameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The gradient length was 120 minutes from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute. For the samples from cohort 2 and 3, two technical repeats were performed operating the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 5 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 17,500 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 250 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 20 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis. For the cohort 1, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 7 method, two independent technical repeats were performed. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 35,000 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 120 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
All RAW data were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) according to Tyanova et al. (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) . We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Mus musculus (24 March 2016) and the PML-RARA protein. Database searches were performed with Trypsin/P, allowing four missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5. Match between runs was performed with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. The maximum peptide mass was set to 5000. Label Free Quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ approach, not allowing Fast LFQ (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). Instrument type was set to Orbitrap.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Proteomics, Pml

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center Leiden The Netherlands

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center Leiden The Netherlands


