### Accession
PXD038967

### Title
N2-methylguanosine modifications on human tRNAs and snRNA U6 are important for colon cancer cell proliferation, protein translation and pre-mRNA splicing

### Description
Modified nucleotides in non-coding RNAs, such as tRNAs and snRNAs, represent an important layer of gene expression regulation through their ability to fine-tune mRNA maturation and transla-tion. Growing evidences support important roles of tRNA/snRNAs modifications and hence the enzymes that install them, in eukaryotic cell development and their dysregulation has been linked to various human pathologies including neurodevelopmental disorders and cancers. Human TRMT112 (Trm112 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae) functions as an allosteric regulator of several methyltransfer-ases (MTases) targeting molecules (tRNAs, rRNAs and proteins) involved in protein synthesis. Here, we have investigated the interaction network of human TRMT112 in intact cells and identify three poorly characterized putative MTases (TRMT11, THUMPD3 and THUMD2) as direct part-ners. We demonstrate that these three proteins are active N2-methylguanosine (m2G) MTases and that TRMT11 and THUMPD3 methylate positions 10 and 6 of tRNAs, respectively. In contrast, we discovered that THUMPD2 directly associates with the U6 snRNA and is required for the for-mation of m2G in this core component of the catalytic spliceosome. Consistently, our data reveal the combined importance of TRMT11 and THUMPD3 for optimal protein synthesis and cancer cell proliferation as well as a role for THUMPD2 in fine-tuning pre-mRNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
8×106 HEKT293T cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes and the next day, were transiently transfected with 5 μg of plasmids (pMG976 or pMG1128; Supplementary Table S1) as described above. Cells were collected in lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, 1mM DTT supplemented with 1×PIC) and a freeze-thaw strategy involving freezing cells in liquid nitrogen for 5 min and thawing at 37°C was used for lysis. The lysate was then incubated at 4°C for 20 min followed by centrifugation (20,000 × g, 4°C; 15-30 min) to obtain the remove cellular debris. Cleared cell extracts were incubated with pre-washed anti-Flag beads overnight at 4°C following which, the beads were washed five times with lysis buffer complemented with 1× PIC. The washed beads were directly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.Samples were sonicated prior to transfer to 1.5mL Eppendorf tubes compatible with a magnetic rack. After incubating the beads on the magnetic rack, the supernatant was discarded. The beads were washed three times with 200μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally resuspended in 100μL of ammonium bicarbonate (50mM) before the addition of 2μg of Try/Lys-C (Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Proteins were digested for 4h at 37°C, 300rpm. Then 2μg of Try/Lys-C was added again and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C, 300rpm. The next day, supernatants were collected after incubation on the magnetic holder. The beads were washed with 100μL of LC-MS grade water and pooled with the supernatants. Digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid at a final concentration of 2%. Samples were transferred back to a new tube after incubation on the magnetic stand to remove any residual beads, before being evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 10μL of H2O/ACN/FA (98/2/0.1).  Peptides were analysed using a nanoAcquity (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed using Mascot (v.2.6.2). The database used contains all UniProtKB-SwissProt Homo sapiens entries, common MS contaminants and decoys (Nov 2019). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed, the precursor tolerance was set at 5ppm and the fragment tolerance at 0.05Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. N-term acetylation and oxidation of methionine residues were defined as variable modifications. Protein identifications were validated and relative label-free quantification was performed with Proline (v2.0) (10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa118) using only specific peptides without modifications and applying a 1% FDR at protein and PSM levels. Differential analysis was performed in Prostar (v 1.22.6). Filtering was set to at least four values in one condition. A VSN normalisation between conditions and a quantile imputation (Quantile 2.5, Factor 1) were applied. The hypothesis test was performed using a Limma test to compare both conditions. The p-value was calibrated using the Benjamini-Hochberg calibration and p-value filtering was applied to achieve a FDR of 1.36% for a p-value =1E-04.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms experiment

### Affiliations
CNRS University of Strasbourg
LSMBO IPHC UMR7178 CNRS Université de Strasbourg

### Submitter
Carapito Christine

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
LSMBO IPHC UMR7178 CNRS Université de Strasbourg


