### Accession
PXD019959

### Title
Absolute quantification and copy number estimation of the TNF-RSC members in A549 cells

### Description
Determine the copy number per cell of the TNF-RSC members in A549 cells using targeted proteomics (PRM) combined with spike-in of known amounts of reference peptides.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells were grown to confluence. Cells were trypsined and counted with Thermo cell counter (CountessTM II cell counter). Lysates (HNN lysate buffer) protein concentration was determined by BCA kit (Pierce). FASP-coupled proteolysis (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) was performed on the lysates (100 ug). Samples were denaturated (8M urea), reduced (5mM TCEP) and alkylated (10mM IAA, RT). After 2 washes with Ammonium bicarbonate, samples were proteolyzed with 0.5 ug of LysC (Wako) for 1hr followed by 2ug of trypsin  (Promega) at 37°C o/n. Digested samples were acidified by addition of formic acid and purified using microspin columns (The Nest Group). Eluates were evaporated, resuspended in ACN 2%, formic acid 0.1%, H20, with addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys), sonicated and centrifuged for 5-10 minutes at 10000g before MS injection. Reference heavy AQUA peptides were spiked-in either before lysis or before injection.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition. Targeted analysis for the AQUA experiments were carried out on a QExactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters). Peptides were separated on a Acquity UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length; 75 uM diameter) with a 90 minutes gradient from ACN 5% to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Isolation was performed with a quadrupole and the isolation window was set at 1.2Da. Peptides were fragmented with a collision energy at 28% (HCD) and detected in an Orbitrap. Lysates were injected three times with three different methods depending on the intensity of the monitored peptides, with Orbitrap fill time and resolution set at 54/118/236 ms and 30000/60000/120000, respectively.        Data analysis. Representative peptides for the ~30 TNF-RSC proteins were selected based on the following criteria: proteotypic; few or no known posttranslational modifications; tryptic (one exception); good response factor and linearity, as measured by targeted/untargeted MS, and/or reported in peptide atlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/). All targeted data were analyzed and quantified using Skyline (version: daily(beta); MacLean et al. 2010).  Generally, manual peak-picking from PRM data was carried out using the following criteria: m/z>200; ppm<5; of multiple available charged states, the one with the best features was chosen; identification was based on co-elution of light and heavy peptides and matching peak shape. Quantified peaks were exported and downstream analyses carried out in R using customized scripts. Copies per cell and PD efficiency were estimated in two steps. (i) First, we estimated the copies per cell of the receptor using the mean of three TNFRI AQUA peptides (spiked into the sample before lysis). (ii) This value was used as a ruler to extrapolate the copies/cell of those proteins (n=28) absolutely quantified across 12 lysates, but whose copy number/cell had not been estimated.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent the main mode of the proteome organization in the cell. In the last decade, several large-scale representations of PPI networks have captured generic aspects of the functional organization of network components but mostly lack the context of cellular states. However, the generation of context-dependent PPI networks is essential for structural and systems-level modeling of biological processes-a goal that remains an unsolved challenge. Here we describe an experimental/computational strategy to achieve a modeling of PPIs that considers contextual information. This strategy defines the composition, stoichiometry, temporal organization, and cellular requirements for the formation of target assemblies. We used this approach to generate an integrated model of the formation principles and architecture of a large signalosome, the TNF-receptor signaling complex (TNF-RSC). Overall, we show that the integration of systems- and structure-level information provides a generic, largely unexplored link between the modular proteome and cellular function.

### Keywords
Aqua, Copy number, Tnf-rsc, Prm

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


