### Accession
PXD027154

### Title
Listeria infection in hepatocytes

### Description
Listeria monocytogenes causes severe foodborne illness in pregnant women and immunocompromised individuals. After the intestinal phase of infection, the liver plays a central role in the clearance of this pathogen through its important functions in immunity. However, recent evidence suggests that subpopulations of L. monocytogenes may escape eradication after prolonged infection of hepatocytes, by entering a persistence phase in vacuoles. Here, we examine whether this long-term infection alters hepatocyte defense pathways, which may be instrumental for bacterial persistence. We first established models of Listeria infection in human hepatocyte cell lines HepG2 and Huh7 and in primary mouse hepatocytes (PMH). In these cells, Listeria efficiently enters the persistence stage after a 3-day infection, while inducing a type I (PMH) or type I/III (HepG2) or no (Huh7) interferon response. RNA-seq analysis identified a common signature of long-term Listeria infection on the hepatocyte transcriptome, characterized by overexpression of a set of genes involved in antiviral immunity and under-expression of many acute phase protein (APP) genes, particularly involved in the complement and coagulation systems. The decrease in APP transcript amounts correlated with lower protein abundance in the secretome of infected cells, as shown by proteomics, and also occurred in the presence of APP inducers (IL-6 or IL-1b). The results also suggest that long-term Listeria infection affects lipid metabolism pathways. Collectively, these results reveal that long-term infection with L. monocytogenes profoundly deregulates the innate immune functions of hepatocytes, which could generate an environment favorable to the establishment of persistent infection.

### Sample Protocol
Listeria monocytogenes  strain EGDe , infected Huh7 or HepG2 hepatocytes cells (3 replicates). For the proteome analysis, 5 µg of protein extract were used for a short migration 1D gel electrophoresis.The proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with 200 ng trypsin. Samples were resuspended in  50 µl loading buffer (0.08 % v/v trifluoroacetic acid, 2 % v/v acetonitrile) for LC‑MS/MS proteome analysis (4 µl = 400 ng peptide per injection).  We then performed a high throughput analysis of secreted proteins using a label-free MS quantitative proteomic approach. For the proteome analysis, 5 µg of protein extract were used for a short migration 1D gel electrophoresis. Mass spectrometry was performed on the PAPPSO platform (MICALIS, INRA, Jouy‑en‑Josas, France; http://pappso.inra.fr/). An Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM  (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The Homo sapiens database (Uniprot, version 2021 taxonomy identifier = 9606, 20 396 entries) was searched by using X!TandemPipeline version 0.4.24. The proteome identification was run with a precursor and a fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Enzymatic cleavage rules were set to trypsin digestion (“after Arg and Lys, unless Pro follows directly after”) and no semi-enzymatic cleavage rules were allowed. The fix modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation was considered as a potential modification. In a second pass, N-terminal acetylation was added as another potential modification, whereas all other previous settings were retained.  A difference in protein amounts in the supernatant of infected compared to uninfected cells, in three independent assays, was considered significant if the determined p-value was inferior to 0.01. Quantification of proteins in the secretome of 72 h-infected HepG2 or Huh7 cells. The identified proteins were filtered as follows: 1) peptide E‑value < 0.05 with a minimum of 2 peptides per protein and 2) a protein E-value of < 10-4. roteins were quantified by the spectral counting (SC) method. MassChroqR (version 0.5.2), an R package developed by PAPPSO platform (http://pappso.inrae.fr) was used to check the quality of data and practice statistical analysis in proteomic. The abundance in number of spectra was modeled using the following generalized mixed model (GLM) with a Poisson distribution. Protein abundance change were detected by analysis of variance (ANOVA) using a Chi-square test. The obtained p-values were adjusted for multiple testing by the Benjamini-Hochberg approach (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). Adjusted p-values obtained from ANOVA for the proteome was considered significant below a value of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocytes, Lc-ms/ms, Listerai monocytogenes

### Affiliations
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute, Jouy-en-Josas, France
INRAE

### Submitter
Celine Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Noirot Philippe
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute, Jouy-en-Josas, France


