### Accession
PXD019588

### Title
Interactome of Eif4a2 in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Cell fate transitions depend on balanced rewiring of transcription and translation programmes to enable ordered developmental progression. We identified a feedback loop between nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) and translation initiation, in which NMD controls the translation initiation factor Eif4a2 and its premature termination codon encoding isoform (Eif4a2-PTC). This leads to translation of a specific truncated protein, which elicits increased translation rates and is causative for significant delays in mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation. Using immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry, we identified the interactome of full length Eif4a2 (Eif4a2-iso1) and Eif4a2-PTC. We find that Eif4a2-iso1 is mainly involved in translation initiation, while unstable Eif4a2-PTC shows little interaction with translation initiation factors. Both isoforms can bind to mRNA, as indicated by the interaction with mRNA binding protein, such as NMD factors and Ago2. Finally, Eif4a2-iso1 and Eif4a2-PTC interact with key pluripotency factors, providing a potential explanation for how Eif4a2 controls ESC differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Eif4a2 KO ESCs in which either flag-tagged Eif4a2iso1 or flag-tagged Eif4a2PTC was re-expressed, and WT ESCs that overexpress a flag-tagged Eif4a2PTC, were used in this study. Eif4a2 KO ESCs, transfected with an empty flag vector, were used as negative control. ESCs were treated for three hours with 1µM epoxomicin (Gentaur, 607-A2606) prior to lysis to inhibit proteasome activity. ESCs were harvested in IP lysis buffer (10mM Tris Base, 10mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0,5% Triton X-100) supplemented with Complete Mini EDTA-free Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 04693159001) and PhosSTOP (Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, 04906845001)). Lysates were then cleared out by centrifugation at 16000g for 15 min at 4°C. NaCl was added to a final concentration of 150mM. 1mg of lysate was used for the immunoprecipitation. Dynabeads (Fisher Scientific, 10004D) were coated with 5µg of anti-flag M2 antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, F1804, mouse) for 1 hour. Flag M2 antibody was cross-linked to the dyanabeads using dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP). Briefly, after antibody coupling, Dynabeads were washed three times with 200 mM Sodium Borate (pH=9) and then incubated for 30 min with DMP-Sodium Borate solution. They were washed with the following buffers: three times with 250mM Tris (pH=8.0), two times with 100mM glycine (pH=2), three times with TBS-T and one time with lysis buffer. Beads were then incubated with the lysates for two hours at 4°C. Five washes were performed with wash buffer (137 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris Base).  Beads with cross-linked antibody were transferred to new tubes and resuspended in 30 µL of 2 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature before adding 25 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and the proteins were digested with 150 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at room temperature for 90 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, the beads were washed with another 30 µL of 2 M urea in 50 mM ABC and the wash combined with the supernatant. After diluting to 1 M urea with 50 mM ABC additional 150 ng trypsin were added and incubated overnight at 37°C in the dark. The digest was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5 %, and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 35% and finally 80% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a customized nano-spray EASY-Spray ion-source (Thermo-Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA), survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 375-1500 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 120k at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy and the spectra recorded for max. 250 ms at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30k. Peptides with a charge of +1 or >+7 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match feature was set to preferred, the exclude isotope feature was enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 seconds. Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16, (Tyanova et al., 2016)) and the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (January 2019, www.uniprot.org), target sequences, as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default.  MaxQuant output tables were further processed in R (R Core Team, 2018, https://www.R-project.org/). Reverse database identifications, contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by a modified peptide, protein groups with less than three quantitative values in one experimental group, and protein groups with less than 2 razor peptides were removed for further analysis. Due to differences in overall contaminant levels between samples, LFQ values were re-normalized using the sample median of the “background” protein subset (as identified in controls). Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution modeled on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, width of distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package (Ritchie et al., 2015) at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Cell fate transitions depend on balanced rewiring of transcription and translation programs to mediate ordered developmental progression. Components of the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway have been implicated in regulating embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation, but the exact mechanism is unclear. Here we show that NMD controls expression levels of the translation initiation factor <i>Eif4a2</i> and its premature termination codon-encoding isoform (<i>Eif4a2</i><sup><i>PTC</i></sup> ). NMD deficiency leads to translation of the truncated eIF4A2<sup>PTC</sup> protein. eIF4A2<sup>PTC</sup> elicits increased mTORC1 activity and translation rates and causes differentiation delays. This establishes a previously unknown feedback loop between NMD and translation initiation. Furthermore, our results show a clear hierarchy in the severity of target deregulation and differentiation phenotypes between NMD effector KOs (<i>Smg5</i> KO &gt; <i>Smg6</i> KO &gt; <i>Smg7</i> KO), which highlights heterodimer-independent functions for SMG5 and SMG7. Together, our findings expose an intricate link between mRNA homeostasis and mTORC1 activity that must be maintained for normal dynamics of cell state transitions.

### Keywords
Eif4a2, Mouse embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Leeb
Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter


### SDRF

