### Accession
PXD010687

### Title
Characterization of the Src-regulated kinome  identifies SGK1 as a key mediator of Src-induced transformation

### Description
Despite significant progress, our understanding of how specific oncogenes transform cells is still limited and likely underestimates the complexity of downstream signalling events. Herein, we describe a novel, integrated approach that addresses this knowledge gap. This utilizes mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomics to characterize the global impact of an oncogene on the expressed kinome, and then functionally annotates the regulated kinases. As an example, we identified approximately seventy protein kinases exhibiting altered expression and/or phosphorylation in Src-transformed mammary epithelial cells. An integrated siRNA screen identified nine kinases, including SGK1, as being essential for Src-induced transformation.  In triple negative breast cancer cells, which exhibit a prominent signalling network governed by src family kinases, Src positively regulated SGK1 expression and combined inhibition of Src and SGK1 was more effective at inhibiting colony formation in vitro, and xenograft growth in vivo, than either treatment alone. Therefore, this approach not only provides major mechanistic insights into oncogenic transformation but also aids the design of improved therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Kinome enrichment and phosphopeptide enrichment were performed as described previously. Briefly, kinases were enriched from protein mixture using kinobead cocktail containing immobilised Purvalanol B (Tocris, UK), CTx-0294885 (also known as KiNet-1, SYNkinase, Australia), SU6668 (Biochempartner Chemical, China) and VI16832 (Evotec, Germany). The resin-bound proteins were eluted and separated into two fractions, for in-gel and in-solution tryptic digestion respectively. 10% of the in-gel extracts were subsequently used for total protein identification. The remaining 90% and all peptides yielded from the in-solution digestion were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 (GL Sciences, Japan). Peptide desalting was performed using homemade C18 Stage Tips according to the published protocol. C18 purified peptides were separated by nano-LC through the Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, California) before being acquired on the Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, MA) with settings reported previously.  For kinomic profiling of MDA-MB-231 cells treated with AZD0530, cells were treated with the drug (1 uM) or vehicle control for 16 h, and then subjected to the above MS workflow, except the data were acquired on a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant with default settings for feature detection, protein/peptide identification and quantification. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled and the FDR was limited to 1% for both protein and peptide identifications. Peptides with posterior error probability greater than 10 % were removed and protein identification required a minimum of 1 unique peptide. For phosphopeptides, those exhibiting a phosphosite localization probability > 0.75 were included in further analyses. The fold change values were obtained from triplicate kinomic profiling experiments. An appropriate cut-off was determined using the same approach as described previously, but more stringent criteria. The frequency distribution of the phosphosite fold changes was plotted and the data divided into 10 terciles with different percentage cut-offs. A fold change of 1.5-fold was selected as phosphosites defined by this are within the top and bottom 10% of all phosphosites (10th and 90th percentile), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Despite significant progress, our understanding of how specific oncogenes transform cells is still limited and likely underestimates the complexity of downstream signalling events. To address this gap, we use mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomics to characterize the global impact of an oncogene on the expressed kinome, and then functionally annotate the regulated kinases. As an example, we identify 63 protein kinases exhibiting altered expression and/or phosphorylation in Src-transformed mammary epithelial cells. An integrated siRNA screen identifies nine kinases, including SGK1, as being essential for Src-induced transformation. Accordingly, we find that Src positively regulates SGK1 expression in triple negative breast cancer cells, which exhibit a prominent signalling network governed by Src family kinases. Furthermore, combined inhibition of Src and SGK1 reduces colony formation and xenograft growth more effectively than either treatment alone. Therefore, this approach not only provides mechanistic insights into oncogenic transformation but also aids the design of improved therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Kinome, Src, Breast cancer, Cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University

### Submitter
Hugh Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Daly
Monash University


