### Accession
PXD017783

### Title
An extracellular receptor tyrosine kinase motif orchestrating intracellular STAT activation

### Description
The ErbB4 receptor isoforms JM-a and JM-b differ within their extracellular juxtamembrane (eJM) domains. Here, ErbB4 isoforms are used as a model to address the effect of structural variation in the eJM domain of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) on downstream signaling. A specific JM-a-like sequence motif is discovered, and its presence or absence (in JM-b-like RTKs) in the eJM domains of several RTKs is demonstrated to dictate selective STAT activation. STAT5a activation by RTKs including the JM-a like motif is shown to involve interaction with oligosaccharides of N-glycosylated cell surface proteins such as β1 integrin, whereas STAT5b activation by JM-b is dependent on TYK2. ErbB4 JM-a- and JM-b-like RTKs are shown to associate with specific signaling complexes at different cell surface compartments using analyses of RTK interactomes and super-resolution imaging. These findings provide evidence for a conserved mechanism linking a ubiquitous extracellular motif in RTKs with selective intracellular STAT signaling.

### Sample Protocol
HC11, MCF-7 and COS-7 cells were lysed and precleared with 50 μl of streptavidin-sepharose. Streptavidin-sepharose (150 μl) was incubated with 300 μg of biotinylated PHA-L lectin for 2 hours at room temperature. The mixture was washed 3 times with 0.2% Tween 20 in PBS. The precleared lysates were incubated with the mixture of PHA- L and streptavidin-sepharose or streptavidin-sepharose alone for 24 hours in +4 °C. The beads were washed 7 times with 0.2% Tween 20 in PBS, 2 times with PBS, and 1 time with Milli-Q water. Bound proteins were eluted with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 5 mM tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 in +95 °C for 10 minutes. Guanidine hydrochloride was diluted to 2 M and eluted samples were digested with 1:50 (w/v) trypsin (Thermo Scientific) overnight at +37 °C. Following digestion, the reactions were quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid at a final concentration of approximately 0.5% (pH ~2), desalted on tC18 SepPak 96-well plate (Waters), and dried by vacuum centrifugation (Heto Lab).  Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were loaded on in-house packed 100 μm x 2 cm precolumn packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads using 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 75 μm x 15 cm analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads. All separations were performed using a 30 minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient ranged from 12% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to 45% buffer B in 25 minutes. Buffer B concentration was ramped up to 100% in 2 minutes and 100% buffer B was run 3 minutes for washout. The DDA method consisted of a full MS scan (120,000 resolution, 3E6 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 100 ms maximum injection time, 300 to 1750 m/z, profile mode), followed by data-dependent MS/MS acquisitions on the top 20 most intense precursor ions (15,000 resolution, 5E4 AGC target, 200 ms maximum injection time, 2.0 m/z isolation window, 27% normalized collision energy, centroid mode).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with Metamorpheus (version 0.0.304) against human, murine or green monkey proteomes containing known post-translational modifications. Mass spectrometry files were calibrated, possible post- translational modifications were searched, and peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using FlashLFQ algorithm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a constant modification and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. All other possible modifications were set using G-DPM search in Metamorpheus. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR at PSM level. Peptides were accepted with search engine score above 5.

### Publication Abstract
The ErbB4 receptor isoforms JM-a and JM-b differ within their extracellular juxtamembrane (eJM) domains. Here, ErbB4 isoforms are used as a model to address the effect of structural variation in the eJM domain of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) on downstream signaling. A specific JM-a-like sequence motif is discovered, and its presence or absence (in JM-b-like RTKs) in the eJM domains of several RTKs is demonstrated to dictate selective STAT activation. STAT5a activation by RTKs including the JM-a like motif is shown to involve interaction with oligosaccharides of N-glycosylated cell surface proteins such as &#x3b2;1 integrin, whereas STAT5b activation by JM-b is dependent on TYK2. ErbB4 JM-a- and JM-b-like RTKs are shown to associate with specific signaling complexes at different cell surface compartments using analyses of RTK interactomes and super-resolution imaging. These findings provide evidence for a conserved mechanism linking a ubiquitous extracellular motif in RTKs with selective intracellular STAT signaling.

### Keywords
N-lectin, Streptavidin pull down

### Affiliations
Medicity Research Laboratories and Institute of Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Finland Turku Bioscience Center, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Finland
Turku Bioscience
University of Turku

### Submitter
Johannes Merilahti

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Elenius
Medicity Research Laboratories and Institute of Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Finland Turku Bioscience Center, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Finland


