### Accession
PXD021577

### Title
Dietary protein  in vitro digest (LC-MS)

### Description
16 dietary protein preparations were digested according to a standardized invitro digestion (InfoGest) protocol, simulating gastrointestinal digestion. Resulting oligopeptide mixtures were subsequently analyzed by UPLC-MS using DDA shot-gun detection. Peak intensity data from MS1 spectra were obtained using Progenesis QI. MS1 peak data were matched and filtered based on overlap with the reference digest of Whey protein using a custom made script in R. MSMS fragmentation spectra were converted to .mgf format and de novo interpreted using SearchGUI 3.3.17 and RapidNOVOR algorithm. Raw data, peak intensity tables and de novo interpretaion data are provided.

### Sample Protocol
Static in vitro digestion  We used an in vitro predigested method according to the widely accepted INFOGEST protocol. This protocol takes the variety of key digestive parameters into account to create a representation of the physiological digestive fluids.   In short, the oral phase was achieved by mixing 50:50 (w/v) protein in electrolyte stock solution (XXX) containing human salivary α-amylase (75 U/mL) and addition of CaCl2 to reach 0.75mM. The oral phase was maintained for 2 minutes at 37℃. Thereafter, the gastric phase was started by mixing food and gastric electrolyte stock to a 50:50 (v/v) ratio. Porcine pepsin (2000 U/mL), CaCl2 to reach 0.075mM and 1M HCl to reach pH 3.0 was added and maintained for 2h at 37℃. Finally, gastric chyme and intestinal electrolyte stock was mixed to a 50:50 (v/v) ratio. First, pH was neutralized to 7.0 by addition of 1M NaOH. Pancreatin was added based on trypsin activity (10 U/mL), bile salts (final 10mM) and CaCl2 (0.3mM) were added. The intestinal phase was incubated for 2h at 37℃. After in vitro digestion, samples were assessed for protein content according the Dumas method. Proteomics IN vitro protein digests were analyzed on a UPLC-MS system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 online connected to QexactivePLUS (Thermofisher, Waltham, U.S.A). Samples were injected (10microliter) on a pentafluorophenyl F5 core-shell column (Kinetex F5, 15cm *2.1mm, 2.6 micrometer particles, Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) operated at 30oC and flow rate of 0.2 ml per minute. Total run time was developed over a 40 minutes time window: Starting with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) for 5 minutes and separated with a gradient of 0% to 30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 100% Acetonitrile) during 20 minutes, increasing to 80% B in 5 minutes, stable at 80% B for 3 minutes and back to 0% B during 2 minutes, and stable at 0% B for 5 minutes. Separated peptides were on-line injected into the QexactivePLUS using the standard ESI source in positive mode, with 3.5kV spray voltage, 290oC capillary temperature, nitrogen sheath gas flow 40 and auxillary gas flow 10 heated at 60oC. MS spectra were collected with alternating scans; first within a m/z range of 70- 380, followed by MS scan within a range of 350- 1200 m/z at 70000 resolution (profile) and AGC target of 3*10e6 ions maxIT for 100 milliseconds; followed with data-dependent switch to MSMS mode at 17500 resolution (centroid) at AGC target 10e5 ions, minimum AGC 8*10e3, maxIT 50 millliseconds and 4 m/z isolation window, loop count 5, a dynamic exclusion of 10 seconds without further charge exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis LC-MSMS data were loaded per replicate of protein source sample into Progenesis QI software (Non-linear Dynamics, Waters BV, UK). Peak detection was performed with a sensitivity setting of 4 and minimum peak length of 2 seconds. Peptide ion data were exported to a comma separated file per replicate of protein source sample. Individual peptide ion tables were further filtered and processed in Excel and R.  A total of 422697 ion-peaks (summed over all peptide ion tables) were observed and corrected for background noise. First, peaks data with a raw abundance <1*105 was were excluded, excluding 414436 ion-peaks. Second all dietary protein digesta were corrected for digestive enzymes by excluding overlapping ion peaks with the blank. Matching Ccriteria for matching ion peaks between separate samples was based on absolute differences in charge, m/z (±0.003) and retention time (±0.5min).  Overlap with the profile of Whey protein WPC was determined for each sample separately (see below). All protein digesta were matched to WPC by the matching criteria. If an ion-peak matched to multiple WPC ion-peaks, the nearest ion-peak was defined based on the two-dimensional space regarding m/z and retention time, weighing both criteria equally (resulting in 0.003 m/z = 0.5 min retention time). The distance was measured using Pythagoras equation, as shown in the formula. The match with the smallest distance was then selected.  Distance=√((∆〖m/z*(0.5/0.003))〗^2+ ∆〖Retention time〗^2 ) If a peptide had multiple ion-peaks matched to the same ion-peak in WPC, their abundance was merged and shown as total sum. This resulted in a total of 4719 ion-peaks overlapping with WPC and in total 3542 ion-peaks non-overlapping with WPC. These data were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Food security is under increased pressure due to the ever-growing world population. To tackle this, alternative protein sources need to be evaluated for nutritional value, which requires information on digesta peptide composition in comparison to established protein sources and coupling to biological parameters. Here, a combined experimental and computational approach is presented, which compared seventeen protein sources with cow's whey protein concentrate (WPC) as the benchmark. In vitro digestion of proteins was followed by proteomics analysis and statistical model-based clustering. Information on digesta peptide composition resulted in 3 cluster groups, primarily driven by the peptide overlap with the benchmark protein WPC. Functional protein data was then incorporated in the computational model after evaluating the effects of eighteen protein digests on intestinal barrier integrity, viability, brush border enzyme activity, and immune parameters using a bioengineered intestine as microphysiological gut system. This resulted in 6 cluster groups. Biological clustering was driven by viability, brush border enzyme activity, and significant differences in immune parameters. Finally, a combination of proteomic and biological efficacy data resulted in 5 clusters groups, driven by a combination of digesta peptide composition and biological effects. The key finding of our holistic approach is that protein source (animal, plant or alternative derived) is not a driving force behind the delivery of bioactive peptides and their biological efficacy.

### Keywords
Dietary protein;  in vitro digest; lc-ms; de novo

### Affiliations
Wageningen Plant Research,
Wageningen UR, the Netherlands
BU Bioscience, Wageningen Plant Research, Wageningen UR. the Netherlands

### Submitter
Antoine America

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine H.P. America
BU Bioscience, Wageningen Plant Research, Wageningen UR. the Netherlands


