### Accession
PXD034885

### Title
TMT proteomic analysis of tropical quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa willd.) seeds during maturation

### Description
Many limitation factors, such as seed pre-harvest sprouting, bitter saponin e.c., greatly restricts quinoa production and popularity. To solves these problems, the underlying mechanism of seed maturation in quinoa was required. In this study, morphological observation, TMT proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) were conducted to investigate the variation of quinoa seed during seed maturation

### Sample Protocol
The accession PI596293, was obtained from Plant Germplasm Quarantine Center, USDA. Accession PI596293, named COLORADO 407D, is a native ecotype from Colorado., the United states, and is early maturing. COLORADO 407D was characterized with a central axis and secondary and tertiary axes, the large, amaranthiform, compact and glomerous inflorescences, large, yellow, sweet seeds. They were sewed in Oct 26, 2017, eared after Dec 10 and harvested on Jan 26, 2018. Inflorescence was collected in both developing stages, respectively. The first stage (Stage I) was 72 days after sewing, and the second stage (Stage II) was 84 days after sewing. Grains from stage I were immature seed (IS), which is in the eve of seed maturation conversion, and grains from stage II were mature seed (MS), edible and dry.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against quinoa database concatenated with reverse decoy database. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search,and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Quinoa (<i>Chenopodium quinoa</i> Willd.), an Andean native crop, is increasingly popular around the world due to its high nutritional content and stress tolerance. The production and the popularity of this strategic global food are greatly restricted by many limiting factors, such as seed pre-harvest sprouting, bitter saponin, <i>etc</i>. To solve these problems, the underlying mechanism of seed maturation in quinoa needs to be investigated. In this study, based on the investigation of morphological characteristics, a quantitative analysis of its global proteome was conducted using the combinational proteomics of tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). The proteome changes related to quinoa seed maturation conversion were monitored to aid its genetic improvement. Typical changes of morphological characteristics were discovered during seed maturation, including mean grain diameter, mean grain thickness, mean hundred-grain weight, palea, episperm color, <i>etc</i>. With TMT proteomics analysis, 581 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were identified. Functional classification analysis and Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that most DAPs involved in photosynthesis were downregulated, indicating low levels of photosynthesis. DAPs that participated in glycolysis, such as glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, pyruvate decarboxylase, and alcohol dehydrogenase, were upregulated to fulfill the increasing requirement of energy consumption during maturation conversion. The storage proteins, such as globulins, legumins, vicilins, and oleosin, were also increased significantly during maturation conversion. Protein-protein interaction analysis and function annotation revealed that the upregulation of oleosin, oil body-associated proteins, and acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 2 resulted in the accumulation of oil in quinoa seeds. The downregulation of &#x3b2;-amyrin 28-oxidase was observed, indicating the decreasing saponin content, during maturation, which makes the quinoa "sweet". By the PRM and qRT-PCR analysis, the expression patterns of most selected DAPs were consistent with the result of TMT proteomics. Our study enhanced the understanding of the maturation conversion in quinoa. This might be the first and most important step toward the genetic improvement of quinoa.

### Keywords
Quinoa, Tmt proteomic, Seed maturation, Regulation mechanism

### Affiliations
Fujian Institute of Subtropical Botany

### Submitter
Zhi-Jun Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-Jun Shen
Fujian Institute of Subtropical Botany


