### Accession
PXD021192

### Title
Proteomic profiling of two distinct populations of extracellular vesicles isolated from human seminal plasma indicates their biogenesis by prostate epithelial cells and potential as biomarker for prostate cancer

### Description
Body fluids contain many populations of extracellular vesicles (EV) that differ in size, cellular origin, molecular composition, and biological activities. EV in seminal plasma are in majority originating from prostate epithelial cells, and hence are also referred to as prostasomes. Nevertheless, EV are also contributed by other accessory sex glands, as well as by the testis and epididymis. In a previous study, we isolated EV from seminal plasma of vasectomized men, thereby excluding contributions from the testis and epididymis, and identified two distinct EV populations with diameters of 50 and 100 nm respectively, each with specific marker proteins. In the current study, we comprehensively analyzed the protein composition of these two EV populations using quantitative Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total 1558 proteins were identified. Of these, ~45% was found only in the isolated 100 nm EV, 1% only in the isolated 50 nm EV, and the remainder in both 100 nm and 50 nm EV. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis suggest that both originate from the prostate, but with distinct biogenesis pathways. Finally, 9 proteins with known prostate specific expression and alternate expression levels in prostate cancer tissue were identified in isolated EV. These data may have potential for the discovery of EV associated prostate cancer biomarkers in blood.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated EV were were denatured and alkylated in 50 ul 8 M Urea, 1 M ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM 2-chloro-acetamide. After 4 fold further dilution with 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and digestion with trypsin (250 ng), peptides were desalted with homemade C-18 stage tips (3 M, St Paul, MN). Peptides were eluted with 80% ACN and, after evaporation of the solvent in the speedvac, dissolved in buffer A (0,1% formic acid). Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75 µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using 140 gradients (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240,000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 15,000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds with injection of ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Maxquant software, version 1.6.3.4. For identification, the Human Uniprot database (Jan 2019) was searched with oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation set as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification, while peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Body fluids contain many populations of extracellular vesicles (EV) that differ in size, cellular origin, molecular composition, and biological activities. EV in seminal plasma are in majority originating from prostate epithelial cells, and hence are also referred to as prostasomes. Nevertheless, EV are also contributed by other accessory sex glands, as well as by the testis and epididymis. In a previous study, we isolated EV from seminal plasma of vasectomized men, thereby excluding contributions from the testis and epididymis, and identified two distinct EV populations with diameters of 50 and 100 nm, respectively. In the current study, we comprehensively analyzed the protein composition of these two EV populations using quantitative Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total 1558 proteins were identified. Of these, &#x2248;45% was found only in the isolated 100 nm EV, 1% only in the isolated 50 nm EV, and 54% in both 100 nm and 50 nm EV. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis suggest that both originate from the prostate, but with distinct biogenesis pathways. Finally, nine proteins, including KLK3, KLK2, MSMB, NEFH, PSCA, PABPC1, TGM4, ALOX15B, and ANO7, with known prostate specific expression and alternate expression levels in prostate cancer tissue were identified. These data have potential for the discovery of EV associated prostate cancer biomarkers in blood.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; prostasomes; proteomic; subtypes; seminal fluid

### Affiliations
Department of Biomolecular Health Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Willem Stoorvogel
Department of Biomolecular Health Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


