### Accession
PXD009611

### Title
Peptidomic Analysis of Natural Substrates of the Promiscuous Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme

### Description
In the current study we exploit this technical advantage to maximize discovery of possible substrates and products of ACE present in plasma

### Sample Protocol
Plasma from five ACE knockout male mice was pooled and subjected to organo-acidic protein precipitation. For this, 1 ml of pooled plasma was mixed with acetonitrile followed by trichloroacetic acid (TCA), 20% final concentration each. Following 30 min incubation on ice, the proteins were precipitated by centrifugation for 30 min at 17,000 × g, 4°C. The supernatant, containing peptides, was lyophilized and resuspended in 500 µL LC/MS-grade water. In order to obtain peptides smaller than 5,000 Da, the sample was, then, subjected to size exclusion gel filtration gravity-driven chromatography, using 1mL spin columns with 10µm pore (Mo Bi Tec) filled with  Sephadex® G-25, fine, gel filtration medium (Sigma) and 5% aqueous solution of formic acid as an eluent. The resulting peptide solution was concentrated and desalted on a C-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridge column (OASIS® HLB, Waters corp.) by eluting with 5% formic acid in methanol, followed by lyophilization . Ex-vivo ACE cleavage:  Assisted by sonication, the lyophilized peptides were gradually dissolved in 300 µL HEPES buffer. Stable isotope-labeled peptide standards were added in a final concentration of 50 fmol/µL each. The peptide solution was equally divided onto three tubes and incubated for 30 min at 37°C using an Eppendorf Thermomixer R at 300 rpm with WT ACE, without ACE, or with acid-inactivated ACE (the pH of the sample solution was lowered to 3 with trifluoroacetic acid prior to addition of the enzyme). In other experiments that were aimed to determine the catalytic domain specificity, the peptides were incubated with WT ACE, NKO ACE, or without addition of ACE. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by lowering the pH to 3 with TFA. The peptides were purified on a C-18 SPE cartridge column and lyophilized. For subsequent mass spectrometry analysis, lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 100 µL of 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and filtered through a 0.22 µm PVDF membrane.  Liquid chromatography (LC)/mass spectrometry (MS) analysis: Complex peptide samples were subjected to high resolution nano-Electrospray MS and MS/MS analysis on an orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with EasyNano LC and Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC systems, using the orbi-orbi mode in the positive ion detection mode.  The chromatographic separation of the samples was carried out on an EASY-Spray™ C18 PepMap® rapid separation LC analytical column equipped with a nanoViper™ connection (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm, 100 Å pores, Thermo Scientific), preceded by an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC trapping column (3 µm,75 µm x 2 cm, 100 Å pores, Thermo Scientific). The samples were analyzed in triplicates and the injected sample volume was 1 µL .

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition and presentation was controlled with the Xcalibur™ 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific). Ion chromatograms were processed and aligned with Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics/Waters). For the targeted analysis, the peptide signal profiles were filtered based on the following selection criteria: p value<0.05 and inter-sample peak intensity fold change>2.0. Also, the ion signals that upon ACE treatment lost intensity were considered to represent putative ACE substrates, whereas, signals that gained intensity were considered to represent putative ACE products. With the freshly prepared list of retention times and m/z targets, the samples were reanalyzed with the mass spectrometer, but this time only selected peptide ions were isolated, allowing for a more efficient fragmentation process. The resulting MS and MS2 data was independently analyzed with PEAKS 8.5 and Proteome Discoverer 2.1 for identification of peptide amino acid sequences and protein assignment. In the PEAKS software, FDRs of 4.0% for peptide-spectrum matchesand 1.5% for protein sequences were used as refining criteria. The Proteome Discoverer output data was further visualized and validated with the Scaffold 4.0 proteome software with a peptide threshold set to 95.0% probability. In addition to the database-assisted peptide identification (mouse NCBI nr database with Parent Mass Error Tolerance set on 10.0 ppm and Fragment Mass Error Tolerance set on 0.01 Da), de novo sequencing was carried out on PEAKS using ALC Score ≥95% for data refinement. In some cases when substrates, but no products were detected, MS/MS evidence for the expected products were searched manually, and the supportive MS/MS fragmentation pattern was extracted and annotated. All identified ACE substrate sequences were submitted to the WebLogo 3.5 application in FASTA format to create the sequence logo depicting the relative frequency and chemical nature of the amino acids at each position of the ACE substrate sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) converts angiotensin I into the potent vasoconstrictor angiotensin II, which regulates blood pressure. However, ACE activity is also essential for other physiological functions, presumably through processing of peptides unrelated to angiotensin. The goal of this study was to identify novel natural substrates and products of ACE through a series of mass-spectrometric experiments. This included comparing the ACE-treated and untreated plasma peptidomes of ACE-knockout (KO) mice, validation with select synthetic peptides, and a quantitative in vivo study of ACE substrates in mice with distinct genetic ACE backgrounds. In total, 244 natural peptides were identified ex vivo as possible substrates or products of ACE, demonstrating high promiscuity of the enzyme. ACE prefers to cleave substrates with Phe or Leu at the C-terminal P2' position and Gly in the P6 position. Pro in P1' and Iso in P1 are typical residues in peptides that ACE does not cleave. Several of the novel ACE substrates are known to have biological activities, including a fragment of complement C3, the spasmogenic C3f, which was processed by ACE ex vivo and in vitro. Analyses with N-domain-inactive (NKO) ACE allowed clarification of domain selectivity toward substrates. The in vivo ACE-substrate concentrations in WT, transgenic ACE-KO, NKO, and CKO mice correspond well with the in vitro observations in that higher levels of the ACE substrates were observed when the processing domain was knocked out. This study highlights the vast extent of ACE promiscuity and provides a valuable platform for further investigations of ACE functionality.

### Keywords
Peptidomics

### Affiliations
City of Hope Medical Center, Beckman Research Institute,
Department of Molecular Imaging and Therapy

Director, Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Core, City of Hope, Beckman Research Institute, Diabetes & Metabolism Research Institute, Department of Molecular Imaging and Therapy,

### Submitter
Margarita (Rita) Semis

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Kalkum
Director, Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Core, City of Hope, Beckman Research Institute, Diabetes & Metabolism Research Institute, Department of Molecular Imaging and Therapy,


