### Accession
PXD017351

### Title
Ssrp1 co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry

### Description
Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) were usually silenced by various histone modifications on histone H3 variants and respective histone chaperones in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, it is still unknown whether chaperones of other histones could repress ERVs. Here, we show that H2A/H2B histone chaperone FACT plays a critical role in silencing ERVs and ERV-derived cryptic promoters in ESCs. Loss of FACT component Ssrp1 activated MERVL whereas the re-introduction of Ssrp1 rescued the phenotype. Additionally, Ssrp1 interacted with MERVL and suppressed cryptic transcription of MERVL-fused genes. Remarkably, Ssrp1 interacted with and recruited H2B deubiquitinase Usp7 to Ssrp1 target genes. Suppression of Usp7 caused similar phenotypes as loss of Ssrp1. Furthermore, Usp7 acted by deubiquitinating H2Bub and thereby repressed the expression of MERVL-fused genes. Taken together, our study uncovers a unique mechanism by which FACT complex silences ERVs and ERV-derived cryptic promoters in ESCs.

### Sample Protocol
E14 ESCs expressing 3HA-Ssrp1 and control E14 ESCs expressing pCAG-3HA were used were washed with pre-cooled PBS and lysed in 1 ml pre-cooled lysis buffer (20 mM Tris [pH = 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton-100, 20 mM KCl, 1% Glycine, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and protease inhibitor cocktail). The cell lysate was pre-cleared and immunoprecipitated with anti-HA magnetic beads (b26202, Bimake). Beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer and twice with wash buffer (50 mM Tris [pH = 8.0], 300 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-100, 1 mM EDTA). Proteins were eluted in elution buffer (50 mM Tris [pH = 7.5], 1% SDS, 10 mM EDTA), and loaded to 10% SDS-PAGE for silver-staining and Mass-Spectrometry (MS). For mass spectrometry, proteins were digested, labeled and loaded to EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Unique peptides were used for the determination of protein enrichment in corresponding samples. Proteins in GO:0005856 (cytoskeleton) were removed from the protein list before analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) were usually silenced by various histone modifications on histone H3 variants and respective histone chaperones in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, it is still unknown whether chaperones of other histones could repress ERVs. Here, we show that H2A/H2B histone chaperone FACT plays a critical role in silencing ERVs and ERV-derived cryptic promoters in ESCs. Loss of FACT component Ssrp1 activated MERVL whereas the re-introduction of Ssrp1 rescued the phenotype. Additionally, Ssrp1 interacted with MERVL and suppressed cryptic transcription of MERVL-fused genes. Remarkably, Ssrp1 interacted with and recruited H2B deubiquitinase Usp7 to Ssrp1 target genes. Suppression of Usp7 caused similar phenotypes as loss of Ssrp1. Furthermore, Usp7 acted by deubiquitinating H2Bub and thereby repressed the expression of MERVL-fused genes. Taken together, our study uncovers a unique mechanism by which FACT complex silences ERVs and ERV-derived cryptic promoters in ESCs.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Ssrp1, Esc, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Nankai University
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China; College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

### Submitter
Weiyu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xinyi Lu
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China; College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.


