### Accession
PXD009352

### Title
Heat stress-responsive proteomics and phosphoproteomics in spinach

### Description
Elevated temperature limits plant growth and reproduction and poses a growing threat to agriculture. Plant heat stress response is highly conserved and fine-tuned in multiple pathways. Spinach (Spinacia oleracea L.) is a cold tolerant but heat sensitive green leafy vegetable. In this study, heat adaptation mechanisms in spinach sibling inbred heat-tolerant line Sp75 were investigated using physiology, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics approaches. The abundance patterns of 911 heat stress-responsive proteins, and phosphorylation level changes of 48 phosphopeptides representing 45 phosphoproteins indicated that heat induced calcium-mediated signaling, ROS homeostasis, endomembrane trafficking, and cross-membrane transport pathways, as well as > 15 transcription regulation factors. Although photosynthesis was inhibited, diverse primary and secondary metabolisms were employed for enhancing thermotolerance, such as glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, amino acid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, vitamin metabolism, and isoprenoid biosynthesis. These data constitutes a heat stress-responsive metabolic atlas in spinach, which will springboard further investigation into the sophisticated molecular mechanism of plant heat adaptation and inform spinach molecular breeding initiatives.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein sample preparation for proteomics Total leaf protein was extracted from four biological replicate samples for each treatment using a phenol extraction protocol (Wang et al., 2010). Protein pellets were dissolved in a lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.04 M DTT, 4% proteinase inhibitor cocktail). The protein concentration was determined using a 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin digestion and iTRAQ labeling For each sample, 100 μg protein was mixed with 100 μl 0.05 M NH4HCO3 in Vivaspin centrifugal concentrators with a molecular weight cutoff of 10 kDa (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany), followed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm at 18 °C for 15 min. The protein sample was reduced using 50 mM DTT in 7 M guanidine-HCl (pH 8.0) at 45 °C for 1 h, and then alkylated using 125 mM iodoacetamide in 7 M guanidine-HCl (pH 8.0) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature followed by centrifugation. The resulting concentrate was washed three times with 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5. Trypsin was added to the samples at 1:50 (w/w, trypsin: sample) and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The tryptic peptides were labeled with iTRAQ 8plex reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). iTRAQ tags 113 and 117, 114 and 118, 115 and 119, and 116 and 121 were used to label samples of 0 h of heat treatment (HHT), 24 HHT, 48 HHT, and 72 HHT, respectively. Two sets of iTRAQ kits were used for labeling the samples from four biological replicates. After labeling, the samples were combined, divided into two aliquots and lyophilized. Peptides from one aliquot were fractioned and desalted before it was used for heat stress-responsive protein (HRP) analysis, and peptides from the other aliquot were used for heat stress-responsive phosphoprotein analysis. 3. Protein fractionation and desalination The peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.02 M ammonium formate, pH 10.5) and fractionated on a Shimadzu LC-20A HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with a XBridge C18 column (150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 800 μl/min with a linear gradient of 5-55% solvent B (0.02 M ammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile, pH 10.5) over 42 min followed by ramping up to 90% solvent B in 1 min and holding for 4 min. The fractions were lyophilized and desalted using 3M Empore C18 solid-phase extraction disks (3M Bioanalytical Technologies, St. Paul, MN, USA). 4. Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using TiO2 beads The labeled peptides were resuspended in 500 μl loading buffer (1% glutamic acid/65% acetonitrile/2% trifluoroacetic acid). TiO2 beads were added and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature. After centrifugation, the mixture was washed twice using wash buffer I (65% acetonitrile/0.5% trifluoroacetic acid) and wash buffer II (65% acetonitrile/ 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), respectively. The phosphopeptides were then eluted with elution buffer I (0.3 M NH4OH/50% acetonitrile) and then elution buffer II (0.5 M NH4OH/60% acetonitrile). The eluted peptides were lyophilized and stored in -20 oC. 5. LC-MS/MS and data analysis Samples were reconstituted in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by online nanoAcquity ultraperformance LC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Nanospary was controlled by a PicoView Nanospray Source (PV550; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) at a spray voltage of 1.9 kV. The peptides were trapped by a 2G‐V/MT Trap symmetry C18 column (5 μm particles, 180 μm ID × 20 mm length) at the flow rate of 3 μl min−1 for 5 min, and separated on a BEH130 C18 analytical column (1.7 μm particles, 100 μm ID × 250 mm length) at 250 nl min−1. Peptides were eluted using mobile phases consisting of solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (ACN/0.1% FA) through a linear gradient from 10% to 35%, and then 85% of solvent B at a duration of 180 min. Data‐dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed following a full MS survey scan by Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 over the m/z range of 300–1800, and MS/MS measurements of the top 20 most intense precursor ions. The target values of automatic gain controls (AGC) were set up to 300,000 for Orbitrap MS and 50,000 for ion‐trap MS/MS detection. The fragmentations of the selected multiply charged ions were achieved using helium gas and argon at a normalized collision energy of 35% for CID and HCD, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a protein database (27,376 sequences, http://www.spinachbase.org/cgi-bin/spinach/index.cgi) (Xu et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2017) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The Sequest HT algorithm was used for protein identification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with two maximum missing cleavages. Mass error of precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ-8plex (N-term) and iTRAQ-8plex (K) were set as static modifications, and oxidation on methione was specified as dynamic modifications. For phosphopeptide identification, a dynamic modification of phosphorylation (S/T/Y) was added to the above criteria. A strict and relaxed target false discovery rate was set as 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. Quantification was performed using iTRAQ reporter ion peak intensities. Proteins considered as reliably identified should meet the following criteria: number of unique peptides ≥ 2, number of razor peptides ≤ 1, and proteins false discovery rate ≤ 1%. The criteria for reliable phosphopeptides include: confidence = high, ambiguity = unambiguous, unique quantification, containing phosphorylation modification, number of protein group = 1, rank A Sequest HT = 1, and delta Cn A Sequest HT = 0. The ratio between samples was calculated using reporter ion intensity and normalized to the sum ratio of all identified spectra that fit above criteria. To designate the HRPs and heat stress-responsive phosphopeptides, a Student’s t-test p < 0.05 and fold change > 1.2 across the treatment and control samples in at least three replicates were applied. Moreover, a heat stress-responsive phosphopeptide should also meet another criterion that the fold change of peptide abundance should be higher than the corresponding protein.

### Publication Abstract
Elevated temperatures limit plant growth and reproduction and pose a growing threat to agriculture. Plant heat stress response is highly conserved and fine-tuned in multiple pathways. Spinach (<i>Spinacia oleracea</i> L.) is a cold tolerant but heat sensitive green leafy vegetable. In this study, heat adaptation mechanisms in a spinach sibling inbred heat-tolerant line Sp75 were investigated using physiological, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic approaches. The abundance patterns of 911 heat stress-responsive proteins, and phosphorylation level changes of 45 phosphoproteins indicated heat-induced calcium-mediated signaling, ROS homeostasis, endomembrane trafficking, and cross-membrane transport pathways, as well as more than 15 transcription regulation factors. Although photosynthesis was inhibited, diverse primary and secondary metabolic pathways were employed for defense against heat stress, such as glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, amino acid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, vitamin metabolism, and isoprenoid biosynthesis. These data constitute a heat stress-responsive metabolic atlas in spinach, which will springboard further investigations into the sophisticated molecular mechanisms of plant heat adaptation and inform spinach molecular breeding initiatives.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Leaf, Spinach, Heat stress

### Affiliations
NEFU
Northeast Forestry University

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaojun Dai
Northeast Forestry University


