### Accession
PXD024487

### Title
SPIN - Species by Proteome INvestigation

### Description
Species determination based on genetic evidence is an indispensable tool in archaeology, forensics, ecology, and food authentication. Most available analytical approaches involve compromises with regard to the number of detectable species, high cost due to low throughput, or a labor-intensive manual process. Here, we introduce “Species by Proteome INvestigation” (SPIN), a shotgun proteomics workflow capable of querying over 150 mammalian species by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Rapid peptide chromatography and data-independent acquisition (DIA) with throughput of 200 samples per day reduce expensive MS time, whereas streamlined sample preparation and automated data interpretation save labor costs. We confirmed the successful classification of known reference bones, including domestic species and great apes, beyond the taxonomic resolution of the conventional peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF)-based Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry (ZooMS) method. In a blinded study of degraded Iron-Age material from Scandinavia, SPIN produced reproducible results between replicates, which were consistent with morphological analysis. Finally, we demonstrated the high throughput capabilities of the method in a high-degradation context by analyzing more than two hundred Middle and Upper Palaeolithic bones from Southern European sites with late Neanderthal occupation. While this initial study was focused on modern and archaeological mammalian bone, SPIN will be open and expandable to other biological tissues and taxa.

### Sample Protocol
Bone samples were collected by drilling or scraping. Bone powder was demineralized and proteins extracted in a 5 % HCl 0.1 % NP-40 buffer. Reduction with TCEP followed by alkylation with NEM. Proteins were cleaned by Protein Aggregation Capture using Chemicell Sulfone beads and 60 % ACN. After washing with 70 % ACN, 80 % EtOH, and 100 % ACN, on-bead digestion with LysC and trypsin was carried out in Tris buffer. Peptides were directly loaded on Evotips, before LC-MS/MS on an Evosep One coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480. Data were acquired in DDA mode using 11 min gradients (100 samples per day) or DIA mode using 5.6 min gradients (200 samples/day).

### Data Protocol
Peptides in DDA data were identified with Maxquant version 1.0.6.17. Peptides in DIA data wee identified with Spectronaut, either using the libraries (analyzed with Maxquant) or with DirectDIA. All searches were done with semi-specific tryptic specificity. Downstream analysis for species determination was done using R scripts provided with the publication.

### Publication Abstract
Species determination based on genetic evidence is an indispensable tool in archaeology, forensics, ecology, and food authentication. Most available analytical approaches involve compromises with regard to the number of detectable species, high cost due to low throughput, or a labor-intensive manual process. Here, we introduce "Species by Proteome INvestigation" (SPIN), a shotgun proteomics workflow for analyzing archaeological bone capable of querying over 150 mammalian species by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Rapid peptide chromatography and data-independent acquisition (DIA) with throughput of 200 samples per day reduce expensive MS time, whereas streamlined sample preparation and automated data interpretation save labor costs. We confirm the successful classification of known reference bones, including domestic species and great apes, beyond the taxonomic resolution of the conventional peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF)-based Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry (ZooMS) method. In a blinded study of degraded Iron-Age material from Scandinavia, SPIN produces reproducible results between replicates, which are consistent with morphological analysis. Finally, we demonstrate the high throughput capabilities of the method in a high-degradation context by analyzing more than two hundred Middle and Upper Palaeolithic bones from Southern European sites with late Neanderthal occupation. While this initial study is focused on modern and archaeological mammalian bone, SPIN will be open and expandable to other biological tissues and taxa.

### Keywords
Dda, Evosep, Orbitrap exploris 480, Palaeoproteomics, Dia, Species identification

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research - University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Patrick Ruether

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


