### Accession
PXD014423

### Title
COPZ1 depletion in thyroid tumor cells triggers type-I IFN response and immunogenic cell death

### Description
Thyroid carcinoma (TC) is generally associated with good prognosis, nevertheless no effective treatments are available for aggressive forms not cured by current therapies. We previously identified the coatomer protein complex zeta 1 (COPZ1), as a new putative therapeutic target for TC, since its depletion impairs the viability of tumor cells, leads to abortive autophagy, ER stress, unfolded protein response and apoptosis, and reduces the tumor growth of TC xenograft models. In this study, by combining genomic, proteomic and functional approaches, we provided evidence that COPZ1 silencing stimulates a type I IFN-mediated viral mimicry response, boosts the production of several inflammatory molecules and finally induces immunogenic cell death, which, in turn, promotes dendritic cell maturation and subsequent activation of T cells. Collectively, our findings support the notion that COPZ1 targeting can be exploited as a new strategy to kill cancer cells with the subsequent involvement of an anti-tumor immune response.   

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and conditioned media TPC-1 (papillary thyroid carcinoma) and 8505C (anaplastic thyroid carcinoma) cells were obtained from Prof. A. Fusco (University Federico II, Naples, IT), Nthy-ori 3–1 cell line (SV-40 immortalized normal human thyroid follicular cells) was purchased from European Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC) (Salisbury, UK),  THP-1 cells ( acute monocytic leukemia) were purchased from ATCC  (Manassas, VA, USA). TPC-1 and 8505C cells were maintained in DMEM (Gibco, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (EuroClone, Pero, Italy), 2 mM glutamine, penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 mg/ml), whereas Nhy-ori 3-1 and THP-1 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). All cell lines were cultured as monolayer at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere. Thyroid cell lines were genotyped at the Fragment Analysis Facility of Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, using Stem Elite ID System (Promega Corporation, Madison, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and ATCC guidelines. The profiles obtained matched to their original profiles {Schweppe, 2008 7426 /id}{Zhao, 2011 9027 /id}. Mycoplasma contamination was tested periodically and found negative in all cell lines (PCR Mycoplasma Detection Set, TAKARA Bio Inc). Conditioned media (CM), obtained by incubating subconfluent cultures for different time after siRNA transfection, were used for cell culture and secretome analysis. siRNA transfection siRNA transfection was performed using 20 nM of the following siRNA oligos siCOPZ1:MISSION esiRNA EHU1040461, siRNA  Universal Negative Control #1 SIC001 (non-targeting: siNT) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and the Lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA)), according to manufacturer's instruction.  Gene Expression Profiling  Total RNA samples were processed according to manufacturer’s procedure for global gene expression profiling by means of GeneChip® Human Gene 2.0 ST arrays (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, CA). Normalized expression values were obtained using Robust Multi Array Average (RMA) procedure and a custom annotation pipeline based on GENCODE v25 {Ronchetti, 2018 9640 /id} was applied to analyze the expression levels of 18.642 specific Ensembl (version 87) genes. Most variable genes across the entire panel (average change in expression levels varying at least two fold from the mean) were investigated by applying a hierarchical agglomerative clustering (Pearson's correlation and average linkage methods), using DNA-Chip Analyzer software {Schadt, 2001 9060 /id}. Supervised analyses were carried out by means of the Significant Analysis of Microarrays software version 5.00 {Tusher, 2001 9641 /id} using the web application provided in the shiny package of the R software (https://github.com/MikeJSeo/SAM). The cut-off point for statistical significance (at a q-value 0) was determined by tuning the Δ parameter on the false discovery rate and controlling the q-value of the selected probes. The resulting list of differentially expressed genes was investigated by means of the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) 6.8 tool (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Functional annotation clustering was performed on Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process (BP), Molecular Function (MF) and Cellular Components (CC) terms at high classification stringency. Significant annotation clusters (Enrichment Score, ES> 2) were selected and representative GO terms were indicated for each cluster. Global functional annotation studies were performed in TPC-1 cells, at 72h after siRNA transfection, by means of Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) {Subramanian, 2005 9419 /id} on KEGG, Reactome and Hallmark gene set collections (v6.2), respectively. Significant gene sets were selected at nominal p-value <0.05 and FDR q-value < 5%, after 500 gene set permutations

### Data Protocol
Cells were lysed in 50 µL of 0.1% RapidGest SF Surfactant (Waters) and diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). After reduction and derivatisation, the proteins were digested with trypsin sequence grade (Roche) for 16 h at 37 °C using a protein:trypsin ratio of 20:1  {Iametti, 2001 9642 /id}. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm in length and with an internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective). The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) {Coccetti, 2008 9643 /id}. Four technical replicate analyses of each sample were performed. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were analysed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human Uniprot sequence database (release 29.06.2015). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm {Cox, 2008 9644 /id} using fast LFQ. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide level and 1% at the protein level. Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.4.0.6, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/) {Zanotti, 2016 9645 /id}. Only proteins present and quantified in at least 2 out of 3 technical repeats were considered as positively identified. An ANOVA test (false discovery rate 0.05) was carried out to identify proteins differentially expressed among the two time points of treatment. In particular, we focused on the differential proteomics between proteins expressed in siNT cells (control) in comparison to proteins expressed in siCOPZ1 cells for 48h. Differential expression was considered as significant if (1) a protein was present only in siNT or siCOPZ1 cells or (2) its normalised intensity (according to the LFQ algorithm) resulted in a statistical difference, as calculated by the welch’s t-test (FDR 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The coatomer protein complex zeta 1 (COPZ1) represents a non-oncogene addiction for thyroid cancer (TC); its depletion impairs the viability of thyroid tumor cells, leads to abortive autophagy, ER stress, UPR and apoptosis, and reduces tumor growth of TC xenograft models. In this study we investigated the molecular pathways activated by COPZ1 depletion and the paracrine effects on cellular microenvironment and immune response. By comprehensive and target approaches we demonstrated that COPZ1 depletion in TPC-1 and 8505C thyroid tumor cell lines activates type I IFN pathway and viral mimicry responses. The secretome from COPZ1-depleted cells was enriched for several inflammatory molecules and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). Moreover, we found that dendritic cells, exposed to these secretomes, expressed high levels of differentiation and maturation markers, and stimulated the proliferation of na&#xef;ve T cells. Interestingly, T cells stimulated with COPZ1-depleted cells showed increased cytotoxic activity against parental tumor cells. Collectively, our findings support the notion that targeting COPZ1 may represent a promising therapeutic approach for TC, considering its specificity for cancer cells, the lack of effect on normal cells, and the capacity to prompt an anti-tumor immune response.

### Keywords
Proteomics; nano lc-ms-ms; tumor;

### Affiliations
università degli studi di Milano, medicina veterinaria, DIMEVET
University of Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
università degli studi di Milano, medicina veterinaria, DIMEVET


