### Accession
PXD014132

### Title
Interactions between host and gut microbiota following dietary interventions

### Description
Increasing the consumption of dietary fibre has been proposed to alleviate the progression of non-communicable diseases such as obesity, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, yet the effect of dietary fibre on host physiology remains unclear. In this study, we performed a multiple diet feeding study in C57BL/6J mice to compare high fat and high fat modified with dietary fibre diets on host physiology and gut homeostasis by combining proteomic, metagenomic, metabolomic and glycomic techniques with correlation network analysis. We observed significant changes in physiology, liver proteome, gut microbiota and SCFA production in response to high fat diet. Dietary fibre modification did not reverse these changes but was associated with specific changes in the gut microbiota, liver proteome, SCFA production and colonic mucin glycosylation. Furthermore, correlation network analysis identified gut bacterial-glycan associations.

### Sample Protocol
Perfused liver (10 mg) was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis employing SWATH-based proteomics as the quantitation strategy.

### Data Protocol
Library and SWATH-MS data were acquired in a 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer coupled with an Ekspert 415 LC system (Sciex, Australia). Database searches included trypsin as digestion enzyme and carbamidomethylation as fixed cysteine modification, reversed database search was enabled to allow false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, and protein global FDR was established at 1%. Information extracted from SWATH MS peak areas was performed using Peak View Version 2.1 with SWATH MicroApp 2.0 (Sciex) using the library search output file. Perseus Version 1.5.5 was employed for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The colonic mucus layer, comprised of highly <i>O-</i>glycosylated mucins, is vital to mediating host-gut microbiota interactions, yet the impact of dietary changes on colonic mucin <i>O-</i>glycosylation and its associations with the gut microbiota remains unexplored. Here, we used an array of omics techniques including glycomics to examine the effect of dietary fiber consumption on the gut microbiota, colonic mucin <i>O-</i>glycosylation and host physiology of high-fat diet-fed C57BL/6J mice. The high-fat diet group had significantly impaired glucose tolerance and altered liver proteome, gut microbiota composition, and short-chain fatty acid production compared to normal chow diet group. While dietary fiber inclusion did not reverse all high fat-induced modifications, it resulted in specific changes, including an increase in the relative abundance of bacterial families with known fiber digesters and a higher propionate concentration. Conversely, colonic mucin <i>O</i>-glycosylation remained similar between the normal chow and high-fat diet groups, while dietary fiber intervention resulted in major alterations in <i>O</i>-glycosylation. Correlation network analysis revealed previously undescribed associations between specific bacteria and mucin glycan structures. For example, the relative abundance of the bacterium <i>Parabacteroides distasonis</i> positively correlated with glycan structures containing one terminal fucose and correlated negatively with glycans containing two terminal fucose residues or with both an N-acetylneuraminic acid and a sulfate residue. This is the first comprehensive report of the impact of dietary fiber on the colonic mucin <i>O-</i>glycosylation and associations of these mucosal glycans with specific gut bacteria.

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Muc2 glycosylation, - dietary fibre modification, C57bl/6j mice, Correlation network analysis, Liver proteome, Short chain fatty acids

### Affiliations
Lawrence Penn Chair of Bowel Cancer Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney | Northern Clinical School
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Daniel BUCIO NOBLE

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Molloy
Lawrence Penn Chair of Bowel Cancer Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney | Northern Clinical School


