### Accession
PXD032221

### Title
Targeted analysis of PTPN14, YAP1, LATS1 and GFP SH-tagged pulldown

### Description
Targeted analysis of YAP1, LATS1 and PTPN14 interactome

### Sample Protocol
The expression of SH-tagged bait proteins stably integrated in T-REx-HEK 293 Flp-In cells was induced with 1 µg/ml tetracycline for 24 h. For affinity purification three and four (based on bait expression), 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% cell confluency were harvested and the cell pellet was snap frozen. The frozen pellet was lysed with the following buffer (HNN lysis buffer): 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1mM PMSF, 1.2 µM Avidin (IBA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma), using 800 µl of lysis buffer for each lysed cell plate. The lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and subjected to mild sonication (3 times 10 seconds, 35% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) and digestion of nucleic acids via Benzonase (Sigma) (50 U/ml). The cleared cell lysate was incubated with 50ml crosslinked Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA) for 1 h on a rotation shaker. Before the incubation with lysate, beads were crosslinked with 5 mM of di-succinimidylsuberate DSS (Thermo) in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl for 30 minutes at 37 °C with strong agitation and quenched with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 37 °C with strong agitation. Upon washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious ), following the FASP protocol49. Briefly, beads in solution were centrifuged at 8,000 × g until dryness. Samples were denatured, reduced (8 M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). Each sample was subsequently washed three times by flushing the filter with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group), dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-class system (Waters). Peptides were separated on ACQUITY UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 60 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1800 m/z) at 60,000 resolution, 110 ms injection time and 1e6 AGC target, followed by time scheduled target PRM scans at 60,000 resolution, 119 ms injection time and 2e5 AGC target. Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 2.0 m/z isolation window and fragmented (HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 30%). Scan windows were set to 6 min for each peptide in the final PRM method. The inclusion list with target peptides analyzed is reported.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with three independent biological replicates of YAP1, PTPN14, LATS1, GFP SH tagged purifications. Supplementary Table 4 reports the list of all target peptides and proteins from YAP1 interactome measured in the analysis. Selected peptides from the YAP1 target library were identified and quantified with the same criteria of the experiment outlined above “Target analysis of endogenous purification of YAP1 in HEK293A cell lines”. Peptide intensity values were normalized for the intensity of a peptide present in the SH-tag of all bait proteins (AADITSLYK) and for the intensity of iRT peptides61

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yap1, Lats1, Apms, Ptpn14

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry


