### Accession
PXD031922

### Title
The Dynamic Proteome in Arabidopsis Thaliana Early Embryogenesis

### Description
In this project, we profiled the dynamics of proteome during Arabidopsis early embryogenesis using nanoproteomics. In addition, we identified some proteins which may be important during this process. Combining with RNA-seq, we unveiled the relationship between RNA and proteins during Arabidopsis early embryogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For protein library construction, lysis buffer was added to the sample for sonication. The lysed sample was centrifuged to obtain the supernatant for reduction and alkylation. Protein extracts quality control was gel. For protein identification, 50 μg of protein were dissolved in solution for trypsin digestion. After digestion, samples were desalted and separated into 20 components with High pH RP. For micro-sample, lysis buffer was added to the sample before sonication. Reduction and alkylation were then performed, followed by trypsin digestion. Trypsin digested samples were separated by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC. The sample was first injected into the trap column for enrichment and desalting, then separated with a self-packed C18 column at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. The peptides separated by the liquid phase were ionized by the nanoESI source and entered the tandem mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion TM Lumos TM Tribrid TM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode detection.

### Data Protocol
The raw data of micro-sample and library sample was subject to MaxQuant’s (v.1.5.3.30) integrated Andromeda engine with “match between runs” mode for identification. Parameters were set as follows: Enzyme was set as trypsin; minimal peptide length was set as 7; PSM-level FDR was set as 0.01; protein-level FDR was set as 0.01; match between run was chosen; iBAQ was chosen; LFQ was chosen; fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications was Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N- term), Deamidation(NQ),Gln->pyro-Glu; the search database was Araport11_ genes.201606.pep.fasta which was downloaded from TAIR.

### Publication Abstract
The morphology of the flowering plant is established during early embryogenesis. In recent years, many studies have focused on transcriptional profiling in plant embryogenesis, but the dynamic landscape of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome remains elusive. In this study, Arabidopsis embryos at 2/4-cell, 8-cell, 16-cell, 32-cell, globular and heart stages were collected for nanoproteomic analysis. In total, 5386 proteins were identified. Of these, 1051 proteins were universally identified in all developmental stages and a range of 27 to 2154 proteins was found to be stage specific. These proteins could be grouped into eight clusters according to their expression levels. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that genes involved in ribosome biogenesis and auxin-activated signalling were enriched during early embryogenesis, indicating that active translation and auxin signalling are important events in Arabidopsis embryo development. Combining RNA-sequencing data with the proteomics analysis, the correlation between mRNA and protein was evaluated. An overall positive correlation was found between mRNA and protein. This work provides a comprehensive landscape of the Arabidopsis proteome in early embryogenesis. Some important proteins/transcription factors identified through network analysis may serve as potential targets for future investigation.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Embryogenesis, Proteome

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Yingzhang HUANG

### Lab Head
Dr Dianjing GUO
The Chinese University of Hong Kong


### SDRF
- organism: Arabidopsis thaliana
- organism part: seed
- cell type: embryonic cell
- disease: not available
- label: NT=label free sample
- instrument: NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos

