### Accession
PXD007257

### Title
Insight into cellular proteome of Lolium multiflorum/Festuca arundinacea introgression forms to decipher crucial mechanisms of cold acclimation in forage grasses

### Description
Frost tolerance is the main component of winter-hardiness. To express this trait, plants have to sense low temperature, and respond by activating the process of cold acclimation. The molecular mechanisms of this acclimation have not been fully understood in the agronomically important group of forage grasses, including Lolium-Festuca species. Herein, the introgression forms of L. multiflorum/F. arundinacea distinct with respect to their frost tolerance, were used as models for the comprehensive, proteomic and physiological, research to recognize the crucial components of cold acclimation in forage grasses. The obtained results stressed the importance of photosynthetic performance under acclimation to low temperature. The stable level of photochemical processes after three weeks of cold acclimation in the introgression form with a higher level of frost tolerance, combined simultaneously with the stable level of CO2 assimilation after that period, despite decreased stomatal conductance, indicated the capacity for that form to acclimate its photosynthetic apparatus to low temperature. This phenomenon was driven by the Calvin cycle efficiency, associated with revealed here accumulation profiles and activities of chloroplastic aldolase. The capacity to acclimate the photosynthetic machinery to cold could be one of the most crucial components of forage grass metabolism to improve frost tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
After 2-D analysis, the selected protein spotswere analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to the Orbitrap Velos type mass spectrometer (Thermo), working in the regime of data dependent MS to MS/MS switch, in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences (Warsaw, Poland) as described by Kosmala et al. (2012) and Perlikowski et al. (2014).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller (version 2.6) and subjected to database search with Mascot Server (version 2,4). The search was performed with following parameters: database - Viridiplantae (4,154,593 sequences) from NCBInr (93,482,448 sequences, download at 20160821), enzyme - trypsin, fixed modifications - Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications - Oxidation (M), peptide mass tolerance - 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance - 0.1 Da, instrument - HCD. The results were formatted with Mascot-derived score thresholds.

### Publication Abstract
Frost tolerance is the main component of winter-hardiness. To express this trait, plants sense low temperature, and respond by activating the process of cold acclimation. The molecular mechanisms of this acclimation have not been fully understood in the agronomically important group of forage grasses, including Lolium-Festuca species. Herein, the introgression forms of L. multiflorum/F. arundinacea distinct with respect to their frost tolerance, were used as models for the comprehensive, proteomic and physiological, research to recognize the crucial components of cold acclimation in forage grasses. The obtained results stressed the importance of photosynthetic performance under acclimation to low temperature. The stable level of photochemical processes after three weeks of cold acclimation in the introgression form with a higher level of frost tolerance, combined simultaneously with only slightly (but not significantly) decreased level of CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation after that period, despite significantly lower stomatal conductance, indicated the capacity for that form to acclimate its photosynthesis to low temperature. This phenomenon was driven by the Calvin cycle efficiency, associated with revealed here accumulation profiles and activities of chloroplastic aldolase. The capacity to acclimate the photosynthetic machinery to cold could be one of the most crucial components of forage grass metabolism to improve frost tolerance.

### Keywords
2d gel, Lc-msms, Leaf, Grass

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
IBB PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


