### Accession
PXD025621

### Title
Succinylation profiles of brain injury after intracerebral hemorrhage

### Description
Protein posttranslational modifications (PTMs) has been shown to regulate biological processes of human diseases via expanding the genetic code and for regulating cellular pathophysiology, however, the system-wide changes at the PTMs levels in ICH brain remains little known. Given that succinylation is one of the important PTMs in regulating many biological processes. Therefore, in this study, we used a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based, quantitative succinyllysine proteomics approach to firstly investigated the ICH-associated brain protein succinyllysine modifications. We totally identified the concentration of approximately 6000 succinylation events and quantified approximately 3500 sites. Among them, 25 succinyllysine sites on 23 proteins were increased, while 13 succinyllysine sites on 12 proteins were downregulated after ICH. Additionally, the subcellular localization analysis of these significantly changed succinylproteins showed that 58.3% hyposuccinylated proteins were located in the mitochondria, while the percentage of succinylproteins located in mitochondria was decreased to about 35% in ICH brains with concomitant increasing in the percentage of cytoplasm to 30.4%. Further bioinformatic analysis showed that the succinylated proteins were mostly located in mitochondria and synapse-related subcellular spaces, and participate in many pathophysiological processes, such as metabolism, cytoskeleton organization, synapse working and ferroptosis, etc.. Moreover, we performed a combination analysis of our succinylproteomics data with previously published transcriptome data and found that most of the differentially succinylated proteins were distributed into neurons, endothelial cells and astrocytes. In conclusion, our analyses uncover a number of succinylation-affected processes and pathways in ICH brains and provide new insights for understanding ICH pathophysiological processes.

### Sample Protocol
C57BL/6 mice (male, 8-week-old, 20-24g) were purchased from Byrness Weil Biotech. Ltd. (Chengdu, China). All mice were bred in a temperature-controlled environment and specific-pathogen-free (SPF) conditions with a 12-hour light/dark cycle and free access to water and food. All procedures and animal experiments were approved and conducted in accordance with the Animal Ethics Committee of the Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine. The ICH model was conducted according to our previously developed method (Pan et al., 2018). Briefly, mice were immobilized on the stereotaxic apparatus (RWD Life Science Co, Shenzhen, China) after being anesthetized with 3% isoflurane for induction and 1.5% for maintenance. 0.5 μl of 0.075 IU type VII collagenase (Sigma Aldrich) was injected into the left striatum (0.8 mm anterior and 2 mm lateral of bregma, at a depth of 3.5 mm) using a syringe pump (Hamilton, Bonaduz, AG) at a rate of 0.0625ul/min. The control (sham) group was injected with 0.5 μl saline. During this surgical operation, the animal’s body temperature was maintained at 37℃. Unsuccessful ICH models, such as asymptomatic or dead, evaluated by on a behavioral test (Corner task) were excluded from this study. The perihematomal and contralateral brain tissues at 3 days after ICH were collected for succinylproteomic analysis. The brain samples were grinded by liquid nitrogen and transferred to centrifuge tube with 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM), and followed by sonication three times on ice. Then, the remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to collect the supernatant. The protein concentration was determined with the BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, each brain protein sample had a final concentration of 20%, and incubated in ice water for 2 hours. Subsequently, to get the peptides mixes for LC/LC MS analysis, the protein digestion was performed just as previously research described (Guo et al., 2017).  Then, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and Affinity Enrichment of succinylpeptides was carried out according to previous reports (Colak et al., 2013). Briefly, total peptides incubated with pre-washed succinyllysine antibody beads (PTM-402, PTM Bio, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Jin and Wu, 2016). The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solution A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 9% to 25% solution B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) within 36 min, 25% to 35% within 18 min and climbing to 80% within 3 min then sustaining at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flowrate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separated peptides were analyzed in Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage was 2.2 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 120,000 for a scan range of 350–1600 m/z. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 1E5, with an intensity threshold of 5E4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0) was used to retrieve the secondary mass spectral data in this experiment. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, and up to 4 missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions in the first search and the main search were set as 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. A carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification, and succinylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using pipeline writing with Perl an R.. Statistical analysis of the succinylproteome was performed on logarithmic intensities for those values that were found to be quantified in one experimental condition. The MoMo analysis tool based on Motif-X algorithm was used to analyze the motif characteristics of the succinyllysine sites. To identify significantly modified succinylpeptides, the three-samples replicates analysis were performed and set a P-value cutoff of 0.05. The comparison of relative quantitative value of each modification site between ICH and control (Sham) brains came to differentially succinyllysine sites using student’s T-test with a P-value < 0.05. Categorical annotation was supplied in the form of Gene Ontology (GO) cellular component, biological process, and molecular function, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) for pathway annotation. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially modified protein against all identified proteins. The category with a corrected P-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Motif-x software was used to assess conserved sequence motifs of succinylation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intracerebral hemorrhage; brain injury; succinylation

### Affiliations
Acupuncture and Tuina School/Third Teaching Hospital, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Xiao-Yi Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyi Xiong
Acupuncture and Tuina School/Third Teaching Hospital, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


