### Accession
PXD020743

### Title
Tubulin Tyrosine Ligase Like 4 (TTLL4) overexpression in breast cancer cells alters exosome biogenesis and promotes brain metastasis

### Description
The survival rate is poor in breast cancer patients with brain metastases. Thus, new concepts for therapeutic approaches are required. During metastasis, the cytoskeleton of cancer cells is highly dynamic and therefore cytoskeleton-associated proteins are interesting targets for tumour therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media of MDA-MB-231 cells was collected after 4 days of incubation under standard conditions, then vesicles were purified by differential centrifugation at 4 °C. First at 500 g for 10 min to eliminate detached cells, following 10,000 g for 30 min to pellet cell debris and finally at 100,000 g for 90 min to harvest exosomes. Exosome samples were lysed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Thermo Fisher) and 1% w/w sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma Aldrich) buffer boiled at 95 °C for 5 min and sonicated with a probe sonicator to destroy DNA/RNA. 10 µg of protein was used and reduced in presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at 60°C for 30 min and alkylated in with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min in the dark at 37 °C. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at a 1:100 ration (enzyme to protein) and digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. To stop the reaction and precipitate the SDC, formic acid (FA, Fluka) was added to 1 % final concentration. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16.000 g, the supernatant transferred into a new tube and was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DDA LC-MS/MS data for the IP samples were searched with the Andromeda algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (v 1.6.2 ,Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry) against a reviewed human protein sequence database (Uniprot, EMBL, release April 2020, 20365 entries) and the reviewed bovine protein sequence database (Uniprot, EMBL, release June 2020, 6012 entries) All samples were handled as individual experiments and the label-free quantification option with a match between runs was used. Trypsin was selected as enzyme used to generate peptides, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide mass of 6000 Da was defined. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid was set as variable modification. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification. The error tolerance for the first precursor search was 20 ppm, for the following main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance. The false discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches and proteins was set to 1 %. For Quantification, all identified razor and unique peptides were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Breast cancer, Microtubule, Metastasis, Polyglutamylation

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Department of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Sabine Windhorst
Department of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


