### Accession
PXD030098

### Title
Relative quantification of 15N labeled acinus-2 pinin-1 and 14N labeled Col through Data Dependent Acquisition to obtain peptide information for targeted Parallel Reaction Monitoring experiment

### Description
To examine the properties of 14N and 15N labeled peptides using Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) on a high resolution, high accuracy mass spectrometer we first set up this DDA experiment. The purpose of this experiment was to choose peptides that are good candidates for targeted quantification. The retention times, mass, and charge from 42 candidate peptides were acquired for targeted quantification.

### Sample Protocol
The WT and acinus-2 pinin-1 plants were grown on Hoagland medium containing 14N or 15N (1.34 g/L Hogland’s No. 2 salt mixture without nitrogen, 6 g/L Phytoblend, and 1 g/L KNO3 or 1 g/L K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), pH 5.8). Proteins were extracted from two samples (one 14N-labeled Col, one 15N-labeled acinus-2 pinin-1) followed with protocols as described (Xu et al. 2017) with slight modification. Briefly, samples were first extracted individually using SDS sample buffer (0.1 M Tris⋅HCl, pH 8.0; 2% (wt/vol) SDS; 20 mM EGTA; 20 mM EDTA; 1.2% (vol/vol) Triton X-100; 2x protease inhibitor), then the protein concentration of each sample was measured by BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher), subsequently followed mixture have 1:1 protein concentration mixture. Then Proteins were further extracted by cold phenol extraction. Proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were de-salted using Sep-Pak waters C18 centrifuge columns. The peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher).   Peptides were first trapped using trapping column Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 uM x 2cm, nanoViper 2Pk, C18, 3 µm, 100A), then separated using analytical column Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75um x25cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100A) (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. For DDA acquisition, the precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
A peak list was generated from the raw data (Q20210927_15.raw) using an in-house script PAVA. The peak list was searched using Protein Prospector using TAIR10 (concatenated with random sequences to allow estimation of a false discovery rate) as the reference proteome. The fixed modification set was Carbamidomethyl cysteine. Variable modifications allowed in the search include Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal methionine loss, N-terminal Glutamate to Pyroglutamate Conversion, and N-terminal acetylation. The data was searched with a 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide and protein FDRs were set as 0.01 and 0.05. 15N labeled peptides were searched separately using the same peak list and reference proteome as before. All parameters of the 15N labeled peptide search were the same except substituting the appropriate 15N labeled fixed and variable mods. 15N labeling efficiency was calculated to be 96.1% by manually comparing theoretical isotopic peaks from 9 of the most abundant peptides and averaging them. Quantification: Quantification was done using Protein Prospector which uses the previous 15N and 14N searches along with the 15N labeling efficiency to calculate the L/H ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate relative quantification is critical in proteomic studies. The incorporation of stable isotope <sup>15</sup>N to plant-expressed proteins <i>in vivo</i> is a powerful tool for accurate quantification with a major advantage of reducing preparative and analytical variabilities. However, <sup>15</sup>N labeling quantification has several challenges. Less identifications are often observed in the heavy-labeled samples because of incomplete labeling, resulting in missing values in reciprocal labeling experiments. Inaccurate quantification can happen when there is contamination from co-eluting peptides or chemical noise in the MS<sup>1</sup> survey scan. These drawbacks in quantification can be more pronounced in less abundant but biologically interesting proteins, which often have very few identified peptides. Here, we demonstrate the application of parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to <sup>15</sup>N labeled samples on a high resolution, high mass accuracy Orbitrap mass spectrometer to achieve reliable quantification even of low abundance proteins in samples.

### Keywords
Quantification, Arabidopsis, Data dependent acquisition, Relative quantification, 15n metabolic labeling, Silac, Protein prospector

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford


