### Accession
PXD003961

### Title
Sec62 regulates ER-phagy during recovery from ER stress

### Description
Perturbing ER homeostasis activates stress programs collectively called the unfolded protein response (UPR). The UPR enhances production of ER-resident chaperones and enzymes to reduce the burden of misfolded proteins. Upon resolution of ER stress, excess ER material is removed by ill-defined, selective autophagic programs. Here, using biochemical and cell-based essays, we identify a novel ER-resident autophagy receptor, Sec62, which is activated during recovery from ER stress to selectively deliver ER fragments to the autolysosomal system for clearance. Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses of autolysosomal fractions upon selective inactivation of the Sec62-regulated pathway inform on the selectivity of Sec62-regulated ER-phagy.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were broken by 15 passages through a 25G1 needle. The postnuclear supernatants were loaded below a linear 10–20% OptiPrepTM gradient prepared by mixing a 10% and a 20% OptiPrepTM solution (Axis Shield) with a Gradient Master BiocompTM (angle 80°, speed 20 rev/s, time 90 s). Intracellular organelles were separated by overnight ultracentrifugation at 94,000 g. Fractions were collected from the top and analyzed by WB. For quantitative analysis of protein content in the autolysosomal fraction, the upper fraction of the density gradient was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 94,000 g. Membranes were dissolved in 2% SDS sample buffer and separated by 1D mini-PAGE over a distance of 2.0 cm. Entire gel lanes were excised into 5 equal regions from top to bottom and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega) with standard protocols. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis of extracted peptide mixtures after digestion was carried out on a Fusion tri-hybrid  orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), interfaced to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nano-HPLC. Peptides were separated on a 60 min gradient from 5% to 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 0.3 ul/min on a EasySpray column (75 μm ID x 50 cm, 2.0 μm, 100Åµ, Dionex). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120’000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Tune 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher), the ten most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for collision-induced dissociation and analysis in the ion trap with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and then dynamically excluded from further selection during 60s.Three replicate experiments, each with a Sec62 and a LIR sample were carried out.

### Data Protocol
Data from all five fractions for each sample were pooled for analysis to identify peptides and proteins at 1% FDR) and obtain Label-Free Quantitation (LFQ) with the software MaxQuant incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). The human subset of the UNIPROT database (release 10_2014) was used for searches. Standard parameters were applied for identification, i.e. fixed modification of cysteine to carbamidomethyl-Cys, variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 0.5 Da on tandem MS fragments. Identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein level by comparison against a decoy database. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) of samples was performed by MaxQuant with standard parameters as described (Cox et al., 2014). Data analysis and annotation and statistical tests were done with the Perseus package (Cox and Mann, 2012).   references :  Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2012). 1D and 2D annotation enrichment: a statistical method integrating quantitative proteomics with complementary high-throughput data. BMC Bioinformatics 13 Suppl 1, S12. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R.A., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794–1805. Cox, J., Hein, M.Y., Luber, C. a, Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513–2526.

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a site of protein biogenesis in eukaryotic cells. Perturbing ER homeostasis activates stress programs collectively called the unfolded protein response (UPR). The UPR enhances production of ER-resident chaperones and enzymes to reduce the burden of misfolded proteins. On resolution of ER stress, ill-defined, selective autophagic programs remove excess ER components. Here we identify Sec62, a constituent of the translocon complex regulating protein import in the mammalian ER, as an ER-resident autophagy receptor. Sec62 intervenes during recovery from ER stress to selectively deliver ER components to the autolysosomal system for clearance in a series of events that we name recovER-phagy. Sec62 contains a conserved LC3-interacting region in the C-terminal cytosolic domain that is required for its function in recovER-phagy, but is dispensable for its function in the protein translocation machinery. Our results identify Sec62 as a critical molecular component in maintenance and recovery of ER&#xa0;homeostasis.

### Keywords
Erad, Er stress, Label-free quantitation, Autophagy, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB) Via Vela 6 CH-6500 Bellinzona Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Maurizio Molinari
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB) Via Vela 6 CH-6500 Bellinzona Switzerland


