### Accession
PXD012555

### Title
BioID Assay of BirA*-hARGLU1 or BirA*-hGR in Flp-In T-Rex 293 cells

### Description
ARGLU1 is a Transcriptional Coactivator and Splicing Regulator Important for Stress Hormone Signaling and Development  Stress hormones bind and activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in many tissues including the brain. We identified arginine and glutamate rich 1 (ARGLU1) in a screen for new modulators of glucocorticoid signaling in the CNS. Biochemical studies show that the glutamate rich C-terminus of ARGLU1 coactivates multiple nuclear receptors including the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the arginine rich N-terminus interacts with splicing factors and binds to RNA. RNA-seq of neuronal cells depleted of ARGLU1 revealed significant changes in the expression and alternative splicing of distinct genes involved in neurogenesis. Loss of ARGLU1 is embryonic lethal in mice, and knockdown in zebrafish causes neurodevelopmental and heart defects. Treatment with dexamethasone, a GR activator, also induces changes in the pattern of alternatively spliced genes, many of which were lost when ARGLU1 was absent. Importantly, the genes found to be alternatively spliced in response to glucocorticoid treatment were distinct from those under transcriptional control by GR, suggesting an additional mechanism of glucocorticoid action is present in neuronal cells. Our results thus show that ARGLU1 is a novel factor for embryonic development that modulates basal transcription and alternative splicing in neuronal cells with consequences for glucocorticoid signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Four 100 mm plates (~ 70% confluency) of Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 cells stably expressing BirA*-hARGLU1 or BirA*-hGR were incubated for 24 h in complete growth media supplemented with 1 µg/mL tetracycline (Sigma), 50 µM biotin (BioShop) and 500 nM Dex. Cells were collected (700 x g, 5 min, 4°C), washed twice with ice-cold PBS, snap frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C until analysis. Pellets were then lysed in 10 mL of modified RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, complete protease inhibitors (Roche)) rotating at 4°C for 1 h. Lysates were sonicated 3 x 10 sec at a power of ~20W (Misonix tip sonicator). Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. Clarified supernatants were incubated with 30 µL of packed, pre-equilibrated streptavidin-sepharose beads (GE 17-5113-01) at 4°C overnight. Beads were collected by centrifugation (700 x g, 1 min, 4°C), washed 2 x with modified RIPA lysis buffer, 2 x with TAP lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 8.0), 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT with complete protease inhibitor cocktail) and 5 x with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.3. Next, on-bead tryptic digest was performed with TPCK-trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. Digested samples were desalted on C18 tips using an acetonitrile and water buffer system. Ten µL of the tryptic mixture was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis (Easy nLC-1200 with a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated on an easy spray C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2µm) with a 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B) solvent system. The gradient was as follows: 11%B – 17%B (5 minutes), 17%B-33%B (95 minutes), 33%-100%B (10 minutes), 100%B (10 minutes). The MS data collection was done using a data-dependent top 20 method.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software. Proteins were identified by searching either the mouse (UP000000589) or human (UP000005640) proteomes from UniProtKB (March 2018). Peptide spectral matches, and protein FDRs were set to 1%, and requiring a minimum of 1 unique peptide for identification. To increase the number of identified matches, “match between runs” was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes. Protein abundancies were calculated using the iBAQ algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Stress hormones bind and activate the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in many tissues including the brain. We identified arginine and glutamate rich 1 (ARGLU1) in a screen for new modulators of glucocorticoid signaling in the CNS. Biochemical studies show that the glutamate rich C-terminus of ARGLU1 coactivates multiple nuclear receptors including the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the arginine rich N-terminus interacts with splicing factors and binds to RNA. RNA-seq of neural cells depleted of ARGLU1 revealed significant changes in the expression and alternative splicing of distinct genes involved in neurogenesis. Loss of ARGLU1 is embryonic lethal in mice, and knockdown in zebrafish causes neurodevelopmental and heart defects. Treatment with dexamethasone, a GR activator, also induces changes in the pattern of alternatively spliced genes, many of which were lost when ARGLU1 was absent. Importantly, the genes found to be alternatively spliced in response to glucocorticoid treatment were distinct from those under transcriptional control by GR, suggesting an additional mechanism of glucocorticoid action is present in neural cells. Our results thus show that ARGLU1 is a novel factor for embryonic development that modulates basal transcription and alternative splicing in neural cells with consequences for glucocorticoid signaling.

### Keywords
Nr3c1, Arglu1, Splicing, Gr

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto

### Submitter
Michael Saikali

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Cummins
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto


