### Accession
PXD037358

### Title
Comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis thylakoid membranes from plants grown under low, moderate and high illumination. Effects of stn7 and tap38 mutations.

### Description
Plants grown under different illumination levels undergo a long-term acclimation response (LTR) resulting in differences in their leaf morphology and chloroplast protein composition to maximise their growth. At the proteomic level, LTR involves modulating the stoichiometry of photosynthetic complexes within the thylakoid membrane through de novo synthesis and degradation of specific proteins. The signalling pathways that mediate LTR in relation to light intensity remain largely unknown, however earlier studies demonstrated a key role for the light-harvesting complex II (LHCII) serine-threonine kinase STN7. We explored the effects of mutant strains of Arabidopsis targeting STN7 and its cognate phosphatase TAP38 in the LTR to low, moderate and high illumination, employing label-free quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana plants (Col-0, stn7 (SALK 073254), tap38 (SALK 025713) (15 per light condition) were grown on John Innes M3 compost mixed at a 4:1:1 ratio with perlite and vermiculite, respectively, in a Conviron plant growth room under fluorescent bulbs at 60% relative humidity, 21 °C daytime, 15 °C night time temperatures, at a light intensity of 150 μE with a 12 hour photoperiod for 2 weeks until rosettes reached a diameter of around 3 cm. The plants were then transferred to low (25 μE), moderate (150 μE), or high light (500 μE) and acclimated for different lengths of time to allow for maturation time, ie. 7, 5 and 4 weeks respectively. Thylakoid membranes were isolated from leaves according to Albertsson et al. (1994) Methods Enzymol 228: 469–482 with the addition of 10 mM NaF to all buffers. Thylakoid membranes were solubilised in 1% Na laurate and centrifuged to remove starch granules. In triplicate, 50 µg of solubilised protein was reduced with 1.5 µl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine-HCl and incubated at 37 ˚C for 30 min, then alkylated by the addition of 1.5 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at ambient temperature for 30 min. Proteolytic digestion was performed in 1% Na laurate, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, with 2 µg pre-mixed trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega), for 3 h at 37 ˚C. Following digestion, Na laurate was extracted by addition of an equal volume of ethyl acetate and acidification with 10 µl 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 15,700 x g for 5 min and the lower phase was isolated. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 50 µl 0.5% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples in 0.5% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile amounting to 400 ng were analysed in triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Scientific, 50 cm x 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 40 °C) anda Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant v. 1.6.3.4 and the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548, downloaded on 10 Sep 2020) with iBAQ enabled. Search parameters were: carbamidomethyl-Cys (fixed modification), Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, Lys acetylation and Gln to pyro-Glu conversion (variable modifications) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Plants respond to changing light intensity in the short term through regulation of light harvesting, electron transfer, and metabolism to mitigate redox stress. A sustained shift in light intensity leads to a long-term acclimation response (LTR). This involves adjustment in the stoichiometry of photosynthetic complexes through de novo synthesis and degradation of specific proteins associated with the thylakoid membrane. The light-harvesting complex II (LHCII) serine/threonine kinase STN7 plays a key role in short-term light harvesting regulation and was also suggested to be crucial to the LTR. Arabidopsis plants lacking STN7 (stn7) shifted to low light experience higher photosystem II (PSII) redox pressure than the wild type or those lacking the cognate phosphatase TAP38 (tap38), while the reverse is true at high light, where tap38 suffers more. In principle, the LTR should allow optimisation of the stoichiometry of photosynthetic complexes to mitigate these effects. We used quantitative label-free proteomics to assess how the relative abundance of photosynthetic proteins varied with growth light intensity in wild-type, stn7, and tap38 plants. All plants were able to adjust photosystem I, LHCII, cytochrome b<sub>6</sub> f, and ATP synthase abundance with changing white light intensity, demonstrating neither STN7 nor TAP38 is crucial to the LTR per se. However, stn7 plants grown for several weeks at low light (LL) or moderate light (ML) still showed high PSII redox pressure and correspondingly lower PSII efficiency, CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation, and leaf area compared to wild-type and tap38 plants, hence the LTR is unable to fully ameliorate these symptoms. In contrast, under high light growth conditions the mutants and wild type behaved similarly. These data are consistent with the paramount role of STN7-dependent LHCII phosphorylation in tuning PSII redox state for optimal growth in LL and ML conditions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Photosystem, Light harvesting complex, Tap38, Electron transfer., Light acclimation, Thylakoid, Stn7

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, UK

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Matt Johnson
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, UK


