### Accession
PXD006454

### Title
Combined sperm proteome of the monarch butterfly Danaus plexippus

### Description
We characterized sperm from the seminal vesicles of male monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus), in triplicate, identifying 548 high confidence proteins. As with all but the most basal lepidopteran species male monarch butterflies are sperm heteromorphic, producing fertilization competent and anucleate fertilization incompetent sperm morphs. Comparing this data to the sperm proteomes of the Carolina sphinx moth (Manduca sexta) and the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) demonstrated high levels of functional coherence across proteomes, and conservation at the level of protein abundance and post-translational modification within Lepidoptera. Comparative genomic analyses revealed a significant reduction in orthology among Monarch sperm genes relative to the remainder of the genome in non-Lepidopteran insects. A substantial number of sperm proteins were found to be specific to Lepidoptera, lacking detectable homology outside this taxa. These findings are consistent with a burst of genetic novelty in the sperm proteome concurrent with the origin of heteromorphic spermatogenesis early in Lepidoptera evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Total sperm contents, including both sperm types, were dissected and purified from the seminal vesicle. Sperm samples from 3-5 males were pooled to form three biological replicates. Samples were solubilized in 2X LDS sample buffer, as per manufacturers’ instructions (Invitrogen, Inc) before quantification via the EZA Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen, Inc). Three replicates of 25ug of protein were separated on a 1 mm 10% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Mini Gel set up using the XCell SureLock Mini-Cell system (Invitrogen) as per manufacturer instructions for reduced samples. Each lane on the resulting gel (containing sample form a single replicate) was sliced into four comparable slices, producing 12 gel fractions independent tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Gel fractions were sliced into 1 mm2 pieces for in-gel trypsin digestion. Gel fractions were reduced (DDT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) before overnight incubation with trypsin at 37 °C. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2μm particle size, 100A pore size, 75mm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5μm particle size, 100A pore size, 300mm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water plus 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water plus 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyzer and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was analyzed using X!Tandem and Comet algorithms within the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v 4.8.0). Spectra were matched against the Danaus plexippus official gene set 2 (OGS2) predicted protein set (downloaded from http://Monarchbase.umassmed.edu, last updated in 2012) with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a parent monoisotopic mass error of ±10 ppm. For both X!tandem and Comet, iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed and non-specific cleavages were excluded from the analysis. False Discovery Rates were estimated using a decoy database of randomized sequence for each protein in the annotated protein database. Peptide identifications were filtered using a greater than 95.0% probability based upon PeptideProphet and the combined probability information from X!Tandem and Comet using Interprophet. Protein assignments were accepted if greater than 99.0%, as specified by the ProteinProphet algorithms respectively. Proteins that contained identical peptides that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein inclusion in the proteome was based on the following stringent criteria: (1) identification in 2 or more biological replicates or (2) identification in a single replicate by 2 or more unique peptides. To identify post-translation modifications (PTMs) of proteins, X!Tandem and Comet were rerun allowing for variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues and acetylation of lysine residues. PTM locations were identified using PTMprophet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sperm, Monarch butterfly, Proteomics, Lepidoptera, Evolution, Parasperm

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Syracuse Univeristy

### Submitter
Emma Whittington

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Steve Dorus
Syracuse University


