### Accession
PXD008216

### Title
PROTEOMIC SIGNATURE OF THE CEREBELLUM IN SCHIZOPHRENIA

### Description
Malfunction of multiple regions in distributed brain circuits has been suggested to underlie the diversity of symptoms and cognitive impairments in schizophrenia. The cerebellum, as part of this circuit, may contribute to these symptoms for this reason we undertook a proteomic profile of this region. Here, we design a quantitative exploratory proteomic analysis in pooled grey matter of the cerebellum from schizophrenia and control individuals with the aim of discovering consistently altered biomarker proteins in schizophrenia.

### Sample Protocol
Our strategy combines differential isotopic labelling of peptides via reductive dimethylation with offline fractionation by SCX and liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a hybrid linear ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML. MS/MS spectra were searched against Uniprot human protein database using the Comet (version 2015025) search algorithm. Peptide matches were filtered to <1% false-discovery rate using the target-decoy database strategy and Percolator 3.1.2. Protein inference was carried out using Protein Prophet (contained in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v4.8.0). Peptides were quantified by peak-area integration, heavy and light peptide intensities were combined for every protein group and a log2 heavy/light ratio determined.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Proteomic, Schizophrenia

### Affiliations
University of Washington  Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Ricard Rodriguez-Mias

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington  Department of Genome Sciences


