### Accession
PXD018049

### Title
Feedback regulation in EGFR signaling involves IRF2BP proteins and temporal control by (de)SUMOylation

### Description
Molecular switches are essential modules in signaling networks by enabling a quick response to environmental changes. Here, we describe a role for small ubiquitin-like-modifier SUMO as a molecular switch in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we compared the endogenous SUMO-proteomes of Hela cells before and after EGF-stimulation. Thereby, we identified a small group of transcriptional repressors, including IRF2BP1, IRF2BP2 and IRF2BPL as novel players in EGFR signaling, which lost SUMO transiently within 15 min of EGF treatment.  We found 38 genes whose expression within the first hour of EGF treatment was altered in cells expressing SUMOylation deficient IRF2BP1, including Dual specific phosphatase 1 (DUSP1), an important feedback regulator of EGFR signalling. We show that IRF2BP1 binds to the proximal promoter of DUSP1, whose activation requires IRF2BP1 deSUMOylation. Thus, the SUMO-dependent molecular switch of IRF2BP1 activity is important to finely tune EGFR signaling

### Sample Protocol
Quantification of the SUMO proteome upon EGF / Mass-spectrometry Hela cells were grown for 6-7 doublings (from 30 cm2 to 3600 cm2 culture dish surface, i.e. 24 15 wells in the end) in SILAC DMEM medium containing dialyzed FBS (dialyzed 3x against PBS through a 6-8.000 MWCO bag), 2 mM L-glutamine and 146 µg/ml lysine and 86 µg/ml arginine. One set of 24 plates contained “light” lysine and arginine, the other set of 24 plates contained D4-lysine and 13C-argnine. 16-18 hours before collecting the cells, they were serum starved in SILAC DMEM medium containing only glutamine and the respective type of lysine and arginine. One set of cells was treated with 100 ng/ml EGF (in PBS-BSA) for 10 min; the other set was treated with PBS-BSA only. For large-scale SUMO-IPs, the cells were lysed in 350 µl 2x lysis buffer per plate and lysates from all 48 plates were combined. SUMO-IPs were performed as stated above and TCA precipitated eluates were loaded onto NuPAGE® Novex® Bis-Tris Mini Gels (4-20%) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue.  In-gel digestion was performed as described {Shevchenko:2006co} with minor modifications. Unless otherwise stated, all incubation steps were performed at 26°C in a thermomixer at 1050 rpm for 15 min and all solutions were prepared with LiChrosolv H2O. Each lane of the stained gel was cut into 23 equally sized pieces. Gel slices were first washed with 150 μl H2O and dehydrated with 150 μl acetonitrile (ACN). Dried gel pieces were incubated with 150 μl of 10 mM DTT reducing solution for 50 min, then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at 26 °C in the dark. After another round of dehydration of gel pieces with ACN, they were rehydrated with 60 μl of digestion buffer (2 µg/ml trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.5) and incubated at 37 °C over night.  For peptide extraction, supernatants of the three following steps were pooled: First, 100 μl ACN were added to dehydrate the gel pieces. Second, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 μl 5 % [v/v] formic acid (FA), followed by addition of 50 μl ACN. Third 50 μl ACN were added to fully dehydrate the gel pieces. The three supernatants containing the peptides were pooled and dried in vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific). Dried peptides were stored at -20 C until submitted to LC-MS.  The extracted peptides initially were dissolved in 20 μl 3 % ACN/ 1% [v/v] FA by vortexing and brief sonication on water bath. For each MS run, 5 µl were loaded onto an in-house packed C18 trap column. Retained peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical C18 capillary column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a gradient from 5% to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 50 min including column equilibrium and wash by using an Agilent 1100 nano-flow LC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Agilent 1100 nano-flow LC was coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) and it was operated in a data-dependent mode. The survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400 with a target value of 106. For Up to 5 of the most intense ions with charges ≤ 2 from the survey scan were sequentially selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ linear ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35 %. (check in MS raw file?)

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software and the Mascot search engine were used for analysis of raw MS files from the LTQ-Orbitrap XL. Quant.exe module of MaxQuant generated the peak lists were searched against the International Protein Index human protein database common contaminants (e.g. keratins, serum albumin) and concatenated with the reverse sequences of all entries. Database (Mascot) search parameters were set as: cysteine carbamidomethylation was as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were as variable modifications; tryptic specificity with no proline restriction and up to two missed cleavages was set. The MS survey scans and MS/MS mass tolerance was set 7 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. A minimal length of six amino acids was considered for identification. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and the protein level. For identification and quantification a posterior error probability (PEP) of peptides was required to be at maximum 0.05. Re-quantify was enabled, and “keep low scoring versions of identified peptides” was disabled. A minimum ratio count of one for each protein was required for quantification of SILAC pairs by considering unique and razor peptides.  In total, this large-scale SILAC/SUMO-IP/Mass-spectrometry experiment was done three times, once where “no FBS” was labeled “light” and “10 min EGF treatment” was labeled “heavy”, and twice vice versa. We used very stringent criteria to obtain the final list of hits: First, all contaminants and reverse sequences, as well as proteins with a “SigB” (calculated by MaxQuant) > 0.05 were removed. Second, only proteins that had a ratio count of 4 or higher were used. Third, proteins that were only identified in one of the tree experiments, or that showed a different behavior in one of the experiments, were removed. Fourth, if a protein was identified in two of the three experiments, it was neglected if the ratio difference was larger than 10-fold. Fifth, a ratio variability larger than 80 percent was not allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular switches are essential modules in signaling networks and transcriptional reprogramming. Here, we describe a role for small ubiquitin-related modifier SUMO as a molecular switch in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we compare the endogenous SUMO proteomes of HeLa cells before and after EGF stimulation. Thereby, we identify a small group of transcriptional coregulators including IRF2BP1, IRF2BP2, and IRF2BPL as novel players in EGFR signaling. Comparison of cells expressing wild type or SUMOylation-deficient IRF2BP1 indicates that transient deSUMOylation of IRF2BP proteins is important for appropriate expression of immediate early genes including dual specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1, MKP-1) and the transcription factor ATF3. We find that IRF2BP1 is a repressor, whose transient deSUMOylation on the DUSP1 promoter allows-and whose timely reSUMOylation restricts-DUSP1 transcription. Our work thus provides a paradigm how comparative SUMO proteome analyses serve to reveal novel regulators in signal transduction and transcription.

### Keywords
Feedback inhibitor, Sumo, Transcription, Egf, Dusp1, Irf2bp1, Regulation, Irf2bp2, Egfr

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectromerty Group Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemnistry Goettingen, Germany
Max Planck Intitute for biophysical Chemnistry

### Submitter
Uwe PLessmann

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectromerty Group Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemnistry Goettingen, Germany


