### Accession
PXD038781

### Title
Sewage Protein Information Mining: Discovery of Large Biomolecules as Biomarkers  of Population and  Industrial Activities.

### Description
Wastewater-based epidemiology has been revealed as a powerful approach for the survey of the population's health and lifestyle. In this context, proteins have been proposed as potential biomarkers that complement the information provided by those used up to now (small exogenous molecules, metabolites, and genomic material). However, few is known about the range of molecular species and dynamics of proteins in wastewater and the information hidden in these protein profiles is still to be uncovered. In previous research, we have described for the first time the proteome of wastewater using polymer probes immersed in wastewater at the entrance of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). Here, we studied the protein composition of wastewater from municipalities with diverse population and industrial activities. For this purpose, we collected water samples at the inlet of 10 different WWTPs in Catalonia at three different times of the year and the soluble fraction of this material was then analyzed by Liquid Chromatography High-resolution Tandem Mass Spectrometry using a shotgun proteomics approach. The complete proteomic profiles, the distribution among different organisms, and the semiquantitative analysis of the main constituents are described. Excreta (urine and feces) from humans, and blood and other residues from livestock were identified as the two main protein sources. Significant differences between the proteomes in the soluble phase and the particulate material, respectively dominated by eukaryote and bacterial proteins, were observed. Our findings provide new insights into the characterization of wastewater proteomics that allow proposing specific bioindicators for wastewater-based environmental monitoring, including human and animal population monitoring, most notably, for rodent pest control (immunoglobulins, amylases), and livestock processing industry monitoring (albumins).

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Sample collection Twenty-four-hour composite wastewater samples were collected at the inlet of 10 wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) located in the Girona and Barcelona provinces in Catalonia (Supplementary Figure 1). At all sites, an automatic water sampler was used. Samples were transferred to the laboratory at 4 ºC.  2.2 Sample preparation Soluble Proteins. Collected samples were filtered immediately after arrival at the laboratory. For this, up to 100 mL of 24-h composite wastewater sample was centrifuged at 4000 × g (10 ºC, 20 minutes) and the supernatant was filtered through 0.2 μm filters (VWR, North American, USA). Then, the filtered samples were lyophilized on a Freeze Dryer (TELSTAR LyoAlfa 6, PA, USA). For the analysis, lyophilized samples were reconstituted in 20 mL milliQ water and concentrated using a 10 kDa cutoff device (Amicon®, NMWL 10 kDa) whose filter was previously passivated to minimize protein adsorption. Passivation was performed by washing the filter with 2.4 mL of NaOH 0.1M that was eliminated by centrifugation at 4000 × g (13 ºC, 10 min), followed by a second wash with 2.5 mL milliQ water and centrifugation. Finally, filters were immersed overnight in Tween-20 (5 % in milliQ water), extensively washed with milliQ water, and centrifuged at 4000 × g (13 ºC, 5 min). Samples were concentrated down to about 400 μL and then evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac. Proteins in the sample were cleaned and concentrated in the head of SDS-PAGE gels (5 % stacking and 12 % resolving) by electrophoresis at 50 V for 40 – 50 min. BSA (Bovine Serum Albumin) was used as the reference marker. After electrophoresis, gels were stained by Coomassie Blue and scanned. The bands with the concentrated proteins were excised and digested with trypsin using an automatic device (DigestPro MS, Intavis). 2.3 Liquid Chromatography High Resolution Mass spectrometry and database search The LC-HRMS/MS system consisted of an Agilent 1200 Series Gradient HPLC (made up of a capillary nano pump, a binary pump, a thermostatic micro injector and a micro-switch valve) coupled to an Orbitrap-Velos High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher) which was equipped with a nanoESI ion source.  For the analysis, the tryptic digests of the sample extracts were evaporated until dry and redissolved in 50 µL of 0.5 % TFA 5 % Methanol with gentle agitation in a Thermomixer (5 min, at 22 ºC, 900 rpm). Five microliters of this material were injected into the HPLC system. Separation was carried out on a 15-cm long, 100 µm i.d. C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co.) which was preceded by a C18 preconcentration cartridge (Agilent Technologies). Separation was done at 0.4 µL/min using a 120-min gradient from 3 to 35 % solvent B (solvent A: 0.1 % formic acid, solvent B: acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid). The Orbitrap-Velos was operated in the positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 1.7 kV. The spectrometric analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, acquiring a full scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense signals detected in the MS scan. The full MS (range 400-1650) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60.000. The MS/MS spectra were done in the linear ion-trap.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer v2.5, ThermoFisher) with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.8 Da; enzyme, Trypsin, and allowance of up to 2 missed cleavages; dynamic modification, methionine oxidation (+16 Da); fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57 Da). Searches were performed against the Uniprot (rev. 10-21). Final results were filtered by peptide rank 1, peptide confidence high (0.1 % FDR), and search engine rank 1.

### Publication Abstract
Wastewater-based epidemiology has been revealed as a powerful approach for surveying the health and lifestyle of a population. In this context, proteins have been proposed as potential biomarkers that complement the information provided by currently available methods. However, little is known about the range of molecular species and dynamics of proteins in wastewater and the information hidden in these protein profiles is still to be uncovered. In this study, we investigated the protein composition of wastewater from 10 municipalities in Catalonia with diverse populations and industrial activities at three different times of the year. The soluble fraction of this material was analyzed using liquid chromatography high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry using a shotgun proteomics approach. The complete proteomic profile, distribution among different organisms, and semiquantitative analysis of the main constituents are described. Excreta (urine and feces) from humans, and blood and other residues from livestock were identified as the two main protein sources. Our findings provide new insights into the characterization of wastewater proteomics that allow for the proposal of specific bioindicators for wastewater-based environmental monitoring. This includes human and animal population monitoring, most notably for rodent pest control (immunoglobulins (Igs) and amylases) and livestock processing industry monitoring (albumins).

### Keywords
Environmental proteomics; sewage epidemiology; water fingerprinting, Mass spectrometry.

### Affiliations
IIBB-CSIC
Biological and Environmental Proteomics, Institute of Biomedical Research of Barcelona, Spanish National Research Council (IIBB-CSIC/IDIBAPS), Rosellón 161, E-08036 Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Montserrat Carrascal
Biological and Environmental Proteomics, Institute of Biomedical Research of Barcelona, Spanish National Research Council (IIBB-CSIC/IDIBAPS), Rosellón 161, E-08036 Barcelona, Spain.


