### Accession
PXD006603

### Title
Multifaceted disruption to cholesterol homeostasis upon loss of the mEMC

### Description
The mammalian Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane protein Complex (mEMC) is an evolutionarily conserved hetero-oligomer whose function and mechanism of action remain elusive. Here we identify a multi-layered contribution of the mEMC to post-translational regulation of cholesterol homeostasis. Mammalian cells employ elaborate sensing and feedback mechanisms to balance free and stored cholesterol through biosynthesis, uptake, efflux and storage. We show that mEMC biogenesis is a prerequisite for optimal maturation of at least two key ER-resident sterol regulatory enzymes: squalene synthase (SQS) and sterol-O-acyltransferase (SOAT1). Without sufficient SQS, mEMC-deficient cells have attenuated cholesterol biosynthetic capability, and loss of SOAT1 significantly reduces the amount of stored cholesteryl esters (CEs). mEMC-deficient cells remain viable, maintaining free cholesterol levels with minimal transcriptional activation of cholesterogenic and uptake pathways by the sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP)-2. Consequently, cells lacking the mEMC were susceptible to changes in extracellular cholesterol availability and effectively were transformed into cholesterol auxotrophs. Supplementing mEMC-deficient cells with cholesterol or lanosterol failed to restore SQS or SOAT1. These data are consistent with a direct role for the mEMC in the biogenesis of SQS and SOAT1. The range of phenotypes observed previously with mEMC subunit depletion may result from its impact on fundamental cholesterol homeostatic mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were maintained for ≥ 6 passages in media supplemented with isotopically labeled light (K0/R0), medium (K4/R6), or heavy (K8/R10) amino acids.Cells were grown in 15 cm tissue culture plates, washed twice with ice-cold PBS (pH 6.7) and labeled with 1 mM sodium meta-periodate + 10 mM aniline + 100 mM aminooxy-biotin + PBS (pH 6.7) under constant agitation in the dark (90, 4ºC). The reaction was quenched by addition of 1 mM glycerol (30 min). The reaction mixture was removed and cells were washed with PBS (pH 7.4) + 5% FCS followed by PBS (pH7.4) + 1mM CaCl2 + 0.5mM MgCl2. Cells were collected in ice-cold PBS using a cell strainer, centrifuged at 1500 × g for 5 min, and resuspended on ice in 300 µl of Triton X-100 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM NEM, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Roche Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) for 45 min. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (25 min, 17.000 × g, 4ºC). Cell lysate from K0/R0, K4/R6, or K8R10 cells were equally mixed based on Bradford assay. 77.8 µl of 50% streptavidin/agarose slurry was added per mg of whole-cell lysate, and incubated for 90 min at 4ºC. Supernatant and bead-bound material were isolated by centrifugation and processed separately. Beads were washed using Micro Bio-Spin Chromatography Columns (Bio-Rad, Cat. No. #732-6204). All washing and modification steps were performed with 600 µl buffer and centrifugation steps were performed at 1000 × g for 1 min at 4ºC. Beads were consecutively washed twice with Triton X-100 lysis buffer and with PBS/0.5% (w/v) SDS. Disulphide bonds were reduced by incubation with PBS/ 0.5% (w/v) SDS/ 100 mM DTT at room temperature for 20 min. Subsequently, beads were washed twice with UC buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 6M urea) and treated with UC buffer/50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min. The samples were successively washed twice with UC buffer, 5 M NaCl, 100 mM Na2CO3, PBS and H2O. Peptides were obtained after overnight incubation with trypsin at 37°C. The samples were acidified to 1 % final concentration of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were collected in new tubes by centrifugation in SpinX spin column (Sigma) at 1000 × g for 1 min and were desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, each cartridge was conditioned with solution B (0.1% TFA in 65% CH3CN) and equilibrated with solution A (0.1% TFA in 98% H2O). Tryptic peptides were loaded and washed with solution A prior elution with solution B. The samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 20 µl solution A. The cytoplasmic fraction was obtained from the supernatant after affinity purification of biotinylated proteins. Proteins were enriched by chloroform/methanol precipitation and resuspended in 6 M urea, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8. The solution was diluted 1:6 with H2O and protein were digested using a 1:50 ratio (trypsin:protein). Tryptic peptides were purified as described above. Peptide analysis was performed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 µm, 100 A, 75 µm × 50 cm). Peptides were eluted on a gradient starting with 2% buffer B (0.1% TFA/5% DMSO in CH3CN) at 3 min to reach 35 % by 123 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data acquisition was performed at a resolution of 70,000 full-width half maximum at mass/charge of 400 with lockmass enabled (445.120025 m/z), Top 15 precursor ion selection, Dynamic Exclusion of 27 seconds, and fragmentation was performed in Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) mode with a Normalized Collision Energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed by using MaxQuant v. 1.5.1.2 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The data was searched using the reviewed human database downloaded from Uniprot in April 2015. The search was performed using the following settings: two missed cleavages were allowed and the peptide ion tolerance was adjusted to 0.05 Da. Variable modifications included N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set at 0.01 against a reversed decoy database. For protein quantification, unique and razor peptides were used with a minimum ratio count of 1. Re-quantify was enabled. Data generated by MaxQuant was further analysed using Perseus v. 1.5.0.31 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Reverse peptides, proteins only identified by site and potential contaminants were removed from the dataset. Normalized ratios for H/L and M/L were log2 transformed. Intensities were log10 transformed. Significance B values were calculated by Perseus. Proteins with a decrease in abundance of at least 30 percent were classified as downregulated. Proteins commonly downregulated with at least 30 percent in multiple cell lines were identified by using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane contains essential complexes that oversee protein biogenesis and lipid metabolism, impacting nearly all aspects of cell physiology. The ER membrane protein complex (EMC) is a newly described transmembrane domain (TMD) insertase linked with various phenotypes, but whose clients and cellular responsibilities remain incompletely understood. We report that EMC deficiency limits the cellular boundaries defining cholesterol tolerance, reflected by diminished viability with limiting or excessive extracellular cholesterol. Lipidomic and proteomic analyses revealed defective biogenesis and concomitant loss of the TMD-containing ER-resident enzymes sterol-O-acyltransferase 1 (SOAT1) and squalene synthase (SQS, also known as FDFT1), which serve strategic roles in the adaptation of cells to changes in cholesterol availability. Insertion of the weakly hydrophobic tail-anchor (TA) of SQS into the ER membrane by the EMC ensures sufficient flux through the sterol biosynthetic pathway while biogenesis of polytopic SOAT1 promoted by the EMC provides cells with the ability to store free cholesterol as inert cholesteryl esters. By facilitating insertion of TMDs that permit essential mammalian sterol-regulating enzymes to mature accurately, the EMC is an important biogenic determinant of cellular robustness to fluctuations in cholesterol availability.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Srebp-2, Soat1, Squalene synthase, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Nuffield Department of Medicine, Target Discovery Institute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marie-Laëtitia Thézénas

### Lab Head
Dr Pr. Benedikt Kessler
University of Oxford, Nuffield Department of Medicine, Target Discovery Institute


