### Accession
PXD033383

### Title
The HLA-ligandome of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas reveals shared tumor-exclusive peptides for semi-personalized vaccination

### Description
Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is diagnosed in 93,000 patients worldwide per year and 51,000 annual deaths can be attributed to this disease. OPSCCs are either human papillomavirus associated (HPV-positive) cancers or non-virally induced, primarily tobacco and alcohol associated (HPV-negative) cancers. MS analysis enabled the identification of naturally HLA-presented peptides in OPSCC tumor tissue. By comparative profiling against benign HLA ligandomic datasets, we demonstrated that tumor-associated peptides are HLA-presented on the cell surfaces of OPSCCs. The established warehouse of OPSCC-associated peptides can be used for downstream immunogenicity testing and peptide-based immunotherapy in (semi-) personalized strategies.

### Sample Protocol
OPSCC tumor biopsies and tonsillar tissue samples from healthy donors were surgically resected, immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen (N2) and subsequently stored at -80 °C. HLA molecules were extracted from tissue samples through immunoaffinity chromatography using the pan-HLA class I-specific mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) W6/32, the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü-39, and the HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 (all produced in-house). Subsequently eluted HLA ligands were separated using reversed-phase ultra high performance liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex) and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an on-line coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For MS data analysis the Proteome discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Database search and spectral annotation was performed against the human proteome as comprised in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (20,279 reviewed protein sequences; September 27th, 2013; www.uniprot.org) via the SequestHT algorithm. Mass tolerance for processing was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Oxidized methionine was allowed as only dynamic modification and no cleavage specificity was selected. Peptide confidence was determined using the percolator algorithm with a target value of q ≤ 0.05 (5% FDR). After processing, further filters for search engine rank (= 1) and peptide length (= 8-25 amino acids) were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Tumor-associated antigen, Immunopeptidome, Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, Hla, Mass spectrometry, Hpv, Opscc

### Affiliations
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Medical Center Ulm, Head and Neck Cancer Center of the Comprehensive Cancer Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany
1 Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Tübingen, Germany
2 German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), DKFZ Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Lena Mühlenbruch

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Laban
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery, University Medical Center Ulm, Head and Neck Cancer Center of the Comprehensive Cancer Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany


