### Accession
PXD046895

### Title
Hsp70 and NAC chaperone systems are in close proximity on the ribosome

### Description
To understand the orientation of Hsp70 Ssb on the ribosome in living Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells we incorporated the noncanonical, photoactivatable amino acid p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine (Bpa) in place of specific individual endogenous amino acids in Ssb1. To identify the proteins to which Ssb1Bpa crosslinked we performed mass spectrometry. The results revealed that Bpa incorporated at the tip of the “lid” subdomain cross linked to the nascent chain associated complex (NAC), while Bpa incorporated into further down the lid crosslinked to ribosomal protein uL29.

### Sample Protocol
All yeast strains to be used for in vivo crosslinking were transformed with plasmid ptRNA-Bpa, which directs incorporation of p-benzoyl-L-phenylalanine (Bpa) at TAG codons, and a plasmid having a TAG mutation at the desired position for Bpa incorporation in the target protein. Strains were then grown on the appropriate selective minimal medium with 0.4 mM Bpa, starting at an OD600nm between 0.03 and 0.10. At OD600nm = 0.5-1.0, cycloheximide was added to 0.1 mg/ml and cells harvested by centrifugation. 12.5-25 OD600nm units of resuspended cells were divided in half - one half subjected to 365 nm UV illumination for 1 hr at 4˚C (Stratalinker 1800 UV crosslinker with 365 nm bulbs); the other was kept on ice as a control. Cells were lysed by agitation with glass beads for 5 min at 4˚C in lysis buffer (300 mM sorbitol, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 10% glycerol v/v, 1 mM dithiothreitol and RNasin RNase Inhibitor (Promega) at a dilution of 1:1,000). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,100 rcf for 10 min in a microcentrifuge (Eppendorf). Typically, 5 Abs260 units of cleared cell lysate was loaded onto a 0.8 ml sucrose cushion composed of lysis buffer having 0.5 M sucrose instead of sorbitol. To pellet ribosomes the cell extracts were centrifuged for 2 hr at 150,700 rcf in a MLA130 rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 4˚C. The pellet was suspended in SDS sample buffer (0.124 M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 6.8, 4% w/v SDS, 10% v/v glycerol, 0.02% bromophenol blue, 4.5% b-mercaptoethanol) prior to SDS-PAGE. Resuspended sucrose cushion pellets were resolved on 7.5% SDS-PAGE, followed by staining with either Coomassie brilliant blue or PierceTM (Thermo Scientific) silver stain for mass spectrometry. After band excision and destaining, samples were alkylated with iodoacetic acid prior to digestion with trypsin and solid phase extracted as described previously (Gamerdinger, 2019). Resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source (Gamerdinger, 2019).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development). To identify the proteins most highly represented in each sample, Scaffold4 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to rank candidates based on total spectrum count.

### Publication Abstract
The area surrounding the tunnel exit of the 60S ribosomal subunit is a hub for proteins involved in maturation and folding of emerging nascent polypeptide chains. How different factors vie for positioning at the tunnel exit in the complex cellular environment is not well understood. We used in vivo site-specific cross-linking to approach this question, focusing on two abundant factors-the nascent chain-associated complex (NAC) and the Hsp70 chaperone system that includes the J-domain protein co-chaperone Zuotin. We found that NAC and Zuotin can cross-link to each other at the ribosome, even when translation initiation is inhibited. Positions yielding NAC-Zuotin cross-links indicate that when both are present the central globular domain of NAC is modestly shifted from the mutually exclusive position observed in cryogenic electron microscopy analysis. Cross-linking results also suggest that, even in NAC's presence, Hsp70 can situate in a manner conducive for productive nascent chain interaction-with the peptide binding site at the tunnel exit and the J-domain of Zuotin appropriately positioned to drive stabilization of nascent chain binding. Overall, our results are consistent with the idea that, in vivo, the NAC and Hsp70 systems can productively position on the ribosome simultaneously.

### Keywords
Nac, Hsp70, Ribosome, Ssb1, In vivo crosslinking

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53726, United States of America
Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology of University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk

### Submitter
Marcin Pitek

### Lab Head
Professor Elizabeth A. Craig
Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53726, United States of America


