### Accession
PXD025241

### Title
Tandem mass tag-based proteomic analysis in saliva of horses with acute abdominal disease

### Description
The objective of the study was to analyze the changes in proteomics that occur in saliva in acute abdominal disease (AAD) by proteomics in order to identify new proteins that could allow gaining knowledge about the physiopathological changes that can occur in this fluid and identify possible new biomarkers of acute abdominal disease. Samples from two groups of horses were analyzed by TMT proteomic analysis: - Diseased horses (n=7; 4 stallions and 3 mares;  mean age = 8 years (range 1-18); Andalusians (n=5) and crossbred (n=2)). Presence of AAD was diagnosed based on history, physical examination (abdominal auscultation, rectal examination and nasogastric intubation) and additional diagnostic tests incl. complete blood count (CBC), serum biochemistry profile, abdominal ultrasound and or abdominocentesis. Final diagnoses were impaction of ascending colon (n=3), right dorsal colon displacement (n=2) and spasmodic colon (n=2).  - Healthy horses (n=6, 3 geldings, 2 stallions and 1 mare; mean age = 12 years (range 4-15); Andalusians (n=4) and crossbred (n=2)). Horses were found healthy based on history, clinical examination, CBC and serum biochemistry profile.  These procedures were approved by the ethical committee of the University of Murcia (CEEA 288/2017).

### Sample Protocol
Saliva samples were obtained before treatment of the horses by introducing a sponge in the horse’s mouth for 1 min, and hereafter the sponge was placed in a collection device (Salivette, Sastedt). Samples were obtained between 8:00 and 10:00 a.m. and kept at 4ºC until further processing, which took place within 12 hours of sample collection. The Salivette tubes were centrifugated at 4000 g for 8 min at 4ºC and the supernatant transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and stored at -80ºC until analysis, which took place within three months after sample collection. A criterion for sample inclusion was the absence of evident blood contamination.   From each sample, 35 μg of acetone-precipitated proteins were subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion and labelled using 6-plex TMT reagents according to manufacturer instructions (Thermo Scientific) with some modification, as described previously (Martinez-Subiela et al., 2017). Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). A pooled sample, generated by mixing equal protein amounts of all 16 samples, was used as an internal standard in all TMT 6-plex experiments. In short, 35 μg of sample and internal standards were reduced with 200mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with 375mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and precipitated with ice-cold acetone (VWR, Pennsylvania, USA) overnight. Samples were then centrifuged, and acetone was decanted. Pellets were resuspended with 50 μl of 100mM TEAB buffer and digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C (2.5 μg of trypsin per 100 μg of protein). TMT label reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile LC-MS grade (Thermo Scientific) and added to each sample. The labelling reaction was incubated for one hour at room temperature and then quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific) for 15 min. Samples were then combined at equal amounts, and 6 μg of each mixed sample set was placed in a well of a microplate, vacuum dried and stored at - 20 °C before further LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano flow system (Dionex, Camberley, UK) and Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described previously (Galán et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and reporter ion-based relative quantification the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied. Database search against Equus caballus FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database 04/10/2017, 37735 entries) was performed using parameters as follows: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated automatically based on decoy database by the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer workflow and was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was to investigate the changes in the salivary proteome in horses with acute abdominal disease (AAD) using a tandem mass tags (TMT)-based proteomic approach. The saliva samples from eight horses with AAD were compared with six healthy horses in the proteomic study. Additionally, saliva samples from eight horses with AAD and eight controls were used to validate lactoferrin (LF) in saliva. The TMT analysis quantified 118 proteins. Of these, 17 differed significantly between horses with AAD and the healthy controls, 11 being downregulated and 6 upregulated. Our results showed the downregulation of gamma-enteric smooth muscle actin (ACTA2), latherin isoform X1, and LF. These proteins could be closely related to an impaired primary immune defense and antimicrobial capacity in the mucosa. In addition, there was an upregulation of mucin 19 (MUC19) and the serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 5 (SPINK5) associated with a protective effect during inflammation. The proteins identified in our study could have the potential to be novel biomarkers for diagnosis or monitoring the physiopathology of the disease, especially LF, which decreased in the saliva of horses with AAD and was successfully measured using a commercially available immunoassay.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Horse, Acute abdominal disease, Tmt, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia            Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia            Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


