### Accession
PXD025893

### Title
Elucidation of the Signatures of Proteasome-Catalyzed Peptide Splicing

### Description
Proteasomes catalyze the degradation of endogenous proteins into oligopeptides, but can concurrently create spliced oligopeptides through ligation of previously non-contiguous peptide fragments. Recent studies have uncovered a formerly unappreciated role for proteasome-catalyzed peptide splicing (PCPS) in the generation of non-genomically templated human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I)-bound cis-spliced peptides that can be targeted by CD8+ T cells in cancer and infection. However, the mechanisms defining PCPS reactions are poorly understood. Here, we experimentally define the biochemical constraints of proteasome-catalyzed cis-splicing reactions by examination of in vitro proteasomal digests of a panel of viral- and self-derived polypeptide substrates using a tailored mass-spectrometry-based de novo sequencing workflow. We show that forward and reverse PCPS reactions display unique splicing signatures, defined by preferential fusion of distinct amino acid residues with stringent peptide length distributions, suggesting sequence- and size-dependent accessibility of splice reactants for proteasomal substrate binding pockets. Our data provide the basis for a more informed mechanistic understanding of PCPS

### Sample Protocol
For constitutive proteasomal digests, 5 μg of synthetic polypeptide were incubated with 500 ng of the 20S constitutive proteasome (CP) (Enzo Life Sciences) in 20mM 4-(2- hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (pH 7.8), 5mMmagnesium chloride, 2mMdithiothreitol (DTT) for 2 or 20 h at 37◦C. Control incubations (lacking the CP) were performed for each peptide in parallel. Following incubation, reactions were terminated by addition of 5 μL of acetic acid, and digest material was bound to a C18 ZipTip column (Merck), eluted in 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), dried down and resuspended in 20 μL LC–MS/MS loading buffer (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water). 1 μL of each digest sample was injected onto a 3μm particle size 0.075mm x 150mm PepMap C18 trap column followed by loading onto a 2μm particle size, 75μm x 50 cm analytical column on the Ultimate 3,000 nUPLC system(Thermo Scientific). A gradient was applied for 30min from 8 to 50% buffer B (0.1% TFA in 100% ACN) in buffer A (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water).

### Data Protocol
PEAKS v8.0 (Bioinformatic Solutions) software was employed for the analysis of all LC–MS/MS datasets (.raw files). Matching against precursor polypeptide sequences was conducted without enzyme specification, using a mass tolerance precursor setting of 5 ppm for peptides and 0.03 Da for fragment ions. PEAKS de novo assisted sequencing was implemented for the assignment of non-spliced peptides derived from individual polypeptide sequences following proteasomal digest of each of the 25 precursor substrates. A false discovery rate of 5% was set using a parallel decoy database search. Following matching of spectra to respective polypeptide sequences, MS/MS spectra assigned as post-translationally modified or originating from the 20S CP were removed from the analysis, as were peptides assigned a PEAKS-10lgP score of <20, yielding a final list of non-spliced peptide sequences. For identification of spliced peptides, a tailored bioinformatics workflow was employed similar to that previously described (9). De novo sequences originating from peptide spectra with average local confidence (ALC) scores of ≥50% that did not match contiguous sequences within the polypeptide precursors were considered. These were termed “de novo unmatched peptides” (DNUPs), and only the top 5 scoring sequence interpretations for each scan were included in the analysis. As the mass:charge ratios of leucine (L) and isoleucine (I) are identical, LC– MS/MS cannot differentiate between L and I residues within peptides. Hence, PEAKS de novo sequencing reports all L or I residues as Ls. Therefore, for DNUPs containing a total of “n” leucine residues, all permutations (2n) of L/I variants were computed prior to in silico splicing—e.g., for de novo sequence LTSLTLKE originating from polypeptide precursor LTSLVRRATLKENEQIPK, 23 combinations of the original de novo sequence would be computed (LTSLTLKE, LTSITLKE, ITSLTLKE, LTSLTIKE, LTSITIKE, ITSLTIKE, ITSITLKE, ITSITIKE) and each sequence input to the splicing algorithm. In silico splicing of the resulting DNUP sequence interpretations in each scan was then implemented. Briefly, each DNUP of length “n” amino acids was split into two fragments from (n−1) aa to 1 aa. The (n-1)th fragment was first scanned for a contiguous match across the polypeptide, and when found, its corresponding splice partner fragment was scanned for a contiguous match within the remainder of the polypeptide sequence. Trans-spliced peptides were omitted from the analysis. Contiguous and spliced peptides identified in control experiments involving incubation of polypeptides without the 20S CP were removed prior to further data analysis, to exclude degradation products that may not arise directly from proteasome-induced hydrolysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomes catalyze the degradation of endogenous proteins into oligopeptides, but can concurrently create spliced oligopeptides through ligation of previously non-contiguous peptide fragments. Recent studies have uncovered a formerly unappreciated role for proteasome-catalyzed peptide splicing (PCPS) in the generation of non-genomically templated human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I)-bound <i>cis-</i>spliced peptides that can be targeted by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in cancer and infection. However, the mechanisms defining PCPS reactions are poorly understood. Here, we experimentally define the biochemical constraints of proteasome-catalyzed <i>cis</i>-splicing reactions by examination of <i>in vitro</i> proteasomal digests of a panel of viral- and self-derived polypeptide substrates using a tailored mass-spectrometry-based <i>de novo</i> sequencing workflow. We show that forward and reverse PCPS reactions display unique splicing signatures, defined by preferential fusion of distinct amino acid residues with stringent peptide length distributions, suggesting sequence- and size-dependent accessibility of splice reactants for proteasomal substrate binding pockets. Our data provide the basis for a more informed mechanistic understanding of PCPS that will facilitate future prediction of spliced peptides from protein sequences.

### Keywords
Peptide spliicng, Antigen processing, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford


