### Accession
PXD013706

### Title
The mitochondrial acyl-carrier protein interaction network highlights important roles for LYRM family members in complex I and mitoribosome assembly

### Description
NDUFAB1 is the mitochondrial acyl carrier protein (ACP) essential for cell viability. Through its pantetheine-4’-phosphate post-translational modification, NDUFAB1 interacts with members of the leucine-tyrosine-arginine motif (LYRM) protein family. Although many LYRM proteins have been well described in a variety of different processes, the functions of others remain either partially or entirely unknown. We profiled the interaction network of NDUFAB1 to reveal associations with 9 known LYRM proteins as well as more than 20 other proteins involved in mitochondrial respiratory chain complex and mitochondrial ribosome assembly. Subsequent knockout and interaction network studies in human cells revealed the LYRM member AltMiD51 to be required for normal assembly of the large mitoribosome subunit, consistent with recent structural studies. In addition, we use proteomics coupled with topographical heat-mapping to reveal that knockout of LYRM2 impairs assembly of the NADH-dehydrogenase module of complex I, leading to defects in cellular respiration. Together, this work adds to the catalogue of functions executed by LYRM family of proteins in building mitochondrial complexes in conjunction with NDUFAB1.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation  Affinity enrichment assays were performed on knockout cell lines complemented with Flag-tagged cDNA as previously described [23]. Briefly, 2 whole cell pellets were harvested in triplicate. Pellets were solubilised in buffer containing 20mM Tris pH 7.4, NaCl 50mM, 10% glycerol, 0.1mM EDTA and 1% digitonin. Pierce™ Spin Columns (ThermoFisher Scientific) were loaded with anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (Sigma) and equilibrated with wash buffer containing 20mM Tris pH 7.4, 60mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5mM EDTA and 0.1% digitonin. Solubilised proteins and complexes were added to the columns and following incubation columns were attached to vacuum manifold and washed 20 times wash buffer. Columns were then incubated with elution buffer (solubilisation buffer plus 150 g/mL Flag peptide) prior to low speed centrifuge and collection into a microcentrifuge tube. Elutates were acetone precipitated and the pellet solubilised in 8M urea and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). This was sonicated at room temperature for 15 minutes prior to addition of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) to a final concentration of 5 mM and chloroacetamide (CAA) to 50mM and the sample was incubated at 37 C while shaking. Following dilution to 2M Urea, 1 g of trypsin (Promega) was added and the sample was incubated overnight at 37 C. Peptides were desalted on SDB-XC Stage tips.   Mitochondrial and whole cell proteomics Mitochondria were isolated as above from LYRM1KO, LYRM9KO and AltMiD51KO cell lines cultured in SILAC DMEM and prepared as described previously [4]. Analysis was performed on SILAC labelled whole cell lysates of the LYRM2KO cell line. Mitochondrial protein yield and whole cell pellet protein amounts were assayed by BCA. Samples were solubilised in 1% (w/v) SDC, 100mM Tris pH 8.1, 40mM CAA and 10mM TCEP and boiling for 5 minutes at 99 C with 1500 rpm shaking. Samples were then sonicated for 15 minutes in a room temperature water bath prior to the addition of 1 g trypsin (Promega) and incubation overnight at 37 C. Supernatant was then transferred to SDB-RPS stage tips and desalted .  Mass-spectrometry  Data in Fig. 1 panel A and B were acquired on the Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion-Trap instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides was performed on a 90 min non-linear ACN gradient. Data was collected in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode using m/z 300 - 1650 as MS scan range, rCID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions. Other instrument parameters were: MS scan at 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1E6, CID at 30% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGC target of 5,000. Data in Fig. 2 panel A and Fig. 4 panel H was acquired on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC. A non-linear ACN gradient of 280 minutes (for Fig. 2 panel A) or 70 minutes (for Fig. 4 panel H) was used. For Fig. 2 panel A data were collected in positive mode using Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375 - 1575 as MS scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the 12 most intense ions with charge ≥ 2. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS maximum injection time 54 ms, AGC target 3E6, Normalized collision energy was at 27% energy, Isolation window of 1.8 Da, MS/MS resolution 17,500, MS/MS AGC target of 2E5, MS/MS maximum injection time 54 ms, minimum intensity was set at 2E3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec. For Fig. 4 panel H data were collected in positive mode using Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375 - 2000 as MS scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the 10 most intense ions with charge ≥ 2. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS maximum injection time 118 ms, AGC target 3E6, Normalized collision energy was at 27% energy, Isolation window of 1.8 Da, MS/MS resolution 35,000, MS/MS AGC target of 5E5, MS/MS maximum injection time 118 ms, minimum intensity was set at 5E3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 10 sec. Data in Fig. 2 panel B through D were acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Peptides were separated as above on a 90 min non-linear ACN gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. Lockmass of 401.92272 from DMSO was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode MS spectra scanning from m/z 350-1550 at 120000 resolution with AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3 sec cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used whereby peptide ions with charge states ≥2-5 were isolated with isolation window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented with high energy collision (HCD) mode with stepped collision energy of 30 ±5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant platform [26] version 1.6.3.4 searching against the Uniprot human database containing reviewed, canonical entries (January 2019) and a database containing common contaminants. For label-free (LFQ) AE-MS experiments, default search parameters were used with “Label free quantitation” set to “LFQ” and “Match between runs” enabled. Using the Perseus platform [27] version 1.6.5.0, proteins group LFQ intensities were Log2 transformed. Values listed as being ‘Only identified by site’, ‘Reverse’ or ‘Contaminants’ were removed from the dataset. Mitochondrial annotations were imported by matching with the Mitocarta2 dataset [28] by gene name and/or ENSG identifier. Experimental groups were assigned to each set of triplicates and the number of valid values for row group calculated. For each experiment (containing a control and an enrichment group) rows having less than 3 valid values in the enrichment group were removed and the missing values in the relevant control group imputed to values consistent with the limit of detection. A modified two-sided t-test based on permutation-based FDR statistics [27] was performed between the two groups. The negative logarithmic p-values were plotted against the differences between the Log2 means for the two groups. The significance threshold used for these experiments is noted in the relevant figure legend and supplementary tables. For SILAC experiments, default search parameters were used with multiplicity set to 2 (Arg8, Lys10) and “Match between runs” enabled. Using the Perseus platform [27] version 1.6.5.0, proteins group normalized H/L ratios were Log2 transformed. Label switched samples (L/H) were inverted to KO/HEK293T orientation prior to this step. Values listed as being ‘Only identified by site’, ‘Reverse’ or ‘Contaminants’ were removed from the dataset. Mitochondrial annotations were imported by matching with the Mitocarta2 dataset [28] by gene name and/or ENSG identifier. Experimental groups were assigned to each set of triplicates rows with <2 valid values for each group removed. Non-mitochondrial proteins were removed, and a one sample Student’s two-sided t-test was performed within each group. The negative logarithmic p-values were plotted against the differences between the mean ratios for each group. A significance threshold (p < 0.05) was used for all experiments. Log2-transformed median SILAC ratios were mapped on homologous subunits of the respiratory chain complexes, mitoribosome assembly intermediate and mitoribosome. Applicable Protein Data Bank accession codes provided in text.

### Publication Abstract
NDUFAB1 is the mitochondrial acyl carrier protein (ACP) essential for cell viability. Through its pantetheine-4'-phosphate post-translational modification, NDUFAB1 interacts with members of the leucine-tyrosine-arginine motif (LYRM) protein family. Although several LYRM proteins have been described to participate in a variety of defined processes, the functions of others remain either partially or entirely unknown. We profiled the interaction network of NDUFAB1 to reveal associations with 9 known LYRM proteins as well as more than 20 other proteins involved in mitochondrial respiratory chain complex and mitochondrial ribosome assembly. Subsequent knockout and interaction network studies in human cells revealed the LYRM member AltMiD51 to be important for optimal assembly of the large mitoribosome subunit, consistent with recent structural studies. In addition, we used proteomics coupled with topographical heat-mapping to reveal that knockout of LYRM2 impairs assembly of the NADH-dehydrogenase module of complex I, leading to defects in cellular respiration. Together, this work adds to the catalogue of functions executed by LYRM family of proteins in building mitochondrial complexes and emphasizes the common and essential role of NDUFAB1 as a protagonist in mitochondrial metabolism.

### Keywords
Lyr motif, Lc-ms, Mitochondria, Ndufab1, Ap-ms, Topographical heatmap, Respirastory chain, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David A Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia


