### Accession
PXD014299

### Title
A cleavable chelation-assisted biotin probe enables the discovery of a celecoxib binding site on prostaglandin E synthase

### Description
The coxibs are a subset of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that selectively target cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) to inhibit prostaglandin signaling and reduce inflammation.  However, only celecoxib remains in use, necessitating exploration of broader mechanisms of the coxibs.  Here, we report a novel binding site for celecoxib on prostaglandin E synthase (PTGES), an enzyme downstream of COX-2 in the prostaglandin signaling pathway using an isotopically-coded cleavable chelation-assisted biotin probe.  Evaluation of the multi-functional probe revealed significantly improved tagging efficiencies attributable to promotion of CuAAC chemistry by the embedded picolyl functional group.  Application of the probe within the small molecule interactome mapping by photo-affinity labeling (SIM-PAL) platform using photo-celecoxib as a reporter for celecoxib identified known targets (e.g., carbonic anhydrase 12) and the significant enrichment of PTGES, along with six additional membrane proteins and 15 subunits of the cytochrome complex.  In addition, four binding sites to celecoxib were mapped by the probe, including a direct interaction with PTGES.  The interaction between celecoxib and PTGES was validated by competitive displacement and thermal shift assay.  The binding site between celecoxib and PTGES enabled the development of a structural model of the interaction and will inform the further development of new selective inhibitors of the prostaglandin signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Desalted samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid/water (20 μL). The sample (10.0 μL) was loaded onto a C18 trap column (3 cm, 3 µm particle size C10 Dr. Maisch 150 µm I.D) and then separated on an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 µm particle size, 250 mm length, 75 µm internal diameter) at 150 nL/min with a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 system connected in line to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. The column temperature was maintained at 50 ˚C. The tryptic peptides were separated via a step-wise gradient from 5% to 98% of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile over 120 min (0–1 min, 0–5%; 1–91 min, 5–27%; 91–115 min, 27–98%; 115–120 min, 98%–0%).  The cleavage peptides were separated via the same gradient described above. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 120K FWHM resolution (m/z = 200).  Tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 at a resolving power settings of 50K. HCD fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments accumulated for up to 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 using SEQUEST HT, allowing for variable modifications (methionine oxidation: +15.995 Da; cysteine alkylation: +57.021 Da; asparagine/glutamine deamidation: +0.984; photo-celecoxib with CBA: +543.151 Da, +545.167 Da; photo-celecoxib with CBPA: +620.177 Da, +622.184 Da), up to two missed cleavages and mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for fragment ions from HCD.

### Publication Abstract
The coxibs are a subset of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that primarily target cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) to inhibit prostaglandin signaling and reduce inflammation. However, mechanisms to inhibit other members of the prostaglandin signaling pathway may improve selectivity and reduce off-target toxicity. Here, we report a novel binding site for celecoxib on prostaglandin E synthase (PTGES), which is an enzyme downstream of COX-2 in the prostaglandin signaling pathway, using a cleavable chelation-assisted biotin probe <b>6</b>. Evaluation of the multifunctional probe <b>6</b> revealed significantly improved tagging efficiencies attributable to the embedded picolyl functional group. Application of the probe <b>6</b> within the small molecule interactome mapping by photoaffinity labeling (SIM-PAL) platform using photo-celecoxib as a reporter for celecoxib identified PTGES and other membrane proteins in the top eight enriched proteins from A549 cells. Four binding sites to photo-celecoxib were mapped by the probe <b>6</b>, including a binding site with PTGES. The binding interaction with PTGES was validated by competitive displacement with celecoxib and licofelone, which is a known PTGES inhibitor, and was used to generate a structural model of the interaction. The identification of photo-celecoxib interactions with membrane proteins, including the direct binding site on the membrane protein PTGES, will inform further functional followup and the design of new selective inhibitors of the prostaglandin signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Harvard University


