### Accession
PXD004209

### Title
A detailed proteomic analysis of plasma membrane from zebrafish brain

### Description
The brain plasma membrane proteome represents the major subsets of signaling proteins and promising drug targets though often understudied due to traditional experimental difficulties. Here we report a comprehensive dataset of the proteins identified in the highly enriched plasma membrane of zebrafish brain by applying multidimensional liquid chromatography coupled with tandem-mass spectrometry (MS/MS). A total number of 108767 peptide groups were identified resulting in 9201 proteins. These included brain receptors, transporters and channels that are important elements linked to brain functions, diseases and drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma membrane from zebrafish brain was obtained by equilibrium density centrifugation on a discontinuous sucrose gradient. The extracted proteins were sequentially digested by trypsin and chymotrypsin using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The peptide mixture was separated by two-dimmensional high-/low pH reverse phase/reverse phase liquid chromatography and analyzed on Thermo Q-Exactive™ Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analysed by searching the UniProtKB Danio rerio database (43655 sequences, download on May 16th, 2016) with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) and MASCOT 2.4 (MatrixScience, London, UK). Detailed search criteria were used as follows; enzyme: trypsin or trypchymo with a maximum of two missing cleavage sites; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: oxidation (M); search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; peptide mass tolerance ± 10 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance ± 0.02 Da. Only proteins with at least two validated spectra, at least one unique peptide and with a maximum false discovery rate of 1% for proteins and peptides and ion score > 20 were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) is a well-established model organism in developmental biology and disease modeling. In recent years, an increasing amount of studies used zebrafish to analyze the genetic changes underlying various neurological disorders. The brain plasma membrane proteome represents the major subsets of signaling proteins and promising drug targets, but is often understudied due to traditional experimental difficulties including problems with solubility, detergent removal, or low abundance. Here, we report a comprehensive dataset of the proteins identified in the enriched plasma membrane of the zebrafish brain by applying sequential trypsin/chymotrypsin digestion with multidimensional LC-MS/MS. A total number of 97&#xa0;017 peptide groups corresponding to 9201 proteins were identified. These were annotated in various molecular functions or neurological disorders. The dataset of the current study provides a useful data source for further utilizing zebrafish in basic and clinical neuroscience.

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Zebrafish brain

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Roman Smidak

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Gert Lubec
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


