### Accession
PXD000787

### Title
A proteomic map of the human aqueous humor

### Description
The aqueous humor is a colourless, transparent fluid that fills the anterior chamber of the eye. It has an important role to play in maintaining the intraocular pressure of the eye and providing nourishment to avascular structures such as the lens and cornea. It is also essential for providing a clear path for the entry and exit of light from the eye and maintaining the refractive power of the eye. In this study, 250 samples of aqueous humor were collected from patients undergoing cataract surgery. The samples were pooled, divided into aliquots and subjected to ingel digestion, insolution digestion followed by strong cation exchange chromatography and basic reverse phase liquid chromatography fractionation. MS/MS analysis was carried out on a Fourier transform LTQ-Orbitrap velos mass spectrometer and the data were searched with the search algorithms Mascot, SEQUEST and X!Tandem against the NCBI RefSeq human protein database.  We have identified 818 proteins of which 447 have been identified for the first time.  Proteins such as sorbitol dehydrogenase, filensin and phakinin were some of the novel proteins identified in this study. Classification of proteins based on domain information yielded 304 proteins with signal peptides, 46 proteins with transmembrane domain and 75 proteins with both signal peptide and transmembrane domains. Our study provides a detailed profile of the human aqueous humor. The results from this study of aqueous proteins should help facilitate research into pathological conditions of the eye such as glaucoma, myopia, cataract and uveitis.

### Sample Protocol
Aqueous humor samples were pooled and abundant proteins were depleted using a Multiple Affinity Removal System spin cartridge (Agilent Technologies Inc., Cat# 5188-6560). The protein concentration of pooled aqueous humor sample was estimated using Lowry’s assay. In-gel digestion: Approximately 250µg of protein was resolved using 10% SDS PAGE. 26 bands stained with Commassie Brilliant Blue were excised and in-gel digestion was carried out.  In-solution digestion: In-solution digestion was carried out as previously described (42).  Strong cation exchange chromatography: The digested peptides were reconstituted using 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer containing 30% ACN, pH 2.7 (solvent A). SCX fractionation was carried out on a Polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD) (300 Å, 5 µm, 100 × 2.1 mm) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). Basic reverse phase liquid chromatography: Basic reverse phase liquid chromatography was carried out with a XBridge C18, 5 μm 250 x 4.6 mm analytical column (Waters corporation, MA, USA) with a flow rate of 1 ml/min using an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system. LC-MS/MS analysis  In-gel, SCX and bRPLC fractions were analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) coupled with Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The nanospray source was fitted with an emitter tip (inner diameter 10 μm) (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and a voltage of 2 kV was applied. Peptide enrichment was carried out on a trap column (2cm x 75um, Magic C18AQ, 5um, 100Å, Michrom Biosciences Inc) at a flow rate of 3ul/min. Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (10 cm x 75 μm, Magic C18AQ, 3um, 100Å, Michrom Biosciences Inc.) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min employing a linear gradient of 7- 30% acetonitrile over 80 min. MS and MS/MS scan acquisition was carried out in an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 60,000 and 15,000 at 400 m/z, respectively. MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner targeting twenty most abundant ions with charge state ≥2 in each survey scan in the m/z range of 350 to 1,800. Fragmentation was carried out using High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) mode with normalized collision energy of 39. Isolation width was set to 2 m/z. Precursor ions selected for MS/MS fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 60s.Target ion quantity for (FT) full MS and MS2 were 5 x 105 and 2 x 105 respectively. The automatic gain control for full MS and MS/MS was set to 1 × 106 and 5 × 104 ions, respectively. Internal calibration was carried out by enabling lock mass option using polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z, 445.1200025) ions.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was searched against human Refseq 50 database (33947 sequences with known contaminants) using Mascot and Sequest search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.3.0.339, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search criteria included oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation of protein as variable modification and carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine as fixed modification. A precursor mass tolerance of 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Search results were filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.  Protein lists from Mascot, Sequest and X! Tandem searches were compiled. Subcellular localization, molecule class, molecular function, biological process and domain-related information were fetched for the identified proteins from the Human Protein Reference Database (http://www.hprd.org)

### Publication Abstract
The aqueous humor is a colorless, transparent fluid that fills the anterior chamber of the eye. It plays an important role in maintaining the intraocular pressure and providing nourishment to the lens and cornea. The constitution of the aqueous humor is controlled by the blood-aqueous barrier. Though this ocular fluid has been extensively studied, its role in ocular physiology is still not completely understood. In this study, aqueous humor samples were collected from 250 patients undergoing cataract surgery, subjected to multiple fractionation strategies and analyzed on a Fourier transform LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. In all, we identified 763 proteins, of which 386 have been identified for the first time in this study. Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD), filensin (BFSP1), and phakinin (BFSP2) are some of the proteins that have not been previously reported in the aqueous humor. Gene Ontology analysis revealed 35% of the identified proteins to be extracellular, with a majority of them involved in cell communication and signal transduction. This study comprehensively reports 386 novel proteins that have important potential as biomarker candidates for future research into personalized medicine and diagnostics aimed towards improving visual health.

### Keywords
Human, Brplc, Eye, Ingel, Trypsin, Lc-ms/ms, Scx, Aqueous humor, Humor

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine,  Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD  21205, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine,  Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD  21205, USA


