### Accession
PXD027365

### Title
MPK3/6-induced degradation of ARR1/10/12 promotes salt tolerance in Arabidopsis

### Description
Here we present a LC-MS/MS analysis on ARR1/10/12-His recombinant proteins that were phosphorylated by MPK3 and MPK6 in vitro

### Sample Protocol
To prepare samples for mass spectrometry, 0.1 μg of GST-MKK5DD, 0.2 μg of GST-MPK3/6 or MPK3/6-His and 2 μg of ARR1/10/12-His were incubated in 30 μL of reaction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT) with 50 mM ATP at 30℃ for 1 h. Protein digestion was performed with FASP method described by Wisniewski. Proteins were reduced with DTT (dithiothreitol) and alkylated with IAM (iodoacetamide). The samples were transferred into 10 kDa ultrafiltration centrifuge tubes (Microcon units). Subsequently, the protein was washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer three times. Then, the protein suspension was digested with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Following centrifugation at 16 000 g for 15 min, the filtrate was collected. After adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution, the digested peptides were desalted with a C18 Stage Tip for further LC-MS analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) for the protein identification against the UniProtKB Arabidopsis thaliana database (http://uniprot.org). The enzyme was set as trypsin, and the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. The main search peptide tolerance, first search peptide tolerance, and MS/MS tolerance were 4.5 ppm, 20 ppm, and 20 ppm, respectively. The peptide spectral matching FDR and the protein FDR were both set as 0.01. Razor and unique peptides were used for the protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arr1/10/12; cytokinin; mpk3/6; phosphorylation; salt stress

### Affiliations
shandong university
Shandong university

### Submitter
Zhenwei Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaojun Ding
Shandong university


