### Accession
PXD017493

### Title
Decoding drought tolerance mechanisms in Holm oak (Quercus ilex) throught a combined transcriptomics and proteomics analysis

### Description
Drought is considered as a threat to the sustainability of Mediterranean forests and, of the agro-silvo-pastoral “dehesa” system.   Holm oak (Quercus ilex L.) is one of the most representative species of these ecosystems and this abiotic stress causes a high tree mortality rate, being more accused at the seedling stage. In this study, an integrative analysis of transcriptome and proteome in leaves of Q. ilex seedlings under drought conditions was carried out to identify gene products involved in the metabolic pathways related to drought tolerant mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC was performed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA) with a C18 75 µm x 50 Acclaim Pepmam column (Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA). The digest peptides (3 ug in 5 ul) was previously loaded on a 300 µm x 5 mm Acclaim Pepmap precolumn (Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA) in 2% AcN/0.05% TFA for 5 min at 5 µL/min. Peptide separation was performed at 40&#9702;C for all runs. Samples were separated during a gradient of 120 min ranging from 95% solvent A (0.1% FA) to 80% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. LC was coupled to MS using an ESI source. Eluted peptides were converted into gas-phase ions by nano electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA) mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 x 105 ion count target threshold. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 1.2 Da with the quadrupole. Monoisotopic precursor ions were CID-fragmented in the ion trap, which was set up as follows: automatic gain control, 2 × 103, maximum injection time, 300 ms, and 35% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the SEQUEST algorithm available in Proteome Discoverer™ 2.1(Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA). The following settings (Romero-Rodríguez et al., 2014) were used:   precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Identification confidence was set to a 5% FDR and the variable modifications were set to: oxidation of methionine and the fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethyl cysteine formation. A maximum of two missed cleavages were set for all searches. The protein identification was carried out against the translated Q. ilex transcriptome generated in this work. A six-frame translation for each sequence in the transcriptome was performed by using transdecoder (Haas et al., 2013) filtering and keeping peptides longer than 50 amino acids. Proteome Discoverer™ filtered out those proteins groups that had no unique peptides among the considered peptides during the protein grouping process.

### Publication Abstract
Quercus ilex is the dominant tree species in natural forest ecosystems across the Mediterranean Basin and in the agrosilvopastoral system dehesa, which has a high ecological and economical significance. As in other forestry species, survival in Q. ilex is threatened by long periods of drought. This paper reports the transcriptome and proteome profiles of 6-month-old seedlings subjected to severe drought conditions. Drought was imposed by water withholding in seedlings grown in perlite for 28&#xa0;days. Seedling leaves were collected when leaf fluorescence had decreased by 20% and 45% relative to well-watered seedlings. The transcriptome and proteome were analyzed by using Illumina and shotgun platforms. The quality and confidence of the mRNA and protein identifications and quantifications were assessed, obtaining 25,169 transcripts and 3312 proteins. Variable transcripts and proteins were analyzed by Venn diagram, Pearson's correlation, GO enrichment, KEGG pathways, multivariate analysis and interaction networks. Despite the poor correlation between mRNA and protein, both platforms gave a complementary view of the changes in the abundance of several gene products under drought conditions and indicated that gene expression regulation and translation to phenotype is quite complex and gene-specific. As a general tendency, while transcripts and proteins of the metabolism were down-accumulated, those of stress related were up-accumulated. Out of the variable dataset, four gene products (viz., FtSH6, CLPB1, CLPB3, and HSP22) were up-accumulated at both omics levels at the two surveyed times, being the first work where they are described in drought response in forest species. These chaperones and proteases could be considered as potential drought tolerance markers to be used in the selection of elite, resilient genotypes, and in breeding programs.

### Keywords
Quercus, Ilex, Lc-msms, Proteome, Drought

### Affiliations
University of Cordoba
University of Cordoba (Spain)

### Submitter
Victor Manuel Guerrero-Sánchez

### Lab Head
Dr Jesus V. Jorrin-Novo
University of Cordoba (Spain)


