### Accession
PXD031605

### Title
Identification of muscle biomarkers in McArdle disease

### Description
Glycogen storage disease type V (GSDV, McArdle disease) is a rare genetic myopathy caused by deficiency of the muscle isoform of glycogen phosphorylase (PYGM). This results in a block in the use of muscle glycogen as an energetic substrate, with subsequent exercise intolerance. The GSDV pathophysiology is still not fully understood, especially with regard to some features such as muscle contractures or persistent muscle damage (i.e., even without prior exercise). We aimed at identifying muscle protein biomarkers of GSDV by analyzing the muscle proteome and the molecular networks associated with muscle dysfunction. Muscle biopsies from 8 patients and 8 controls were studied by quantitative protein expression using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) followed by artificial neuronal networks (ANNs) and topology analysis. Protein candidate validation was performed by western-blot. Several proteins predominantly involved in the process of muscle contraction and/or calcium homeostasis, such as myosin, sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 1, tropomyosin alpha-1 chain, tro-ponin isoforms, and alpha-actinin-3 showed significantly lower expression levels in muscle of GSDV patients. These proteins could be potential biomarkers of the persistent muscle damage reported in GSDV patients. Further studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which PYGM controls the expression of these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fifteen mg of each muscle sample were homogenized in lysis buffer (Tris Buffered Saline 1X Solution (TBS) pH 7.4, 1% SDS and protease inhibitors cocktail) using a glass potter on ice. Homogenate was boiled for 1 min, vortexed for 30 s (three times), and cen-trifuged 1 min at 14000 rpm. Total protein was quantified in the supernatant using Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA)) to set a final concentration of 50 μg/µl. GSDV patient’s and control’s protein extracts were divided in two different pools to perform iTRAQ labelling followed by proteome analysis by RP-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
In-gel digestion and iTRAQ labelling.  The protein extracts (50-60 µg/pool) were resuspended in sample buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, 10% 2-mercaptoethanol and 0,004% bromophenol blue), and loaded onto of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel. The whole proteome of each wide well concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface was dyed with Coomassie blue, excised in cubes and placed into 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The excised pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (1:1), reduced with 10 mM DTT 1h at 56ºC and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide 1h at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the samples were digested in situ with trypsin (sequencing grade) as described by Shevchenko et al. The gel pieces were dehydrated by removing all liquid using sufficient acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:trypsin (w/w), kept on ice for 2 h and incubated 12h at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies).For relative quantification, 50 µg of tryptic digested peptides were labeled using chemicals from the iTRAQ reagent 8plex Multi-plex kit (AB). We performed a parallel double labeling using reagents 113 y 115 for patients’ pools and reagents 114 and 116 for controls pools. Briefly, tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB pH 8, followed by peptide-labeling. Each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 50 μL of isopropanol and added to the respective peptide mix-ture and then incubated at room temperature for 2h. Labelling reaction was stopped by the addition of 0.1% formic acid. Whole supernatants were dried down and the four samples were mixed to obtain the “4plex-labeled mixture”. The mixture was desalted onto OASIS HLB Extraction Cartridges until RP-LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein identification and quantification.  The desalted 4plex-labeled mixture was dried, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn, and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 240-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B in 180 min followed by gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 240 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). Electrospray ionization, EIS, was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon Byosystems) interface. The instrument method consisted of a data-dependent top-20 experiment with an Or-bitrap MS1 scan at a resolution (m/Δm) of 30,000 followed by either twenty high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS mass-analyzed in the Orbitrap at 7,500 (Δm/m) res-olution. MS2 experiments were performed using HCD to generate high resolution and high mass accuracy MS2 spectra. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 500. The lock mass option was enabled for both MS and MS/MS mode and the poly-dimethylcyclosiloxane ions (protonated (C2H6OSi)6); m/z 445.120025) were used for in-ternal recalibration of the mass spectra. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 40% for HCD fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion ap-plied during 30 seconds periods. Precursors of unknown or +1 charge state were rejected. Data analysis Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed against uniprot-Homo.fasta. The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ reagent labeling at the N-terminus and lysine residues. Search against decoy database was done using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. All proteins were identified with at least two peptides with high confidence. Quantitation of iTRAQ labeled peptides was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using a Workflow for processing raw files with HCD spectra for quantification (and identification). The Reporter Ions Quantifier node contains a specific quantification method for i-TRAQ 8plex. For the ratio calculations we use Quan Value corrections and for the Protein quantification we considered protein groups for peptide uniqueness and used only unique peptides. Tolerances of 10 ppm for peak integration and most confident centroid for integration method were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Glycogen storage disease type V (GSDV, McArdle disease) is a rare genetic myopathy caused by deficiency of the muscle isoform of glycogen phosphorylase (PYGM). This results in a block in the use of muscle glycogen as an energetic substrate, with subsequent exercise intolerance. The pathobiology of GSDV is still not fully understood, especially with regard to some features such as persistent muscle damage (i.e., even without prior exercise). We aimed at identifying potential muscle protein biomarkers of GSDV by analyzing the muscle proteome and the molecular networks associated with muscle dysfunction in these patients. Muscle biopsies from eight patients and eight healthy controls showing none of the features of McArdle disease, such as frequent contractures and persistent muscle damage, were studied by quantitative protein expression using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) followed by artificial neuronal networks (ANNs) and topology analysis. Protein candidate validation was performed by Western blot. Several proteins predominantly involved in the process of muscle contraction and/or calcium homeostasis, such as myosin, sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 1, tropomyosin alpha-1 chain, troponin isoforms, and alpha-actinin-3, showed significantly lower expression levels in the muscle of GSDV patients. These proteins could be potential biomarkers of the persistent muscle damage in the absence of prior exertion reported in GSDV patients. Further studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which PYGM controls the expression of these proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Proteomic, Rp-lc-ms/ms, Muscle, Itraq

### Affiliations
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12)
Hospital 12 de Octubre

### Submitter
Ines Garcia-Consuegra Galiana

### Lab Head
Dr Ines Garcia-Consuegra
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12)


