### Accession
PXD007750

### Title
CharmeRT -  CharmeRT: Boosting peptide identifications by chimeric spectra identification and retention time prediction

### Description
Files include several HeLa tryptic digests with different isolation widths and different gradient times for chimeric spectra identification and validation, each of them as three technical replicates

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreotiol (1µg DTT per 20 µg protein) and Iodacetamide (5 µg per 20 µg protein). Proteins were predigested with Lys-C at 30 °C for 2 hours (1µg Lys-C per 50µg protein in 6M urea and 12mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer) and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, Trypsin Gold, Mass spectrometry grade) at 37 °C (1µg trypsin per 30µg protein, 0.8M urea in 45mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer), digest stopping by adding concentrated TFA to a pH of approximately 2. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched following the in-house TiO2 enrichment protocol, HeLa peptides, following the in-house HeLa protocol. The HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system coupled to an Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min. The eluting peptides were directly analyzed using hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometers (Q Exactive or Q Exactive Hybrid, Thermo Fisher). The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 350−1650Th, nominal resolution of 70 000, target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17 500 using normalized collision energy 30%, isolation widths of 2, 4, or 8 and the target value was set to 5E4. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2 and higher) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 10 s. Additionally, the underfill ratio was set to 20%, resulting in an intensity threshold of 2E4.

### Data Protocol
Runs have been performed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4, MS Amanda v 1.4.14.9288, Elutator v 1.14.1.236. The following parameter settings have been used for MS Amanda: swissprot database 2016-06 (human) including the ‘cRAP’ contaminants database; trypsin as enzyme; 2 missed cleavages; Carbamidomethyl(C) as fixed PTM; Oxidation(M) and (for the phosphorylated data set) Phospho(S,T) as variable modifications. 10ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance were used. Second search parameters: MS1 spectrum deisotoping set to false; keep y1 ion, remove water losses, remove ammonia losses, and exclude first precursor set to true; top 5 or top 10 results per precursor. The Elutator FDR threshold was set to 1%. The match with the best q-value was selected in a case when several high confident matches were reported for the same spectrum, such that the number of PSMs corresponds to the number of confidently identified spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Coeluting peptides are still a major challenge for the identification and validation of MS/MS spectra, but carry great potential. To tackle these problems, we have developed the here presented CharmeRT workflow, combining a chimeric spectra identification strategy implemented as part of the MS Amanda algorithm with the validation system Elutator, which incorporates a highly accurate retention time prediction algorithm. For high-resolution data sets this workflow identifies 38-64% chimeric spectra, which results in up to 63% more unique peptides compared to a conventional single search strategy.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-msms, Chimeric spectra

### Affiliations
IMP, IMBA
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria

### Submitter
Viktoria Dorfer

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
IMP, IMBA


