### Accession
PXD016986

### Title
Metabolic differences between morphologically distinct symbiont populations in the tubeworm Riftia pachyptila

### Description
The endosymbiont population of the hydrothermal vent tube worm Riftia pachyptila consists of a single 16S phylotype of sulfur-oxidizing gammaproteobacteria. The intracellular symbiont exhibits remarkable morphological heterogeneity, from small rod-shaped or coccoid cells to large cocci, which were suggested to be part of a common cell cycle. To assess whether these morphological differences are accompanied by distinct metabolic profiles, we physically enriched individual symbiont cells sizes by density gradient centrifugation and subjected these enrichments to metaproteomic analysis and statistical evaluation using clustering and random forests. Unlike previous molecular studies, which examined the metabolism of the symbiont population as whole, we were thus able to unravel comprehensive protein abundance patterns of individual symbiont subpopulations. Supported by microscopic analyses, our metaproteomic results show that Riftia symbiont cells of different sizes are stages of a physiological differentiation process: Small symbionts actively divide and may establish cellular symbiont-host interaction, as indicated by highest abundance of the cell division key protein FtsZ and highly abundant chaperones and porins in this initial phase. We furthermore present evidence that large symbionts, on the other hand, do not divide, but still replicate DNA, leading to DNA endoreduplication. Highest abundance of enzymes for CO2 fixation, carbon storage and biosynthesis indicates that in its late differentiation stage, the symbiont’s metabolism is efficiently geared on the production of organic material. We propose that this symbiont aging process enhances the productivity of the symbiosis as a whole.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted as described in (Hinzke et al. 2018, dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.kg6ctze). Briefly, cells were mixed with lysis buffer (1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)), heated for 5 min at 95 °C and 600 rpm and cooled on ice. Samples were then placed in an ultrasonic bath for 5 min and subsequently cooled on ice. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (14.000 x g, 10 min, room temperature). Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were generated using a 1D gel-based approach as in (Ponnudurai et al., 2017, doi:10.1038/ismej.2016.124) with minor modifications. In brief, 20 µg of sample was mixed with Laemmli sample buffer containing DTT (2 % (w/v) SDS, 10 % glycerol , 12.5 mM DTT, 0.001 % (w/v) bromophenol blue in 0.06 M Tris-HCl, (Laemmli, 1970, doi:10.1038/227680a0)) and separated using pre-cast 4-20 % polyacrylamide gels (BioRad). After staining, protein lanes were cut in 10 pieces, destained (600 rpm, 37 °C, 200 mM NH4HCO3 in 30 % acetonitrile), digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37 °C, before peptides were eluted in an ultrasonic bath. Peptides were then directly used for 1D LC-MS analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS spectra against the Riftia host and symbiont database (Hinzke et al., 2019, 10.1128/mBio.02243-19), which was constructed from the host transcriptome and three symbiont genome assemblies, i.e., NCBI project PRJNA60889 (endosymbiont of Riftia pachyptila (vent Ph05)), NCBI project PRJNA60887 (endosymbiont of Tevnia jerichonana (vent Tica)), and JGI IMG Gold Project Gp0016331 (endosymbiont of Riftia pachyptila (vent Mk28)). The cRAP database containing common laboratory contaminants (The Global Proteome Machine Organization, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) was added. Database search was conducted using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.0.0.802 with the Sequest HT node as described in Kleiner 2018 (Kleiner et al., 2018, doi:10.1073/pnas.1722325115) with a false discovery rate of 5% (FidoCT q-value <0.05). For details regarding statistical data evaluation using clustering and random forest analysis, please refer to the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Hydrothermal vents, Deep sea, Metaproteomics, Holobiont, Mutualistic association, Mutualism, Gradient centrifugation

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Greifswald Intitute of Marine Biotechnology
Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany Institute of Marine Biotechnology, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Tjorven Hinzke

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany Institute of Marine Biotechnology, Greifswald, Germany


