### Accession
PXD042402

### Title
Surface Proteomics of ADAM15 Knock-Down cells

### Description
ADAM15 is a member of the disintegrin-metalloproteinase family of sheddases, which plays a role in several biological processes including cartilage homeostasis. Contrary to well-characterized ADAMs, little is known about ADAM15 substrates or how the enzyme exerts its biological functions. Herein, we used “surface-spanning enrichment with click-sugars (SUSPECS)” proteomics to identify ADAM15 substrates and/or proteins regulated by the proteinase at the surface of chondrocyte-like cells. ADAM15-silencing significantly altered membrane levels of 13 proteins, but none of these was a canonical substrate. We used orthogonal techniques to validate ADAM15 effects on 3 of these proteins which have known roles in cartilage homeostasis. This confirmed that ADAM15-silencing increased levels of PDCD1LG2 and reduced levels of vasorin and SLC26A2 through an unknown post-translational mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
HTB94 cells were plated in a 6-well plate until 70% confluent, and then transiently transfected with an ADAM15 siRNA or non-targeting control siRNA (s16681 or 4390844, respectively; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by using jetPRIME transfection reagent (Polyplus, Illkirch, France). Cells were then cultured at 37 °C for 12 h, before addition of 50 μM ManNAz sugar (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to the culture for another 24 h. Cells were washed twice with 2 ml ice cold PBS (pH 7.4), before adding 25 μM sulfo-DBCO-biotin conjugate in ice cold PBS, and incubating for 2 h at 4 °C in the dark. Cells were washed twice with 10 ml ice cold PBS to remove excess sulfo-DBCO-biotin conjugate, and lysed in 2 ml STET lysis buffer. Cell lysates were centrifuged (5 min, 4000 × g, 4 °C) and the resultant supernatants filtered through a 0.2 mm Corning syringe filter and collected in a 15 ml tube. Biotinylated proteins were pulled down using streptavidin. 300 μl of Pierce high capacity streptavidin-agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was loaded to a Poly-Prep chromatography column (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA) and ‘clicked’ cell lysates were loaded onto the column. After washing with 10 ml wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton) to remove non-specifically bound material, streptavidin-agarose beads were re-suspended in 500 μl wash buffer and transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. Beads were centrifuged (1 min, 7000 × g, room temperature) and peptides eluted using elution buffer (62.5 mM Tris.HCl, pH 6.8, 8 M urea, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 5% mercaptoethanol, 0.002% bromphenol-blue) with 3 mM biotin, and boiled (95 °C, 5 min). Eluates were loaded onto a 10% acrylamide gel for SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. The gel was stained using Coomassie brillant blue (30-60 min), and de-stained overnight with 10% acetic acid. Qualitatively equal gel slices were then excised from the gel and proteins in the gel slices digested with trypsin using the in-gel digestion protocol. In-gel digestion was performed as previously described (Shevchenko, A., et al. 2006, Nat Protoc. 1, 2856-60). In brief, protein lanes from the de-stained acrylamide gel were sliced out vertically and divided into 8 equal horizontal pieces above the BSA band (the thickest band at around 64 kDa on the gel) and 6 equal horizontal pieces below the BSA band. Pieces were further sliced into 1 mm3 cubes, collected in a 96-well plate and incubated in 150 μl of acetonitrile (ANC) (room temperature, 10 min). Gels were de-hydrated using vacuum centrifugation, then 50 μl of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to each well (55 °C, 30 min). 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM ABC was added to the gel pieces, and incubated for 20 min. Gels were then de-hydrated using 150 μl ACN.  50 μl of 3 ng/μl trypsin in 10 mM ABC; 10% ACN was added to cover each gel piece completely, and trypsin incubation performed on ice for 30 min. ABC was then added to cover the gel pieces completely, the 96-well plate covered with its lid, and placed into a 37 °C incubator overnight. On the following day, 5% formic acid (FA) and ACN were mixed (1:2 volume:volume ratio) immediately before use and 100 μl of the mixture added to wells before incubation at room temperature with gentle shaking for 15 min to extract fragmented peptides. The resultant supernatant was collected in an Eppendorf tube, and the extraction step repeated (generally 3 times) until gel pieces were completely de-hydrated. Peptides in the supernatant were de-hydrated using vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 33 μl 0.1% FA.  To perform liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), approximately 1 μg of peptides from each sample were loaded onto the nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Proxeon) using an in-house packed C18 column (50 cm x 75 μm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a binary gradient (Table 2.12) of water and acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA at a column temperature of 50 °C. The nanoLC system was coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an nanospray ex ion source system (Proxeon) online. Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 and the top 10 peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 2.5×104 were chosen for collision-induced dissociation to sequence peptides via fragmentation. The resultant fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17 500. A dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by LC-MS/MS was analysed using Maxquant 1.5.2.8. (Max-Planck Institute Munich, Germany). Proteomic data generated were compared against a reviewed canonical FASTA database of Homo sapiens from UniProt. Two missed cleavages were allowed when performing database searches. False discovery rates (FDR) of both peptides and proteins were adjusted to less than 5% using a decoy proteomic data base using the same criteria as the real canonical FASTA database. Label-free quantification (LFQ) for protein abundance was only performed when at least two ratio counts of unique peptides were detected in each experimental conditions (non-targeting vs. knockdown). Additionally, only unique peptides were used for LFQ. The LFQ values were transformed to log2-based values and a two-sided heteroscedastic student’s t-test was used to perform statistical analysis of significance. A p-value less than 5%, corrected with the FDR, was set as the significance threshold.

### Publication Abstract
ADAM15 is a member of the disintegrin-metalloproteinase family of sheddases, which plays a role in several biological processes including cartilage homeostasis. In contrast with well-characterized ADAMs, such as the canonical sheddases ADAM17 and ADAM10, little is known about substrates of ADAM15 or how the enzyme exerts its biological functions. Herein, we used "surface-spanning enrichment with click-sugars (SUSPECS)" proteomics to identify ADAM15 substrates and/or proteins regulated by the proteinase at the cell surface of chondrocyte-like cells. Silencing of ADAM15 by siRNAs significantly altered membrane levels of 13 proteins, all previously not known to be regulated by ADAM15. We used orthogonal techniques to validate ADAM15 effects on 3 of these proteins which have known roles in cartilage homeostasis. This confirmed that ADAM15-silencing increased cell surface levels of the programmed cell death 1 ligand 2 (PDCD1LG2) and reduced cell surface levels of vasorin and the sulfate transporter SLC26A2 through an unknown post-translational mechanism. The increase of PDCD1LG2 by ADAM15 knockdown, a single-pass type I transmembrane protein, suggested it could be a proteinase substrate. However, shed PDCD1LG2 could not be detected even by a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, a highly sensitive method for identification and quantification of proteins in complex protein samples, suggesting that ADAM15 regulates PDCD1LG2 membrane levels by a mechanism different from ectodomain shedding.

### Keywords
Suspecs, Adam15, Surface

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Proteomics Group of Fondazione Ri.MED, Research Department IRCCS ISMETT (Istituto Mediterraneo per i Trapianti e Terapie ad Alta Specializzazione), via E. Tricomi 5, 90145 Palermo, Italy

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Dario Scilabra
Proteomics Group of Fondazione Ri.MED, Research Department IRCCS ISMETT (Istituto Mediterraneo per i Trapianti e Terapie ad Alta Specializzazione), via E. Tricomi 5, 90145 Palermo, Italy


