### Accession
PXD007280

### Title
Proteome analysis of hypoxic glioblastoma cells reveals sequential metabolic adaptation of one-carbon metabolic pathways

### Description
Rapidly proliferating tumors are exposed to a hypoxic microenvironment due to their density, high metabolic consumption, and interruptions in blood flow due to immature angiogenesis. Cellular responses to hypoxia promote highly malignant and metastatic behavior, as well as a chemotherapy-resistant state. In order to better understand the complex relationships between hypoxic adaptations and cancer progression, we studied the dynamic proteome responses of glioblastoma cells exposed to hypoxia via an innovative approach: quantification of newly synthesized proteins using heavy stable-isotope arginine labeling combined with accurate assessment of cell replication by quantification of the light/heavy arginine ratio of peptides in histone H4. We found that hypoxia affects cancer cells in multiple intertwined ways: inflammation, typically with over-expressed glucose transporter (GLUT1), DUSP4/ MKP2, and RelA proteins; a metabolic adaptation with overexpression of all glycolytic pathway enzymes for pyruvate/lactate synthesis; and the EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and cancer stem cell (CSC) renewal with characteristic morphological changes and mesenchymal/CSC protein expression profiles. For the first time, we identified the vitamin B12 transporter protein TCN2, which is essential for one-carbon metabolism, as being significantly downregulated. Further, we found, by knockdown and overexpression experiments, that TCN2 plays an important role in controlling cancer cell transformation towards the highly aggressive mesenchymal/CSC stage; low expression of TCN2 has an effect similar to hypoxia, while high expression of TCN2 can reverse it. We conclude that hypoxia induces sequential metabolic responses of one-carbon metabolism in tumor cells.

### Sample Protocol
For LFQ proteomics, we combined the two preparations of samples and analyzed the do-d5 samples at least three times. The detail protocol may be refferred to TMT method via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005487.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by PEAK® DB to perform De Novo sequencing assisted database search against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens database with 88,760 entries of protein sequences (release date: 09/2014). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modifications and oxidati on of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. FDR were estimated by the ratio of decoy # hits over target # hits among PSMs. Maximum allowed FDR is 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Rapidly proliferating tumors are exposed to a hypoxic microenvironment because of their density, high metabolic consumption, and interruptions in blood flow because of immature angiogenesis. Cellular responses to hypoxia promote highly malignant and metastatic behavior, as well as a chemotherapy-resistant state. To better understand the complex relationships between hypoxic adaptations and cancer progression, we studied the dynamic proteome responses of glioblastoma cells exposed to hypoxia via an innovative approach: quantification of newly synthesized proteins using heavy stable-isotope arginine labeling combined with accurate assessment of cell replication by quantification of the light/heavy arginine ratio of peptides in histone H4. We found that hypoxia affects cancer cells in multiple intertwined ways: inflammation, typically with over-expressed glucose transporter (GLUT1), DUSP4/MKP2, and RelA proteins; a metabolic adaptation with overexpression of all glycolytic pathway enzymes for pyruvate/lactate synthesis; and the EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and cancer stem cell (CSC) renewal with characteristic morphological changes and mesenchymal/CSC protein expression profiles. For the first time, we identified the vitamin B<sub>12</sub> transporter protein TCN2, which is essential for one-carbon metabolism, as being significantly downregulated. Further, we found, by knockdown and overexpression experiments, that TCN2 plays an important role in controlling cancer cell transformation toward the highly aggressive mesenchymal/CSC stage; low expression of TCN2 has an effect similar to hypoxia, whereas high expression of TCN2 can reverse it. We conclude that hypoxia induces sequential metabolic responses of one-carbon metabolism in tumor cells. Our mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD005487 (TMT-labeling) and PXD007280 (label-free).

### Keywords
Protein pathways, Proteomics, Hypoxia, One carbon

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Kangling Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kangling Zhang
University of Texas Medical Branch


