### Accession
PXD019456

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) based on pathological grading using FFPE blocks using high-resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
Oral squamous cell carcinoma is one of the most common cancers occurring worldwide associated with significant mortality and morbidity. Despite the early prognostic factors which such as histological tumor grading, staging, the extent of the tumor invasion, and involvement of regional lymph nodes, there is a demand for development of molecular markers which will help in unraveling molecular carcinogenesis associated with OSCC. In the current study, we carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis using high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify the differentially expressed proteins among the types of OSCC FFPE tissues. This resulted in the identification of 2,399 non-redundant proteins expressed differentially across histologically-classified well, moderate and poorly differentiated OSCC specimens.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE sections of 10 μm from three histological grades (well-, moderately- and poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma) were obtained. The deparaffinization of FFPE sections involved 3 cycles of xylene treatment which was further rehydrated using ethanol and water. These rehydrated tissue sections were then lysed using lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) and transferred to PCT microtubes. Barocycler was used for protein extraction and protein concentration of samples was determined using Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. An equal amount of proteins from each condition were subjected to reduction using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark. It was further subjected to trypsin digestion at a final concentration of 1:20 (w/w) and labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT). The labeled peptides were subjected to fractionation using basic Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography and LC-MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were searched using the Human RefSeq 81 protein database in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using SequestHT and Mascot as search algorithms. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavage allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT at lysine, and peptide N-termini were given as fixed modification, and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were given as variable modifications. We searched our data with a precursor ion mass tolerance at 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. The peptides identified were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated by searching the target database against the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Loss of cell differentiation is a hallmark for the progression of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Archival Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) tissues constitute a valuable resource for studying the differentiation of OSCC and can offer valuable insights into the process of tumor progression. In the current study, we performed LC-MS/MS-based quantitative proteomics of FFPE specimens from pathologically-confirmed well-differentiated, moderately-differentiated, and poorly-differentiated OSCC cases. The data were analyzed in four technical replicates, resulting in the identification of 2376 proteins. Of these, 141 and 109 were differentially expressed in moderately-differentiated and poorly differentiated OSCC cases, respectively, compared to well-differentiated OSCC. The data revealed significant metabolic reprogramming with respect to lipid metabolism and glycolysis with proteins belonging to both these processes downregulated in moderately-differentiated OSCC when compared to well-differentiated OSCC. Signaling pathway analysis indicated the alteration of extracellular matrix organization, muscle contraction, and glucose metabolism pathways across tumor grades. The extracellular matrix organization pathway was upregulated in moderately-differentiated OSCC and downregulated in poorly differentiated OSCC, compared to well-differentiated OSCC. PADI4, an epigenetic enzyme transcriptional regulator, and its transcriptional target HIST1H1B were both found to be upregulated in moderately differentiated and poorly differentiated OSCC, indicating epigenetic events underlying tumor differentiation. In conclusion, the findings support the advantage of using high-resolution mass spectrometry-based FFPE archival blocks for clinical and translational research. The candidate signaling pathways identified in the study could be used to develop potential therapeutic targets for OSCC.

### Keywords
Proteomic profiling, Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue, Biomarkers, Orbitrap, Omics technology

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad, Ph.D.
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India


