### Accession
PXD012206

### Title
Structure of NDH the complex I-like molecule of oxygenic photosynthesis

### Description
Cyclic electron flow (CEF) around photosystem I (PSI) is a mechanism by which photosynthetic organisms balance levels of ATP and NADPH necessary for efficient photosynthesis1,2. The NAD(P)H dehydrogenase-like complex (NDH) is a key component of this pathway in most oxygenic photosynthetic organisms3,4 and the last large photosynthetic membrane protein complex of unknown structure. Related to the respiratory NADH dehydrogenase complex (complex I), NDH transfers electrons originating from PSI to the plastoquinone (PQ) pool, while pumping protons across the thylakoid membrane, thereby increasing the amount of ATP produced per NADP+ molecule reduced4,5. NDH possesses 11 of the 14 core complex I subunits as well as several oxygenic photosynthesis specific (OPS) subunits, which are conserved from cyanobacteria to higher plants3,6. However, the three complex I core subunits involved in accepting electrons from NAD(P)H are notably absent in NDH3,5,6. Thus, how NDH acquires and transfers electrons to PQ is presently unclear. Nevertheless, the OPS subunits, specifically NdhS, are proposed to enable NDH to accept electrons from ferredoxin (Fd), its electron donor3–5,7. Here we report a 3.1 Å structure of the ~0.42 MDa NDH complex from the thermophilic cyanobacterium Thermosynechoccous elongatus BP-1 (T. elongatus) obtained by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Our maps reveal the structure and arrangement of the principle OPS subunits in the NDH complex, as well as an unexpected cofactor near the PQ-binding site in the peripheral arm. The location of the OPS subunits supports a role in electron transfer and defines two potential Fd-binding sites at the apex of the peripheral arm. Together, these results suggest multiple electron transfer routes could be present in NDH, which would serve to maximize PQ reduction and avoid deleterious off-target chemistry of the semi-plastoquinone radical.

### Sample Protocol
, BN-PAGE bands corresponding to the NDH complex were isolated and processed using a standard in-gel digestion procedure.  Briefly, the gel pieces were excised, reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, destained, and digested overnight with chymotrypsin at 37°C. Chymotryptic peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, dried in a speed-vac, and resuspended in 20 µL of 4% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Purified peptides (2.5 μg) were captured on a C18 μ precolumn and eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm) with a 1 h 5-40% gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were analyzed with an Impact II Q-TOF spectrometer equipped with a CaptiveSpray electrospray source with an acetonitrile-enriched NanoBooster gas (Bruker). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a range 150-2200 m/z range, a fixed cycle time of 3 sec, a dynamic exclusion of 1 min, m/z-dependent isolation window (1.5-5 Th) and collision energy in the range 25-75 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant33 (version 1.6.1.0). Specific searches with either trypsin (before K,R) or chymotrypsin (before F,Y,W,L,I,M) were performed against the T. elongatus (strain BP-1) proteome (2451 proteins; ID: UP000000440; NdhP and NdhQ appended). Common contaminants provided by MaxQuant were also included. Tryptic and chymotryptic peptides were permitted a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was allowed as a fixed modification. N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Default Bruker Q-TOF instrument parameters were utilized, including a first search peptide mass tolerance of 0.07 Da, main search peptide tolerance of 0.006 Da, and isotope match tolerance of 0.005 Da. The false discovery rate threshold was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic electron flow around photosystem I (PSI) is a mechanism by which photosynthetic organisms balance the levels of ATP and NADPH necessary for efficient photosynthesis<sup>1,2</sup>. NAD(P)H dehydrogenase-like complex (NDH) is a key component of this pathway in most oxygenic photosynthetic organisms<sup>3,4</sup> and is the last large photosynthetic membrane-protein complex for which the structure remains unknown. Related to the respiratory NADH dehydrogenase complex (complex I), NDH transfers electrons originating from PSI to the plastoquinone pool while pumping protons across the thylakoid membrane, thereby increasing the amount of ATP produced per NADP<sup>+</sup> molecule reduced<sup>4,5</sup>. NDH possesses 11 of the 14 core complex I subunits, as well as several oxygenic-photosynthesis-specific (OPS) subunits that are conserved from cyanobacteria to plants<sup>3,6</sup>. However, the three core complex I subunits that are involved in accepting electrons from NAD(P)H are notably absent in NDH<sup>3,5,6</sup>, and it is therefore not clear how NDH acquires and transfers electrons to plastoquinone. It is proposed that the OPS subunits-specifically NdhS-enable NDH to accept electrons from its electron donor, ferredoxin<sup>3-5,7</sup>. Here we report a 3.1 &#xc5; structure of the 0.42-MDa NDH complex from the thermophilic cyanobacterium Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1, obtained by single-particle cryo-electron microscopy. Our maps reveal the structure and arrangement of the principal OPS subunits in the NDH complex, as well as an unexpected cofactor close to the plastoquinone-binding site in the peripheral arm. The location of the OPS subunits supports a role in electron transfer and defines two potential ferredoxin-binding sites at the apex of the peripheral arm. These results suggest that NDH could possess several electron transfer routes, which would serve to maximize plastoquinone reduction and avoid deleterious off-target chemistry of the semi-plastoquinone radical.

### Keywords
Nad(p)h dehydrogenase-like complex, Cyclic electron flow, Membrane protein structure, Bioenergetics, Electron cryo-microscopy, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
McGill University

### Submitter
Andrew Bayne

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Francois Trempe
McGill University


