### Accession
PXD028548

### Title
ZAKb is a cellular compression sensor that mediates hypertrophic signaling in skeletal muscle

### Description
Mechanosensing is required for the senses of touch and hearing, and impacts on cellular processes such as cell differentiation, migration, invasion and tissue homeostasis. Mechanical inputs give rise to p38- and JNK-signaling, which mediates adaptive physiological responses in various tissues. In muscle, fiber contraction-induced p38 and JNK signaling ensures adaptation to exercise, muscle repair and hypertrophy. However, the mechanism by which muscle fibers sense mechanical load to activate this signaling, as well as the physiological roles of mechanical stress sensing more broadly, have remained elusive. Here, we show that the upstream MAP3K ZAK is a sensor of cellular compression induced by osmotic shock and cyclic compression in vitro, and muscle contraction in vivo. This function relies on ZAK’s ability to recognize stress fibers in cells and the corresponding Z-discs in muscle fibers, when under tension. Consequently, ZAK-deficient mice present with skeletal muscle defects characterized by fibers with centralized nuclei and progressive adaptation towards a slower myosin profile. Our results highlight how cells in general sense mechanical compressive load, and how mechanical forces generated during muscle contraction are translated into MAP kinase signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen and ground muscle samples were transferred to a Precellys tube, with three beads (2.8 mm) and 750 µl of boiling lysis buffer containing 5% SDS, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5, 1mM NaF, 1 mM beta-glycerol-phosphate, 1mM Sodium Orthovanadate and cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma Aldrich). Samples were homogenized using 6,000 rpm for 20 seconds. After clarification, samples were reduced and alkylate in 5mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA for 10 minutes at 95ᵒC. Samples were further homogenized by sonication with a probe during 2 minutes (1 sec ON, 1 sec OFF, 70% amplitude). Protein concentration was measured by BCA. Afterwards, samples were digested overnight using the PAC protocol (Batth et al., 2019) implemented for the KingFisher robot as described previously (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020). Samples were acidified after digestion to final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides were loaded onto Sep-Pak cartridges (C18 1 cc Vac Cartridge, 50 mg - Waters). Eluted peptides from the Sep-Pak were concentrated in a Speed-Vac, and 200 µg of peptides (measured by A280 Nanodrop) were used for phospho-enrichment. Phosphoenrichment was performed as described previously (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020) using 20 µl of TiIMAC-HP beads (MagResyn). Eluted phosphopeptides were acidified with 10% TFA to pH <3 and loaded into Evotips for further MS analysis.Samples were analyzed on the Evosep One system using an in-house packed 15 cm, 150 μm i.d. capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) using the pre-programmed gradients for 60 samples per day (SPD) for phospho-proteome samples and 30 SPD for total proteome . The column temperature was maintained at 60°C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation, Biberach, Germany) and interfaced online with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS. Spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275°C. Full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target was 30% with an IT of 45 ms. Mass range was set to 350−1400. Full MS scan was followed by a DIA scan comprised of 49 windows of 13.7 Da with an overlap of 1 Da, scanning from 472 to 1143 Da for phospho-proteome and 361 to 1033 Da for total proteome. Resolution was set to 15,000 and IT to 22 ms. Normalized collision energy was set at 27%. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 100%. All data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity and peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched in Spectronaut (v14) using a library-free approach (directDIA). Carbamylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N-termini and in phospho-proteomics samples phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Mus musculus FASTA database (UniprotKB/Swiss-prot 22,888 entries) and a common contaminants database were used. For phospho-proteomics samples, PTM localization cutoff was set to 0.75. Cross-run normalization was on. Phospho-peptide quantification data was exported and collapsed to site information using the Perseus plugin described in Bekker-Jensen et al (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Zak, Mouse. muscle

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Professor, NNF-Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Professor, NNF-Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen


