### Accession
PXD001484

### Title
Douglas fir proteome project -  In vitro protein profiles in the early and late stages of Douglas-fir xylogenesis

### Description
The process of wood formation is of great interest to control and manipulate wood quality for economically important gymnosperms. A Douglas-fir tissue culture system was developed to induce differentiation of callus into tracheary elements (fibers) and to monitor xylogenesisin-vitro by a proteomics approach. Two proteomes were being compared, from an early and late stage during the fiber differentiation process. After 18 weeks in a differentiating medium 80% elongated cells and 20% of cells with advanced spiral thickening were found indicating full wood fiber differentiation. Based on 2D electrophoresis, mass spectrometric, and data analyses, it was shown that nondifferentiated callus (early stage of development) expressed proteins related to protein metabolism, cellular energy and primary cell wall metabolism. At the same time, actively differentiating wood fibers (late stage of development) expressed proteins responsible for housekeeping and stress response, but mostly proteins involved in cell wall polysaccharides biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Phenol based protein extraction was performed according to the protocol described by Dziedzic and McDonald [17] and Wang et al. [21] with some modifications. Briefly, undifferentiated and differentiating tissue samples were ground using a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen. Finely powdered tissue was washed once with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone solution, then with aqueous 80% methanol, and finally, twice with aqueous 80% acetone. Proteins from air-dried powdered tissue were extracted with a 1:1 mixture of Tris-EDTA (10 mM) saturated phenol (pH 8.0) and SDS-sucrose buffer, followed by precipitation with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. The protein pellet was washed twice with 100% methanol and aqueous 80% acetone. The air-dried protein pellet was dissolved in Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad) [22].

### Data Protocol
An in-gel digestion procedure suitable for mass spectrometry was adapted from University of California - San Francisco Mass Spectrometry Core Facility protocol (http://cancer.ucsf.edu/_docs/cores/mass-spec/In-gel_digest_procedure.pdf). Extracted protein-containing spots were destained with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile followed by in-gel 0.5 μM trypsin digestion (Promega, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin) at 37°C overnight.  The procedure previously described by [17] and [24] for bacterial peptides analysis was used. Reverse-phase liquid chromatography (nanoACQUITY UPLC) coupled to a Q-TOF Premier (Waters Corp.) tandem mass spectrometry system was employed to separate the peptides. Protein digests (2 μl) were injected onto a loading column (Symmetry C18 trap column, 180 μm x 20 mm) and then separated using an analytical column (BEH 130 C18 nanoACQUITY UPLC, 75 µm x 150 mm). Solvents used were: aqueous 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The Q-TOF mass spectrometer coupled with a nano-electrospray ionization source were used.  The MS and UPLC were controlled by MassLynx V4.1 software (Waters Corp.). Data generation was performed using a data dependent analysis (DDA) MS method, which allows the UPLC effluent to be monitored in MS survey mode. When multiply charged analytes (+2, +3, and +4) having properties of peptides were detected, the instrument switched to MS/MS mode and increased the collision cell voltage to produce peptide fragmentation data (MS/MS) suitable for sequencing. A reference peptide (or lock mass) was sprayed simultaneously with the LC effluent and was sampled for 1 s every 30 s. The lock mass standard used was human [glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma–Aldrich). The lock mass produces a double charged peak at m/z of 785.826 that was used for a lock mass correction.

### Publication Abstract
The process of wood formation is of great interest to control and manipulate wood quality for economically important gymnosperms. A Douglas-fir tissue culture system was developed that could be induced to differentiate into tracheary elements (fibers) making it possible to monitor xylogenesis in vitro by a proteomics approach. Two proteomes were analyzed and compared, one from an early and one from a late stage of the fiber differentiation process. After 18 weeks in a differentiation-inducing medium, 80% of the callus cells were elongated while 20% showed advanced spiral thickening indicating full wood fiber differentiation. Based on 2D electrophoresis, MS, and data analyses (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001484.), it was shown that in nondifferentiated callus (representing an early stage of development), proteins related to protein metabolism, cellular energy, and primary cell wall metabolism were abundant. By comparison, in cells actively differentiating wood fibers (representing a late stage of development), proteins involved in cell wall polysaccharide biosynthesis predominated together with housekeeping and stress-associated proteins.

### Keywords
Callus differentiated tracheary elements, Proteomics, Dougls fir

### Affiliations
Department of Forest, Rangeland, and Fire Sciences 875 Perimeter Drive MS 1133 Moscow, Idaho 83844-1133  University of Idaho
Department of Forest, Rangeland, and Fire Sciences

### Submitter
Jowita Laniak

### Lab Head
Dr Armando McDoanld
Department of Forest, Rangeland, and Fire Sciences 875 Perimeter Drive MS 1133 Moscow, Idaho 83844-1133  University of Idaho


