### Accession
PXD019665

### Title
Characterization of the Novel Mitochondrial Genome Segregation Factor TAP110 in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Mitochondrial genome inheritance has been extensively studied in only a handful of model organisms, all belonging to the Opisthokonta eukaryotic supergroup. To understand mitochondrial evolution in more detail, it is important to include organisms of other supergroups such as Excavata (e.g. T. brucei) in our studies. To assure correct inheritance of the replicated kDNA to the two daughter cells in T. brucei , it is anchored to the flagellum that drives kDNA segregation during cell division. The structure connecting the kDNA to the basal body has been described as the tripartite attachment complex (TAC). Several components of that TAC structure and how they assemble has been described in the last few years. It remains elusive how the TAC, inside the mitochondrion, can connect to the kDNA. Here, we present data on the TAC associated protein 110 (TAP110). TAP110 is a 110 kDa protein that shows sequence similarities to a histone linker protein. With super-resolution microscopy, we show that TAP110 co-localizes with TAC102, a TAC component of the unilateral filaments in the mitochondrion. In contrast to other kDNA segregation factors characterized previously, TAP110 remains only partially associated with the flagellum after DNaseI and detergent treatment. Overexpression of TAP110 leads to a delay in the separation of the replicated kDNA networks and thus an increase in cells with replicated but non-segregated kDNA. The depletion of TAC102 leads to loss of TAP110, suggesting that TAP110 is more proximal to the kDNA than TAC102. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the TAC, but not the kDNA, is required for correct TAP110 localization. Blue native suggests that TAP110 might interact with other proteins to form a >669 kDa complex. Interestingly, TAP110 can only be solubilized in dyskinetoplastic cells suggesting a direct interaction with the kDNA.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from induced (day 2) and non induced TAP110 overexpressing whole cells were separated on 10% NOVEX gradient SDS gel (Thermo Scientific) for 8 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were fixated and stained with a Coomassie solution (0.25% Coomassie Blue G-250 [Biozym], 10% acetic acid, 43% ethanol). The gel lane was cut into slices, minced, and destained with a 50% ethanol/50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate pH 8.0 solution. Proteins were reduced in 10mM DTT for 1h at 56°C and then alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel using twice with a mixture of acetonitrile (30%) and 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate pH 8.0 solution and three times with pure acetonitrile, which was subsequently evaporated in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and loaded on an activated C18 material (Empore) StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007).  For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 50 cm self-packed column (New Objective) with 75 µm inner diameter filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH) mounted to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) and sprayed online into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). We used a 103-min gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated with a top 20 MS/MS data-dependent acquisition scheme per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine (Jürgen Cox et al., 2011) integrated into MaxQuant software suite 1.5.2.8 (Jürgen Cox & Mann, 2008) using the TriTrypDB-46_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins protein database (11,203 entries). For the analysis, carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Match between run option was activated.  Contaminants, reverse database hits, protein groups only identified by site, and protein groups with less than 2 peptides (at least one of them classified as unique) were removed by filtering from the MaxQuant proteinGroups file. Missing values were imputed by shifting a beta distribution obtained from the LFQ intensity values to the limit of quantitation. Further analysis and graphical representation was done in the R framework incorporating ggplot2 package in-house R scripts (H, 2016; R Development Core Team, 2014)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; expression

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


