### Accession
PXD032081

### Title
Peptide of Trichinella spiralis infective larval extract that harnesses growth of human hepatoma cells

### Description
This project aimed to explore novel anticancer therapeutics from products of parasite since several data related to benefits from the T. spiralis infection have been documented. We validated antitumor activity of T. spiralis infective larval extract and extricate the parasite-derived-antitumor peptide. We found that larval extract exerted antitumor activity to three types of carcinoma cells including hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2, ovarian cancer SK-OV-3, and lung adenocarcinoma A549. Interestingly, it displayed the most antitumor effect to HepG2 cells. Using proteomic and bioinformatic approaches, three putative anticancer peptides were identified from T. spiralis infective larval extract. One of these peptides showed a dose-dependent-anti-HepG2 effect by inducing ROS accumulation, leading to inhibition of the cell proliferation. Our data indicate potential application of the larval extract-derived antitumor peptide as a complementary agent for human hepatoma treatment and highlight a positive aspect of parasite apart from its deleterious effect.

### Sample Protocol
Encysted T. spiralis larvae were isolated from the skeletal muscles by the digestion method. The larval suspension was treated with protease inhibitor cocktail, ground with a plastic pestle, and sonicated on ice. The larval homogenate was centrifuged, the supernatant was collected, and the protein content was determined.

### Data Protocol
Proteins in the larval extracts were studied through gel-based proteomic analysis using ESI-QUAD-TOF. The LC-MS/MS raw data files were processed and converted into the Mascot Generic File (.mgf) format using DataAnalysis software, version 3.4. The .mgf files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 against the NCBI database. Trichinella spiralis was set for the taxonomy filter. Missed cleavages were set to 1. Peptide tolerance and tendem MS tolerance were set to 0.8 Da and 0.8 Da, respectively. The variable modification was set to carbamidomethylation and oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antitumor peptide, Infective larva, Proteomics, Trichinella spiralis, Drug discovery, Human hepatocellular carcinoma hepg2 cell

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Pichet Ruenchit

### Lab Head
Dr Pichet Ruenchit
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


