### Accession
PXD006103

### Title
Effect of Sec61 inhibitor mycolactone on the proteome of the MutuDC dendritic cell line

### Description
Here we used a newly identified Sec61 blocker, mycolactone, to analyze Sec61 contribution to antigen cross presentation, ERAD and transport of internalized antigens into the cytosol in dendritic cells. Shotgun proteomics were used to asses the broad-ranging effects of Sec61 blockade on dendritic cells and its effect on critical proteins required for antigen presentation and ERAD.

### Sample Protocol
MutuDCs (4.106 cells) were treated with 100 nM Mycolactone or DMSO as vehicle control for 6 or 24h, in triplicate. Cells from each condition were harvested, washed twice with PBS and cell pellets were frozen at -80˚C until further use. Cell pellets were re-suspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, phosSTOP tablet (Roche, 1 tablet in 10 ml of buffer), sonicated (three bursts of 15'' at an amplitude of 20%) and centrifuged for 15' at 16,000 x g at 4˚C to remove insoluble material. The protein concentration in the supernatants was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) and 0.5 mg of total protein in each sample was used to continue the protocol. Proteins in each sample were reduced by addition of 5mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 100mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Both samples were further diluted with 20mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4M and proteins were digested with 2 µg LysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4h at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2M urea and digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15' incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ C18 cartridges (Agilent). Cartridges were first washed with 1 ml of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (25 µl 0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the cartridge. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted with 700 µl 0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (20:80, v/v). Purified peptides were re-dissolved in solvent A and 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A (on a reverse-phase column produced in-house, 100 µm I.D. x 20 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) followed by loading the sample on a 40 cm column packed in the needle (produced in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in linear gradients from 2% to 30% in 100 minutes, then from 30% to 56% in 40 minutes and finally from 56% to 99% in 5 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (27) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database version of April 2016 containing 16,622 mouse protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, then quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (28). A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. The statistical analysis to determine differentially expressed proteins was performed in R software (version 3.3.2) using the limma package. P values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method to obtain a False Discovery Rate (FDR). Proteins with a FDR ≤ 0,1 and a log2 mycolactone/control LFQ intensity fold change (log2 FC) > 0.5 were considered upregulated by mycolactone, while proteins with a FDR ≥ 0.1 and a log2 FC < -0.5 were considered downregulated. Gene Ontology annotations of proteins were inferred from the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
Although antigen cross-presentation in dendritic cells (DCs) is critical to the initiation of most cytotoxic immune responses, the intracellular mechanisms and traffic pathways involved are still unclear. One of the most critical steps in this process, the export of internalized antigen to the cytosol, has been suggested to be mediated by Sec61. Sec61 is the channel that translocates signal peptide-bearing nascent polypeptides into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and it was also proposed to mediate protein retrotranslocation during ER-associated degradation (a process called ERAD). Here, we used a newly identified Sec61 blocker, mycolactone, to analyze Sec61's contribution to antigen cross-presentation, ERAD, and transport of internalized antigens into the cytosol. As shown previously in other cell types, mycolactone prevented protein import into the ER of DCs. Mycolactone-mediated Sec61 blockade also potently suppressed both antigen cross-presentation and direct presentation of synthetic peptides to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. In contrast, it did not affect protein export from the ER lumen or from endosomes into the cytosol, suggesting that the inhibition of cross-presentation was not related to either of these trafficking pathways. Proteomic profiling of mycolactone-exposed DCs showed that expression of mediators of antigen presentation, including MHC class I and &#x3b2;2 microglobulin, were highly susceptible to mycolactone treatment, indicating that Sec61 blockade affects antigen cross-presentation indirectly. Together, our data suggest that the defective translocation and subsequent degradation of Sec61 substrates is the cause of altered antigen cross-presentation in Sec61-blocked DCs.

### Keywords
Mouse mutudc dendritic mycolactone sec61 ms/ms lfq

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur, Immunobiology of Infection Unit, 75015 Paris, France

### Submitter
Jean-David Morel

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline DEMANGEL
Institut Pasteur, Immunobiology of Infection Unit, 75015 Paris, France


