### Accession
PXD042320

### Title
Omentum gel enables the study of metastatic ovarian cancer and stromal cell functions in a physiologically relevant environment

### Description
High-grade serous (HGS) ovarian cancer is the most common and aggressive ovarian cancer type, and the most lethal gynaecological disease 1,2. The major cause is its highly metastatic nature and the limited availability of effective therapies to oppose it. The omentum is a highly vascularised visceral depot of adipose tissue with immune functions, which becomes the preferential metastatic site in patients with HGS ovarian cancer 1,2. The omentum provides an environment that supports the rapid growth of metastatic tumours and their spread within the peritoneal cavity and adjacent organs 2,3. Research aimed at understanding the biology of metastatic tumours in the omentum is therefore essential to find strategies to oppose HGS ovarian cancer. To this aim, there is the need for in vitro models that faithfully recapitulate the microenvironment of HGS omental metastasis in patients.

### Sample Protocol
3x105 omCAFs or HGS ovarian cancer cells, cells were plated on 30 µg/ml Matrigel, OmGel (mix of OmGels derived from 6 HGS ovarian cancer patients) or on plastic on 10 cm dishes for 48 h in RPMI supplemented with 4% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 2 mM glutamine with or without 30 µg/ml OmGel or Matrigel. Cells were washed 3 times in PBS then lysed in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH7.4. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C in cold acetone, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (Sigma) pH 8.0, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) in the dark and digested with Lys C (Wako chemicals) for 3 h at RT and then with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Only for the TMT labelled samples, peptides were labelled with TMTpro 16plex reagent kit according to manufacturer instructions (Thermo Scientific) and then fractionated (see below). For non-labelled peptides, peptides were acidified with trifluoracetic acid (TFA, Sigma) and desalted using C18 StageTip 39 prior to MS analysis. Peptides were eluted with two rounds of 20 µL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN, VWR) 0.1% formic acid (Milipore). For the gels, OmGel and Matrigel samples were resuspended in lysis buffer and prepared as described above. For the unlabelled samples, peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over a 275 min two-step gradient method. The % of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) was 2-22% at step one (180 min) and 32% (50 min) at step two. For the TMT-labelled samples, peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over three optimised two-step gradient methods for fractions 1-7, 8-15 and 16-21. Step one was commenced for 75 mins and step two for 25 min. For fractionated samples 1-7 the % of solvent B was 3-18% at step one and 30% at step two. For fractions 8-15 the % of B was 5-24% at step one and 38% at step two and for fractions 16-21 the % B was from 7-30% at step one and 47% at step two. Peptides were then electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectropsray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants. Data was acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode using data-dependent acquisition. Full scan mass range was set to 375-1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution. For the unlabelled peptides, injection time was set to 50 ms and high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation triggered on the top 20 most intense ions. For MS2 analysis, injection time was set to 20 ms and ions were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. For the TMT-labelled peptides, injection time was set to 50 ms with a target value of 5E5 ions. HCD fragmentation was triggered at top speed (3 s) for MS2 analysis. MS2 injection time was set to 175 ms with a target of 2E5 ions and 15,000 resolution. Ions already selected for MS2 were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS .raw data was processed with MaxQuant software 40, version 1.6.3.3 for the gels and 1.6.14.0 for the cancer cell and CAF proteomes, and searched with the Andromeda search engine 41  against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens database (2018, 95,146 entries). For TMT-labelled samples, data was searched with multiplicity set to MS2 level TMT16plex. For unlabelled samples, LFQ and iBAQ quantification options were enabled. First and main searches were done with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main. MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and trypsin cleavage was selected allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications and Carbimidomethylation as a fixed modification. FDR was set to 1% for both protein and peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix; ovarian cancer; caf; matrisome; omentum

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Kelly Hodge

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Glasgow, UK


