### Accession
PXD028822

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Canine Hepatobiliary Neuroendocrine Neoplasms

### Description
Neuroendocrine neoplasms of the gallbladder and liver occur rarely in dogs and humans. A recent reclassification of human neuroendocrine neoplasms by the World Health Organization has refined categorization of these tumors by morphology, replicative indices, and molecular signatures. In humans, these factors correlate with survival outcomes. Improved characterization of these tumors is needed in dogs to identify diagnostic biomarkers and determine therapeutic strategies. To achieve this objective, the proteome of 3 canine hepatobiliary neoplasms was compared to normal canine adrenal and liver tissue from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples. Thirty-two upregulated and 121 downregulated differentially expressed proteins were identified in the hepatobiliary neuroendocrine neoplasm samples. Among the upregulated proteins is galectin-1, a multivalent carbohydrate binding protein known to play a role in lung and pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasia development and progression in humans. Drugs targeting the galectin family have shown promise as anticancer therapeutics in cervical cancer, prostate cancer, lung and pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasia in human medicine. Galectin-1 may represent a novel treatment target in hepatobiliary neuroendocrine neoplasia in both humans and dogs.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues from 2 canine gallbladder NENs and 1 primary hepatic NEN were collected. The patients with gallbladder NENs were a 5 year-old, male neutered Boston terrier and a 7 year-old, male neutered Doberman pinscher who underwent cholecystectomies for tumor removal. Liver biopsies were obtained from both patients. No extrahepatic masses were identified on abdominal ultrasound or during surgery. The patient with the liver NEN was a 12 year-old, male neutered rat terrier. The tissue from this tumor was obtained by surgical biopsy. The diffuse nature of the mass precluded complete resection; however, gross extrahepatic metastases were not identified on abdominal CT nor at exploratory laparotomy. Three matched normal canine liver tissue and adrenal glands were obtained from the Louisiana Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory histology repository. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains were performed on all tissues. Sections were reviewed by 3 anatomic pathologists (ES, DP, RB).  Five micron scrolls of FFPE tissue were submitted to The IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics (http://idearesourceproteomics.org/) for processing. Briefly, FFPE tissue scrolls were deparaffinized by solubilization in xylene. Extracted proteins were then reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation [Nature Methods 6: 359-62 (2009)] with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were labeled using tandem mass tag isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions and combined into one 10-plex sample group. The labeled peptide multiplex was separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B (Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile and Buffer B is 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) ratio under basic pH (pH 10) conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio.  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometric data was searched with MaxQuant (Max Planc Institute; version 1.6.17.0) against the UniprotKB/SwissProt Canis familiaris protein database (March 2020) for protein identification. Protein were normalized using cyclic loess normalization in the ProteiNorm app (Graw et al ). Proteins with significant abundance differences when comparing NEN vs adrenal and NEN vs liver were identified by performing an empirical Bayes moderated t-test using the BioConductor package Limma v 3.36.2 and Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction.9 Unless otherwise stated, an FDR cutoff of 0.05 was applied. To identify differentially abundant tumor proteins compared to adrenal glands and liver tissue, we filtered protein expression by fold change (> 2). Protein or peptide clustering was performed with Cluster 3.0 (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) using hierarchical clustering and Euclidian distance as the metric.10 Functional enrichments of gene ontology (GO) categories from Canis familiaris were performed using ShinyGO v.06 using a p-value cutoff of 0.05 (http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/).

### Publication Abstract
Hepatobiliary neuroendocrine neoplasms are rare cancers in humans and dogs. To date, no large-scale primary hepatobiliary neoplasm omics analyses exist in any species. This limits the development of diagnostic biomarkers and targeted therapeutics. Neuroendocrine cancers are a heterogenous group of neoplasms categorized by their tissue-of-origin. Because the anatomic niche of neuroendocrine neoplasms shapes tumor phenotype, we sought to compare the proteomes of 3 canine hepatobiliary neoplasms to normal hepatobiliary tissue and adrenal glands with the objective of identifying unique protein signatures. Protein was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples and submitted for tandem mass spectroscopy. Thirty-two upregulated and 126 downregulated differentially expressed proteins were identified. Remarkably, 6 (19%) of the upregulated proteins are correlated to non-hepatobiliary neuroendocrine neoplasia and 16 (50%) are functionally annotated within the exosome cellular compartment key to neuroendocrine signaling. Twenty-six (21%) downregulated proteins are enriched in metabolic pathways consistent with alterations in cancer. These results suggests that characteristic neoplastic protein signatures can be gleaned from small data sets using a comparative proteomics approach.

### Keywords
Neurouro

### Affiliations
UAMS
Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Johnston
Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803


