### Accession
PXD020271

### Title
BRCA1-dependent ubiquitination and phosphorylation regulates signaling events in high-grade serous ovarian cancer tissues

### Description
Despite recent advances in the management of BRCA1 mutated high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), the physiology of these tumors remains poorly understood. Here we provide a comprehensive molecular understanding of the signaling processes that drive HGSC pathogenesis and their dependency on BRCA1 mutation-state directly in patient-derived tissues. Using a multi-layered proteomic approach, we show the tight coordination between the ubiquitination and phosphorylation regulatory layers and their role in key cellular processes related to BRCA1-dependent HGSC pathogenesis. In addition, we identify key bridging proteins, kinase activity, and post-translational modifications responsible for molding distinct cancer phenotypes, thus providing new opportunities for therapeutic intervention, and ultimately advance towards a more personalized patient care.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer, protein extract obtained and quantified. Samples were precipitated with chilled acetone and pellets were resuspended in 6 M Urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was performed with endoproteinase LysC and trypsin (1:100). Peptide mix was acidified with formic acid 5% and desalted. Five micrograms were separated for analysis of the proteome. The remaining peptides were processed for phosphopeptide enrichment using the High-SelectTM TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific, P/N A32993) and immunoaffinity purification of K-e-GG peptides which was performed using PTMscan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-e-GG) kit (Cell Signalling, P/N 5562S) following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode and the acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v.4.1.31.9. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the data set acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software v.1.6.0.16 using the Andromeda search engine. Data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (as in April 2018, 20,341 entries) plus a list of common contaminants (148 entries). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. For peptide identification a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm on precursor masses and 0.5 Da on fragment ions was set. Only peptides with an Andromeda score > 40 were included. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and ubiquitination of lysine were used as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. At least one unique peptide was considered per protein for it to be identified and reported. The rest of parameters were set as default. Peptides were quantified with extracted ion chromatogram areas using the embedded algorithm from MaxQuant. Protein abundances were estimated from peptide areas using the LFQ algorithm. Data analysis was performed with Perseus software v.1.6.2.1. For all data comparisons 60% of valid values were considered and log2-transformed. For the analysis of phosphorylated and ubiquitinated peptides, data were centered to the median and only peptides with a site-localization probability of at least 0.75 were included in the analysis. Changes in protein or peptide abundance between groups were compared using two-sided t test analysis followed by correction for multiple testing. Changes were considered significant with a q-value below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Despite recent advances in the management of BRCA1 mutated high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), the physiology of these tumors remains poorly understood. Here we provide a comprehensive molecular understanding of the signaling processes that drive HGSC pathogenesis with the addition of valuable ubiquitination profiling, and their dependency on BRCA1 mutation-state directly in patient-derived tissues. Using a multilayered proteomic approach, we show the tight coordination between the ubiquitination and phosphorylation regulatory layers and their role in key cellular processes related to BRCA1-dependent HGSC pathogenesis. In addition, we identify key bridging proteins, kinase activity, and post-translational modifications responsible for molding distinct cancer phenotypes, thus providing new opportunities for therapeutic intervention, and ultimately advance towards a more personalized patient care.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, Brca1, Proteomics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology  (BIST), Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.
Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus

### Submitter
Melissa Bradbury

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology  (BIST), Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.


