### Accession
PXD038238

### Title
Bacteria Commonly Associated with Central Nervous System Catheter Infections Elicit Distinct CSF Proteome Signatures

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunt infection is a common and devastating complication of the treatment of hydrocephalus. Timely and accurate diagnosis is essential as these infections can lead to long term neurologic consequences like seizures, decreased IQ and impaired school performance. Currently the diagnosis of shunt infection relies on bacterial culture, however, culture is not always accurate especially as these infections are frequently caused by bacteria capable of forming biofilms like Staphylococcus epidermidis, Cutibacterium acnes, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and may have very few planktonic bacteria in the CSF to be picked up on culture. Therefore, there is a critical need to identify a new rapid, and accurate method for diagnosis of CSF shunt infection with broad bacterial species coverage to improve the long-term outcomes of children suffering from these infections.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were excised from SDS-PAGE gel, destained, reduced with tris-carboxyethylphosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were eluted from the gel and concentrated to 20 µl by vacuum centrifugation and analyzed using a high-resolution mass spectrometry nano-LC-MS/MS Tribrid system, Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ coupled with UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Around 1 µg of peptides was run by the pre-column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75µm × 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSCL, 75 µm × 15 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific). The samples were eluted using a 105-min linear gradient of ACN (5-45 %) in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Sciences, London, UK, vs 2.6.). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt database (selected for Rat, 2019_6, 8082 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Parameters on MASCOT were set as follows: Enzyme: trypsin, Max missed cleavage: 2, Peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+, Peptide tolerance: ± 0.6 Da, Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C),Variable modifications: oxidation (M), MS/MS tolerance: ± 0.6 Da, Quantitation: Label free, Instrument: ESI-TRAP. MASCOT results were exported as .mgf files, in case if needed for publishing. MASCOT .dat results files were further processed with Scaffold, which allows multiple search results to be condensed into a single result file.  Scaffold (vs 4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller A. et al, Anal Chem 2002;74(20):5383- 92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii A. et al, Anal Chem 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. For the purpose of label free quantitation, the results were displayed as Total Spectrum Counts. Spectral counting counts the number of spectra identified for a given peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, S. epidermidis, Biomarker, Central nervous system infection, Csf, Cns, Proteome, Inflammation, C. acnes, Shunt infection, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
University of Nebraska at Omaha

### Submitter
Ishwor Thapa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gwenn L. Skar
Department of Pediatrics University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE


