### Accession
PXD018427

### Title
A Sensitive, Rapid, Robust and Reproducible Workflow for Host Cell Protein Profiling in Biopharmaceutical Process Development

### Description
There is a growing industry and regulatory need to detect host cell protein (HCP) impurities in the production of protein biopharmaceuticals, as certain HCPs can impact product stability, safety, and efficacy, even at low levels.1-6 In some cases, regulatory agencies require the identification as well as the quantification of HCPs in drug products for risk assessment, and this is an active and growing topic of conversation in industry and amongst regulators. In this study, we developed a sensitive, robust, and reproducible workflow for HCP detection and quantification in the significantly shorter turnaround time than previously reported using an Evosep ONE LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Due to its fast turnaround time, this HCP workflow can be integrated into process development for the high-throughput (60 samples analyzed per day) identification of HCPs. The ability to rapidly measure HCPs and follow their clearance throughout the downstream process can be used to pinpoint sources of HCP contamination, which can be used to optimize biopharmaceutical production to minimize HCP levels. Analysis of the NIST monoclonal antibody (mAb) reference material using the rapid HCP profiling workflow detected the largest number of HCPs reported to date, underscoring an improvement in performance along with an increased throughput. The HCP workflow can be readily implemented and adapted for different purposes to guide biopharmaceutical process development and enable better risk assessment of HCPs in drug substances (DS) and drug products (DP).

### Sample Protocol
A 100 µL aliquot of 10 mg/mL NIST mAb standard RM 8671 was used per sample preparation. To a 100 µL of NIST mAb, 95 µL of 10 mM TEAB and 2.5 µL of Trypsin Gold (1 mg/mL stock, 1:400 enzyme to protein ratio) was added. Samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. Samples were spiked with 2 ppm (2 pmol) of peptide RT mixture (0.5 pmol/µL stock) and then 5 µL of 50 mg/mL DTT was added and the sample was heated at 90 °C for 10 minutes. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 5 minutes and supernatant transferred to clean Eppendorf tubes. 4uL of formic acid was added to acidify samples prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For high-pH fractionation of the sample, Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were eluted with 5 to 50 % of acetonitrile in triethylamine and collected in 8 fractions. Each sample and in case of fractionation, each fraction concentration was measured using Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol. An estimate of 1 µg (unless otherwise stated) of digested sample was used per LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and MS/MS product ion lists were searched against the mouse UniProt Reference Database (downloaded on Jan 16, 2020, reviewed entries only) appended with the NIST mAb heavy and light chain sequences and a common contaminant database. Both the Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search engines were used, and, in each algorithm, the precursor and product ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only complete tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications, and search results were filtered through Percolator at the peptide spectral match (PSM) level using a strict false discovery rate (FDR) value of 0.01 (i.e. 1% FDR) and relaxed FDR of 0.05 (i.e. 5% FDR). For the final HCP list reported, common contaminants such as keratin, actin, and trypsin, were removed, and only proteins identified by at least two unique peptides were reported.

### Publication Abstract
There is a growing industry and regulatory need to detect host cell protein (HCP) impurities in the production of protein biopharmaceuticals, as certain HCPs can impact product stability, safety, and efficacy, even at low levels. In some cases, regulatory agencies require the identification and the quantification of HCPs in drug products (DPs) for risk assessment, and this is an active and growing topic of conversation in the industry and amongst regulators. In this study, we developed a sensitive, robust, and reproducible workflow for HCP detection and quantification in a significantly shorter turnaround time than that previously reported using an Evosep ONE LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Because of its fast turnaround time, this HCP workflow can be integrated into process development for the high-throughput (60 samples analyzed per day) identification of HCPs. The ability to rapidly measure HCPs and follow their clearance throughout the downstream process can be used to pinpoint sources of HCP contamination, which can be used to optimize biopharmaceutical production to minimize HCP levels. Analysis of the NIST monoclonal antibody reference material using the rapid HCP profiling workflow detected the largest number of HCPs reported to date, underscoring an improvement in performance along with an increased throughput. The HCP workflow can be readily implemented and adapted for different purposes to guide biopharmaceutical process development and enable better risk assessment of HCPs in drug substances and DPs.

### Keywords
Drug product (dp), Host cell proteins (hcps), Monoclonal antibody (mab), Evosepone, Lc-ms/ms, Drug substance (ds)

### Affiliations
GlaxoSmithKline CMC Analytical
GSK

### Submitter
Jiao Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Kilby
GlaxoSmithKline CMC Analytical


