### Accession
PXD037176

### Title
Inactivation of Influenza A virus under expiratory aerosol conditions is mediated by structural protein changes, as determined by whole virus mass-spectrometry.

### Description
Multiple respiratory viruses including Influenza A virus (IAV) can be transmitted via expiratory aerosol particles, and many studies have established that environmental conditions can affect viral infectivity during airborne transmission. Low aerosol pH was recently identified as a major factor influencing the infectivity of aerosol-borne IAV and SARS-CoV-2, however, there is a fundamental lack of understanding as to the mechanisms leading to viral inactivation within the acidic aerosol micro-environment. Here, we identified that the early stages of the IAV infection cycle were impacted by transient exposure to acidic aerosol conditions (pH below 5.5), which was primarily attributed to loss of binding function of the viral protein haemagglutinin. Viral capsid integrity was also somewhat affected by transient acidic exposure. We then characterised the structural changes associated with loss of viral infectivity using whole-virus hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), and observed discrete regions of unfolding in the external viral protein haemagglutinin and in the internal matrix protein 1. Viral nucleoprotein structure appeared to be unaffected by exposure to acidic aerosol conditions, and no changes to viral genome integrity or to lipids within the viral envelope were detected using our whole-virus methods. Collectively, these data indicate that viral inactivation observed under indoor aerosol conditions is mediated by specific protein conformational changes, particularly to haemagglutinin. This study additionally provides a proof-of-concept that HDX-MS is a highly effective method for characterisation of internal and external proteins of whole enveloped viruses such as IAV. Overall, improved understanding of the fate of respiratory viruses within exhaled aerosols will aid the development of novel strategies and therapeutics to control the severity of seasonal and/or pandemic influenza, and constitutes a global public health priority.

### Sample Protocol
For HDX-MS, 10x-concentrated buffers were used to adjust virus samples to pH 4 or 7, by adding 10x pH buffers to the virus sample in a 1:9 ratio. To neutralise IAV samples, 2.2 μL of 2M Na2HPO4 was added to the 10 μL mixture of acidified virus, and vortexed for 2 seconds to mix. To neutralise VSV samples, acidified VSV was diluted 1/10 in PBSi containing 3% 10x pH 7 buffer. For neutral control samples, 1 μL of 10x pH 7.2 buffer (160 mM citric acid, 1.68 M Na2HPO4) was mixed with 9 μL of virus sample and vortexed for 2 seconds to mix. This reduced sample pH from ~7.3 to 7.0. To mock neutralise, 2.2 μL of 10x pH 7.0 buffer (130.5 mM citric acid, 1.74 M Na2HPO4) was added to this 10 μL and vortexed for 2 seconds to mix. This strategy ensured salt and virus concentrations were comparable between neutralised pH 4 and pH 7 samples. All pH adjustments and incubations were performed at ambient room temperature.   To initiate HDX, neutralised whole-virus samples were incubated in D2O buffer (99% deuterium oxide, Sigma 151882, supplemented with 120 mM NaCl). 40 μL D2O buffer was added to every 10 μL of neutralised virus (final D2O concentration 78%) on ice for 30 seconds, 300 seconds, or 3,600 seconds in triplicate. After each D2O incubation, samples were quenched by dilution into ice-cold quench buffer (150 mM TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine]-HCl, 2 M urea, 0.1% formic acid (FA) final concentrations, pH 2.5), spun at 21,000 g for 2 min in a pre-cooled 4oC centrifuge, and supernatant was immediately flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored at -80oC until analysis by HDX-MS. To quantify deuterium uptake, protein samples were thawed and injected in UPLC system immersed in ice. The protein was digested via two immobilized pepsin columns (Thermo #23131), and peptides were collected onto a VanGuard pre-column trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted and peptides separated with a C18, 300Å, 1.7 μm particle size Fortis Bio column 100 x 2.1 mm over a gradient of 8 – 30 % buffer B over 20 min at 150 μl/ min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 100% acetonitrile). Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermoscientific), for ions from 400 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at 270 °C, 5 kV of ion spray voltage.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identified by data-dependent acquisition after MS/MS were analyzed by Mascot. Deuterium incorporation levels were quantified using HD examiner software (Sierra Analytics), and quality of every peptide was checked manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heamaggluttinin, Hdx-ms, Influenza, Hatrix protein 1, Ph

### Affiliations
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Molecular Microbiology, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Oscar Vadas

### Lab Head
Dr Oscar Vadas
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Molecular Microbiology, Geneva, Switzerland


