### Accession
PXD046256

### Title
Global, neuronal, and beta-cell specific deletion of the insulin inhibitory receptor (inceptor) improves glucose homeostasis in diet-induced obese male mice

### Description
The insulin inhibitory receptor (inceptor) was recently identified as a key terminator of insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (INSR/IGF1R) signaling in pancreatic 𝛽-cells12. Yet, the relevance of 𝛽-cell inceptor for glucose regulation through the INS1R/IGF1R axis has only been demonstrated for normoglycemic and insulin sensitive lean mice, questioning whether inceptor regulation of INS1R/IGF1R action also plays a role in glucose metabolism under conditions of diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Here we demonstrate that whole-body germline loss of inceptor improves glucose metabolism in diet-induced obese mice with only minimal effects on weight and body composition. To assess the effect in different tissues we performed proteomics in the global, neuronal and beta cell specific mouse knock-outs.

### Sample Protocol
Dry ice cooled tissues were disrupted using a Tissuelyser II (Quiagen), boiled for 5 min at 95°C 1000rpm in 2% SDC buffer (2% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.5) and sonicated (Diagenode Bioruptor, 15 * 30 s at high intensity). After centrifugation, protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the BCA Protein Assay (Thermo, 23225). 25 µg of protein per sample were reduced alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA at 40°C in the dark for 10min and then digested overnight (37°C, 1000 rpm) with a 1:50 ratio (protein:enzyme) of trypsin (Sigma, t6567) and LysC (Wako, 129-02541). On the next day peptides were acidified and loaded onto activated triple layer styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated STAGE tips (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore). Peptides were washed with 100 µl ethylacetate 1% TFA, 100 µl 30% Methanol 1% TFA and 150 µl 0.2% TFA and eluted with 60 µl elution buffer (80% ACN, 5% NH4OH). Peptides were lyophilized and dissolved in 10 µl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis 500 ng of peptides was performed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and FAIMS (CV50) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The liquid chromatography was equipped with a 50cm column packed in-house with with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH). The peptides were separated at 60°C over 1h by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1 formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Starting with 5% of buffer B, this fraction was increased stepwise to 45% over 45 min followed by a wash-out at 95%, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. After using electrospray ionization (ESI) to transfer the peptides to the mass spectrometer, a data independent (DIA) method was used for measurement. For this, one ms1 scan (300-1650 m/z, max. ion fill time of 45 ms, normalized AGC target = 300%, R= 120.000 at 200 m/z) was followed by 66 ms2 fragment scans of unequally spaced windows (fill time = 22 ms, normalized AGC target = 1000%, normalized HCD collision energy = 30%, R= 15.000).

### Data Protocol
DIA Raw files were demultiplexed with Spectronauts HTRMS converter and analyzed with Spectronaut (v18.1.230626.50606). Analysis of the resulting protein file was performed in Perseus (v1.6.15.0) using standard parameters if not stated otherwise. Proteomic samples that showed a considerably lower ProteinGroup count than others in the same tissue were excluded. Log2 transformed values were with adjusted and transformed to its previous range. To avoid low intensity artefacts sometimes generated in Spectronaut, values lower than 4 standard deviations of the average distribution were considered NaN.  Thereafter Proteingroups were filtered for min. n-1 valid values (n describes the number of replicates in the smallest tissue&genotype group in the respective set) in total (PCA) or in at least one sample group (heatmaps and volcano plots). For PCAs and volocano plots, missing values were imputated with a normal distribution (Downshift 1.8 stdvs, Width 0.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diet-induced obesity, Glucose homeostasis, Insulin inhibitory receptor, Inceptor, Insulin inceptor

### Affiliations
Institute for Diabetes and Obesity (IDO),Helmholtz Zentrum München
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Institute for Diabetes and Obesity (IDO),Helmholtz Zentrum München


