### Accession
PXD008619

### Title
Surface glycoproteome of BACE1-inhibited neurons

### Description
The cell surface proteome is dynamic and has fundamental roles in cell signaling. Many surface membrane proteins are proteolytically released into a cell’s secretome, where they can have additional functions in cell-cell-communication. Yet, it remains challenging to determine the surface proteome and to compare it to the cell secretome, in particular under serum-containing cell culture conditions. Here, we set-up and evaluated the ‘surface-spanning protein enrichment with click sugars’ (SUSPECS) method for cell surface membrane glycoprotein biotinylation, enrichment and label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. SUSPECS is based on click chemistry-mediated labeling of glycoproteins, is fully compatible with labeling of living cells and can be combined with secretome analyses in the same experiment. Immunofluorescence-based confocal microscopy demonstrated that SUSPECS selectively labeled proteins at the cell surface, but not within cells. Nearly 700 transmembrane glycoproteins were quantified at the surface of primary murine neurons. To demonstrate the utility of SUSPECS, we tested how the protease BACE1, which is a key drug target in Alzheimer’s disease, affects the cell surface glycoproteome. Pharmacological inhibition of BACE1 selectively remodeled the neuronal surface proteome, resulting in up to seven-fold increased abundance of the BACE1 substrates APP, SEZ6, SEZ6L, CNTN2, CHL1 and L1, while other substrates were not or only mildly affected. Protein changes at the cell surface only partly correlated with changes in the secretome. Additionally, apparent non-substrates, such as TSPAN6, were also increased. Several altered proteins were validated by immunoblots in neurons and BACE1-deficient murine brains and indicate that BACE1-inhibition may lead to unexpected secondary effects.

### Sample Protocol
Cleared cell culture lysates of 6 control (DMSO) and 6 inhibitor treated (C3) cell samples were loaded on a polyprep chromatograpy column (Biorad) containing 300 µL of high capacity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermofisher) and washed twice with 10 mL 2% SDS in PBS to remove non-specifically bound proteins. The flow-through was reloaded to increase the yield of bound biotinylated proteins. Each column was washed twice with 10 mL 2% SDS in PBS. Streptavidin-beads were transferred into an Eppendorf tube in 2% SDS in PBS and boiled 5 min at 95°C in 150 µL Lämmli buffer supplemented with 8M urea and 3 mM biotin to elute the proteins. Samples were separated with 10% SDS-polyacrylamid gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and stained with 0.025% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue in 10% acetic acid for 15 min with horizontal shaking. The gel was destained in 10% acetic acid (2x 30min, 1x overnight) with horizontal shaking. Each lane was cut into 14 horizontal slices (=14 fractions) at equal height and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion. Briefly, proteins residing in the gel were denatured with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and reduced with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM ABC. Proteolytic digestion was performed at 37°C overnight using 150 ng trypsin per fraction. Peptides were extracted with 40% Acetonitril (ACN) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid, dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for proteomic analysis. Each gel fraction was analyzed on an Easy nLC-1000 (Thermo Proxeon), which was coupled online via a nano electrospray source (Thermo Proxeon) to a Velos Pro Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a self-packed C18 column (300 mm × 75 µm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch) with a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid (0 min, 2% B; 3:30 min 5% B; 48:30 min, 25% B; 59:30, 35% B; 64:30, 60% B). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. The ten most intense peptide ions per spectrum were chosen for collision-induced dissociation (CID) within the ion trap. A dynamic exclusion of 40 s was applied for CID acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Database search and label free quantification was done with the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1, maxquant.org). The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy approach (concatenated forward/reverse database including the reference mouse proteome (UniProt, download: June 8, 2016)). Label free quantification (LFQ) intensity values were used for relative quantification. At least two ratio counts of unique peptides were required for protein quantification. The LFQ intensities of technical replicates were averaged. For relative quantification the LFQ intensity ratios of C3 and vehicle treated samples were calculated separately for each biological replicate to account for experimental variations of different neuronal cell preparation batches. At least three LFQ ratios of biological replicates were required for statistical analysis. All LFQ ratios were log2 transformed and a one-sample T-test (µ0 = 0) was applied to check if the average log2 LFQ ratio is different from zero.  The p-value threshold was adjusted for false discovery rate (5%) by applying Benjamini-Hochberg correction criteria. Classification of identified proteins was done using UniProt keywords and subcellular locations as well as the PANTHER (protein annotation through evolutionary relationship) classification system (http://www.pantherdb.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The cell surface proteome is dynamic and has fundamental roles in cell signaling. Many surface membrane proteins are proteolytically released into a cell's secretome, where they can have additional functions in cell-cell-communication. Yet, it remains challenging to determine the surface proteome and to compare it to the cell secretome, under serum-containing cell culture conditions. Here, we set up and evaluated the 'surface-spanning protein enrichment with click sugars' (SUSPECS) method for cell surface membrane glycoprotein biotinylation, enrichment and label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. SUSPECS is based on click chemistry-mediated labeling of glycoproteins, is compatible with labeling of living cells and can be combined with secretome analyses in the same experiment. Immunofluorescence-based confocal microscopy demonstrated that SUSPECS selectively labeled cell surface proteins. Nearly 700 transmembrane glycoproteins were consistently identified at the surface of primary neurons. To demonstrate the utility of SUSPECS, we applied it to the protease BACE1, which is a key drug target in Alzheimer's disease. Pharmacological BACE1-inhibition selectively remodeled the neuronal surface glycoproteome, resulting in up to 7-fold increased abundance of the BACE1 substrates APP, APLP1, SEZ6, SEZ6L, CNTN2, and CHL1, whereas other substrates were not or only mildly affected. Interestingly, protein changes at the cell surface only partly correlated with changes in the secretome. Several altered proteins were validated by immunoblots in neurons and mouse brains. Apparent nonsubstrates, such as TSPAN6, were also increased, indicating that BACE1-inhibition may lead to unexpected secondary effects. In summary, SUSPECS is broadly useful for determination of the surface glycoproteome and its correlation with the secretome.

### Keywords
Murine neurons, N-glycoproteome, Bace1, Surface

### Affiliations
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lichtenthaler
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich


