### Accession
PXD044682

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Landscape of Pseudorabies Virus Infection Reveals Multiple Potential Antiviral Targets

### Description
A quantitative phosphoproteome was conducted to explore the phosphorylation changes and host cellular responses upon PRV infection. Besides, the characteristics of the phosphorylated proteins were analyzed, including molecular distribution, percentage of the phosphorylated (STY) sites, and phosphorylated motifs. Additionally, the GO and KEGG analyses of the significantly changed phophoproteins were performed. Finally, DNMT1, HDAC6, EGFR, GRK2, VIM, and G3BP1 were chosen for analysis of their effect on PRV replication using an inhibitory-based experiment, and the results showed that all these proteins are necessary for efficient PRV replication.

### Sample Protocol
PK15 cells in six 10 cm cell culture dishes were infected or mock-infected with JSY13 (0.5 MOI), the cells were lysed and subjected to BCA method for concentration determination. Then, equal amounts of the protein were subjected to TMT-based LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data was queried against the UniProt database. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme digestion mode, and cysteine alkylation was designed as the fixed modification in the database search. The quantitative method was set as TMT-6plex with a specified false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomic landscape, Pseudorabies virus, Virus-host interaction, Antiviral targets

### Affiliations
Yangzhou university
Yangzhou agriculture university

### Submitter
Zongyi Bo

### Lab Head
Dr Zongyi Bo
Yangzhou university


