### Accession
PXD018912

### Title
Growth Phase-Specific Variations of the Proteome and Acetylome of the Organohalide-Respiring Dehalococcoides mccartyi Strain CBDB1

### Description
The strictly anaerobic bacterium Dehalococcoides mccartyi is obligatory dependent on organohalide respiration for energy conservation and growth. Due to its capability to reductively dehalogenate a multitude of toxic halogenated electron acceptors, it plays an important role in the attenuation of these compounds at respective contaminated sites. Here, D. mccartyi strain CBDB1, specialized on the dehalogenation of chloroaromatic compounds, was grown in a two-liquid phase system with 1,2,3-trichlorobenzene as electron acceptor, acetate plus CO2 as carbon source and hydrogen as electron donor. The proteome and Nε-lysine acetylome were analyzed in the lag, exponential and stationary phases. The high and almost invariable abundance of the membrane-localized organohalide respiration complex consisting of the reductive dehalogenases CbrA and CbdbA80, the uptake hydrogenase HupLS and the organohalide respiration molybdoenzyme OmeAB was shown throughout growth and also after a prolonged stationary phase. Quantification of transcripts of reductive dehalogenase genes revealed their major synthesis starting in the lag phase, which might be a prerequisite for balanced growth in the exponential phase. The analyses of the coverage of functional pathways as well as indicator analysis revealed the growth-phase specificity of the proteome, with regulatory proteins identified as important indicators for the stationary phase. The number of acetylated proteins increased from the lag to the stationary phase. We detected pronounced acetylation of key proteins of the acetate metabolism, i.e. the synthesis of acetyl-CoA and its processing via gluconeogenesis and the incomplete Wood-Ljungdahl pathway, as well as of proteins central for the biosynthesis of amino acids, co-factors and terpenoids. In addition, the partial acetylation of the reductive dehalogenases as well as of TatA, a component of the twin-arginine translocation machinery, suggests that acetylation might be directly involved in the maintenance of the organohalide respiration capacity of D. mccartyi over periods without access to halogenated electron acceptors.

### Sample Protocol
Growth conditions Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain CBDB1 was cultivated anaerobically in Ti(III)-citrate-reduced, carbonate-buffered synthetic medium at 30 °C with hydrogen as electron donor and acetate as a carbon source. The cultures were overlaid with the electron acceptor 1,2,3-trichlorobenzene dissolved in hexadecane leading to a nominal concentration of 10 mM. Two experiments were conducted to analyze the proteomes of the lag-, exponential and stationary phase. In the 1st experiment, the proteomes and acetylomes were analyzed. In the 2nd experiment, the proteomes were compared with the transcription profiles of selected rdhA genes. For each data point three biological replicates were analyzed.   Cell harvest  To obtain a total cell count of at least 109, for each of the 3 biological replicates 50 to 200 ml culture volume was harvested. The cells were first pelleted at 3500 x g and 4 °C for 45 min, then the supernatant was removed except for the last 2 ml. Cells were resuspended in the remaining supernatant and pelleted again at 8415 x g and 4 °C for 30 min. The pellet was resuspended in 100 µl remaining supernatant and washed with 1.5 ml 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer (at 8415 x g and 4 °C for 30 min). The cell pellets were stored in 100 µl remaining supernatant at -80 °C until further processing. Peptide preparation from lysed cells Protein extraction, digestion, and peptide purification were performed as described before [1]. Briefly, cells were dissolved in 8 M urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 8M urea, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 1 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate) and disrupted by four cycles of freeze/thaw/ultrasonic bath treatment. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (15 min, 4 °C, 20000 g) and proteins were quantified by the BCA-assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). After reduction (4.5 mM DTT, 30 min, 55 °C) and subsequent alkylation (10 mM IAA, 15 min, room temperature, dark), samples were diluted four-fold with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8. In experiment 1, three replicates of each 44 µg (exponential phase), 15 µg (lag phase), 117 µg (stationary phase) and in experiment 2, three replicates of each 60 µg (exponential and stationary phase) and 3 µg (lag phase) were digested overnight with an equivalent of 2% trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted over SEP PAK Classic C18 columns (Waters, USA) and eluted using 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. 5% of the eluate was aliquoted for the proteome analysis; all samples were lyophilized and stored at -80°C.  Immunoaffinity enrichment of lysine-acetylated peptides The PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, USA) was used to enrich acetylated peptides from the desalted peptides of experiment 1 according to [1].  LC-MS/MS Non-modified peptides from experiment 1 and 2 and acetylated peptides from experiment 1 were desalted by using SOLAµ SPE Plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States). After solubilizing peptides in 0.1% formic acid, they were separated using a 100 min non-linear gradient from 3.2% to 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm, C18, Thermo Scientiﬁc) in a UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and 35 °C. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (experiment 1) or a Q Exactive HF MS (experiment 2, both Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA), both with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode.  Mass spectrometer full scans were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 or 60,000 in the scan range of 375-1575 or 350–1,550 m/z, in experiment 1 and experiment 2, respectively. The MS ion count target was set to 1x106/3×106 at maximum injection time of 80 ms/50 ms (experiment 1/experiment 2). The instrument was run in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s in experiment 1, in experiment 2, the 10 most intense peaks were isolated. An MS/MS isolation window for ions in the quadrupole of charge state 2-6 was set to 1.6 m/z or 1.4 m/z, respectively. MS/MS scans were acquired using the HCD mode at normalized collision-induced energy of 28%, with a resolution of 30,000/15,000, an automatic gain control target of 1x105 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. In both experiments, the exclusion time to reject masses from repetitive MS/MS fragmentation was set to 30 s.  [1] Guo A et al.. Immunoaffinity enrichment and mass spectrometry analysis of protein methylation. Mol Cell Proteomics, 2014; 13: 372-387.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. The acquired spectra were searched by Sequest HT against a D. mccartyi strain CBDB1 database containing 1,454 non-redundant protein-coding sequence entries (downloaded October 2014 from Uniprot) and a “common repository of adventitious proteins database” (cRAP) to exclude contaminants. Enzyme specificity was selected as trypsin with up to four missed cleavages allowed. Peptide ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.02 Da. Acetylation of lysines and protein N-termini and oxidation of methionines were selected as dynamic and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as static modiﬁcation. A maximum of three equal and four dynamic modifications per peptide were allowed. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01, calculated by Percolator, and a Sequest HT XCorr > 2.0 were considered as identiﬁed. Quantification of proteins was performed using the average of the top three peptide MS1-areas. In total, of experiment 1, 45 samples and of experiment 2, 36 samples were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer yielding a multireport. For the publication, of experiment 1, only the proteome and acetylome of the three replicates of the lag (proteome “20160215_DT_Ac_Halle_N_starv_1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”, acetylome “20160215_DT_Ac_Halle_E_starv_1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”), exponential (proteome “20160215_DT_Ac_Halle_N_EEI_1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”, acetylome “20160215_DT_Ac_Halle_E_EEI_1_[…].raw”/”2_[…].raw”/”3_[…].raw”) and stationary phase (proteome “20160215_DT_Ac_Halle_N_stat_1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”, acetylome “20160215_DT_Ac_Halle_E_stat_1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”) were analyzed. Of experiment 2, the proteome the three replicates of the lag (“20180312_DT_CBDB1_Kac_N_H5_1_115.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”), exponential (“20180312_DT_CBDB1_Kac_N_E1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”) and stationary phase (“20180312_DT_CBDB1_Kac_N_S1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”) as well as the inoculum (“20180312_DT_CBDB1_Kac_N_I1.raw”/”2.raw”/”3.raw”) were analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
The strictly anaerobic bactGIerium <i>Dehalococcoides mccartyi</i> obligatorily depends on organohalide respiration for energy conservation and growth. The bacterium also plays an important role in bioremediation. Since there is no guarantee of a continuous supply of halogenated substrates in its natural environment, the question arises of how <i>D. mccartyi</i> maintains the synthesis and activity of dehalogenating enzymes under these conditions. Acetylation is a means by which energy-restricted microorganisms can modulate and maintain protein levels and their functionality. Here, we analyzed the proteome and N&#x3b5;-lysine acetylome of <i>D. mccartyi</i> strain CBDB1 during growth with 1,2,3-trichlorobenzene as an electron acceptor. The high abundance of the membrane-localized organohalide respiration complex, consisting of the reductive dehalogenases CbrA and CbdbA80, the uptake hydrogenase HupLS, and the organohalide respiration-associated molybdoenzyme OmeA, was shown throughout growth. In addition, the number of acetylated proteins increased from 5% to 11% during the transition from the exponential to the stationary phase. Acetylation of the key proteins of central acetate metabolism and of CbrA, CbdbA80, and TatA, a component of the twin-arginine translocation machinery, suggests that acetylation might contribute to maintenance of the organohalide-respiring capacity of the bacterium during the stationary phase, thus providing a means of ensuring membrane protein integrity and a proton gradient.

### Keywords
Dehalococcoides mccartyi, Chlorobenzene, Low biomass, Reductive dehalogenation, Anaerobic respiration, Dehalogenase, Transcription analysis, Growth phase, Proteome, Tat transport, Acetate metabolism, Acetylome, Organohalide respiration, Nε-lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molekular Systems Biology Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Dominique Türkowsky

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molekular Systems Biology Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


