### Accession
PXD015675

### Title
Mass spectrometry of Manica rubida venom

### Description
In the present study, the venom peptidome of the red ant, Manica rubida, was characterized using an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approach. In addition, insecticidal assays on C18 reversed-phase HPLC venom fractions were conducted on Lucilia caesar blowflies to identify neurotoxic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Crude venom was resuspended in water and then desalted using ZipTip® C18 (Merck Millipore, Burlington, USA) after adding TFA at a final concentration of 0.5% v/v. Then, venom sample was subjected to de novo sequencing using Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nL/min flow rate, a 98 min gradient from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) for a total time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 120 000, with a mass range of 350-1550 m/z. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 27%. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with an in-house Peaks software (BSI, version 6.0) to perform de novo sequencing. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The following modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met) and pyroglutamic acid (Glu). De novo peptide sequences with Average Local Confidence (ALC) levels higher than 60% were used for peptide sequencing.

### Publication Abstract
Using an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approach, we characterized the venom peptidome of the European red ant, <i>Manica rubida</i>. We identified 13 "myrmicitoxins" that share sequence similarities with previously identified ant venom peptides, one of them being identified as an EGF-like toxin likely resulting from a threonine residue modified by <i>O-</i>fucosylation. Furthermore, we conducted insecticidal assays of reversed-phase HPLC venom fractions on the blowfly <i>Lucilia caesar</i>, permitting us to identify six myrmicitoxins (i.e., U<sub>3</sub>-, U<sub>10</sub>-, U<sub>13</sub>-, U<sub>20</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1a, U<sub>10</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1b, and U<sub>10</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1c) with an insecticidal activity. Chemically synthesized U<sub>10</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1a, -Mri1b, -Mri1c, and U<sub>20</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1a irreversibly paralyzed blowflies at the highest doses tested (30-125 nmol&#xb7;g<sup>-1</sup>). U<sub>13</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1a, the most potent neurotoxic peptide at 1 h, had reversible effects after 24 h (150 nmol&#xb7;g<sup>-1</sup>). Finally, U<sub>3</sub>-MYRTX-Mri1a has no insecticidal activity, even at up to 55 nmol&#xb7;g<sup>-1</sup>. Thus, <i>M. rubida</i> employs a paralytic venom rich in linear insecticidal peptides, which likely act by disrupting cell membranes.

### Keywords
Venom, Ant, Peptide

### Affiliations
Institut National Universitaire de Champollion
Equipe BTSB-EA 7417, Université de Toulouse, Institut National Universitaire Jean-François Champollion, Place de Verdun, 81012, Albi, France

### Submitter
Axel Touchard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Treilhou
Equipe BTSB-EA 7417, Université de Toulouse, Institut National Universitaire Jean-François Champollion, Place de Verdun, 81012, Albi, France


