### Accession
PXD000689

### Title
Analysis of initial changes in the proteome of soybean root tip under flooding stress

### Description
Flooding has a severe negative effect on cultivation in the early stage of soybean growth. To understand the mechanism in early-stage soybean responding to flooding stress, proteomic techniques were used

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were treated without or with flooding for 3, 6, 12 and 24 h. Proteins were extracted from root tip by TCA/Acetone method. The extracted proteins were separated by 2-DE, proteins in the excised gel pieces were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. For gel-free proteomics, protein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nano LC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm ID × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, NikkyoTechnos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 400-15,000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The top ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Identification of proteins was performed by MASCOT search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) using soybean peptide database (54175 sequences) obtained from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.0, http://www.phytozome.net/soybean). DTA files were generated from acquired raw data files and then converted to Mascot generic files using Discover Daemon software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Parameters used in Mascot searches were follows: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. For gel-free proteomics, peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. Automatic decoy database search was performed in the search. Mascot results were filtered with Mascot percolator. The Mascot results were used for differential analysis using SIEVE software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For identification of protein spots separated by 2DE, the search parameters were set as follows: peptide mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.2 Da; maximum missed cleavages, 1; and peptide and charges, +2, +3, and +4. The minimal requirement for accepting a protein identified was as follow: (i) the score indicated the probability of a true positive identification and was at least 100; (ii) at least two peptide sequence matched above the identity threshold; and (iii) the coverage of the total protein sequence by the matching peptides was a minimum of 4%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Flooding stress, Soybean, Root tips

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization


