### Accession
PXD039334

### Title
Identification of global inhibitors of cellular glycosylation

### Description
Small molecule inhibitors of glycosylation enzymes are valuable tools for dissecting glycan functions and potential drug candidates. Screening for inhibitors of glycosyltransferases are mainly performed by in vitro enzyme assays with difficulties moving candidates to cells and animals. Here, we circumvent this by employing a cell-based screening assay using glycoengineered cells expressing tailored reporter glycoproteins. We focused on GalNAc-type O-glycosylation, and selected the GalNAc-T11 isoenzyme that selectively glycosylates the endocytic low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR)-related proteins as target. Our screen of a limited small molecule compound library did not identify selective inhibitors of GalNAc-T11, however we identified two compounds that broadly inhibited Golgi-localized glycosylation processes. These compounds mediated reversible fragmentation of the Golgi system without affecting secretion. We demonstrate how these inhibitors can be used to manipulate glycosylation in cells to induce expression of truncated O-glycans and augment binding of cancer-specific Tn-glycoprotein antibodies and to inhibit expression of heparan sulfate and binding and infection of SARS-CoV-2.

### Sample Protocol
10µg purified E-cadherin reporter expressed in HEK293WT treated with 10µM NSC80997 or DMSO was run on an SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie stain. The E-cadherin band was cut-out followed by 3 times destaining in 100 mM Ambic buffer with 40% acetonitrile (ACN; Thermo Fisher) and dehydrated in 100% ACN. Dehydrated gel pieces were rehydrated in 50 µl 100 mM Ambic containing 200 ng Trypsin (Roche) and incubated at 37℃ overnight. Digested peptides were collected by addition of 50 µl 50% ACN and desalted using C18 stage tip. Peptides from control and NSC80997 treated samples were differentially labelled by a TMT6plex kit (Thermo Fisher) before being mixed, desalted using C18 stage tip and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation and hexose modification of serine and threonine residues. Carbamindomethyl (cystein) was set as fixed modification. Protease specificity was set to full or semi-specific trypsin cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Small molecule inhibitors of glycosylation enzymes are valuable tools for dissecting glycan functions and potential drug candidates. Screening for inhibitors of glycosyltransferases are mainly performed by in vitro enzyme assays with difficulties moving candidates to cells and animals. Here, we circumvent this by employing a cell-based screening assay using glycoengineered cells expressing tailored reporter glycoproteins. We focused on GalNAc-type O-glycosylation and selected the GalNAc-T11 isoenzyme that selectively glycosylates endocytic low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR)-related proteins as targets. Our screen of a limited small molecule compound library did not identify selective inhibitors of GalNAc-T11, however, we identify two compounds that broadly inhibited Golgi-localized glycosylation processes. These compounds mediate the reversible fragmentation of the Golgi system without affecting secretion. We demonstrate how these inhibitors can be used to manipulate glycosylation in cells to induce expression of truncated O-glycans and augment binding of cancer-specific Tn-glycoprotein antibodies and to inhibit expression of heparan sulfate and binding and infection of SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Compound library screen, Golgi fragmentation, Cell-based glycan array, Glycosyltransferases, O-glycosylation, Glycosylation inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


