### Accession
PXD012371

### Title
Bald thigh syndrome in sighthounds

### Description
Bald thigh syndrome is a common hair loss disorder in sighthounds. The overall goal of our study was to identify the cause of bald thigh syndrome and the pathological changes associated with it. We approached this aim by comparing skin biopsies and hair shafts of affected and control dogs microscopically as well as by applying high-throughput technologies such as genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics. While the histology is rather unspecific in most cases, trichogram analysis and scanning electron microscopy revealed severe structural abnormalities in hair shafts of affected dogs. This finding is supported by the results of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of skin biopsies and hair shafts, respectively, where genes and proteins important for differentiation of the inner root sheath and the assembly of a proper hair shaft were downregulated. Transcriptome profiling of skin biopsies revealed a downregulation of genes encoding 23 hair shaft keratins and 51 keratin associated proteins, as well as desmosomal cadherins and several actors of the BMP signaling pathway, which is important for hair shaft differentiation. To identify differentially expressed proteins in structural abnormal hair shafts, we performed nLC-MS/MS- based proteomic analysis of fractured hair shafts of four dogs with bald thigh syndrome (Greyhounds, n=3, Whippet, n=1) and intact telogen hair shafts of four control dogs (Greyhounds, n=3, Whippet= n=1) plucked on the thighs. Decreased expression of keratin 71 and desmocollin 2 on the mRNA level in skin biopsies corresponded with a reduced protein expression in the hair shafts of affected dogs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on fractured HSs of four dogs with BTS (Greyhounds, n=3, Whippet, n=1) and intact telogen HSs of four control dogs (Greyhounds, n=3, Whippet= n=1) plucked on the thighs (S1 Table). From each dog 0.25-0.29 mg of hair was cut in small pieces and washed successively three times with 50mM acetic acid and 20% ethanol before protein extraction. Hairs were lysed by vortexing strong agitation in 150µL 0.2M NaOH, 1% SDS, 2% beta-mercaptoethanol and 0.01M EDTA for 30 minutes at 90°C. The supernatant after centrifugation was kept and two additional extractions were done with 150µL lyses buffer by vortexing for 30 minutes at room temperature. The three supernatants were pooled and proteins precipitated with five volumes of acetone at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 16000 g for 10 min, the dry pellet was resuspended in 30µL Laemmli buffer/ 40mM DTT, boiled for 5 minutes at 95°C and loaded on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Extracted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested for nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). Identical gel material, but without any protein sample loaded, was processed in parallel, in order to assess keratin contaminations from the laboratory environment.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was processed with MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.5.4.1) to identify proteins at a 1% FDR and relatively quantify expression differences between control and BTS dog samples at a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Bald thigh syndrome is a common hair loss disorder in sighthounds. Numerous possible causes, including environmental conditions, trauma, stress, endocrinopathies and genetic components have been proposed, but only endocrinopathies have been ruled out scientifically. The overall goal of our study was to identify the cause of bald thigh syndrome and the pathological changes associated with it. We approached this aim by comparing skin biopsies and hair shafts of affected and control dogs microscopically as well as by applying high-throughput technologies such as genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics. While the histology is rather unspecific in most cases, trichogram analysis and scanning electron microscopy revealed severe structural abnormalities in hair shafts of affected dogs. This finding is supported by the results of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiling where genes and proteins important for differentiation of the inner root sheath and the assembly of a proper hair shaft were downregulated. Transcriptome profiling revealed a downregulation of genes encoding 23 hair shaft keratins and 51 keratin associated proteins, as well as desmosomal cadherins and several actors of the BMP signaling pathway which is important for hair shaft differentiation. The lower expression of keratin 71 and desmocollin 2 on the mRNA level in skin biopsies corresponded with a decreased protein expression in the hair shafts of affected dogs. The genetic analysis revealed a missense variant in the IGFBP5 gene homozygous in all available Greyhounds and other sighthounds. Further research is required to clarify whether the IGFBP5 variant represents a predisposing genetic risk factor. We conclude from our results that structural defects in the hair shafts are the cause for this well-known disease and these defects are associated with a downregulation of genes and proteins essential for hair shaft formation. Our data add important knowledge to further understand the molecular mechanisms of HF morphogenesis and alopecia in dogs.

### Keywords
Hair, Greyhound dog, Proteome, Bald thigh syndrome

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Institut für Tierpathologie (ITPA) Vetsuisse University of Bern Länggassstrasse 122 3001 Bern

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Maria Welle
Institut für Tierpathologie (ITPA) Vetsuisse University of Bern Länggassstrasse 122 3001 Bern


