### Accession
PXD041695

### Title
Convergent origin and accelerated evolution of vesicle-associated RhoGAP proteins in two unrelated parasitoid wasps

### Description
Gene duplication, accompanied by modification of the expression and/or function of one of the duplicates under the action of positive selection, followed by further duplication to produce multigene families of toxins is a well-documented process in venomous animals. This evolutionary model has been less described in parasitoid wasps, which use maternal fluids, including venom, to protect their eggs from encapsulation by the host immune system. The leptopilina venom proteomic data were used to evidence that specific RhoGAPs formed a family of protein that are associated with vesicles that act as transport systems to deliver them in the immune cells of their drosophila larval host. We showed that the gene encoding the cellular RacGAP1 is at the origin of the virulent RhoGAP family formed by successive duplications that evolved under positive selection. Almost all of these RhoGAPs lost their GAP activity and GTPase binding ability due to mutations in key amino acids suggesting new function(s) and  mechanism of action in host cells that remain to be elucidated.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic analysis was performed on wasps venom reservoirs.Twenty-five Lbm, Lby and Lh female venom apparatus were dissected, and reservoirs were separated from the gland and opened to release the venom content in 25 ml of Ringer’s solution supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The suspension was centrifuged for 2 min at 500 g to remove the residual tissues. The supernatant was carefully removed, immediately mixed with 4X Laemmli buffer containing beta-mercaptoethanol and boiled for 5 min. The venom was separated on a 6-16% linear gradient SDS-PAGE and the gel was silver stained. Identification of proteins by mass spectrometry was performed on bands excised from the gel, cut into small blocks, and rinsed with water and acetonitrile prior to reduction and alkylation. Sample trypsinization was then carried out overnight at 37 deg C with 12.5 ng/ ul trypsin (sequencing grade, Sigma). The generated peptides were sequenced by nano-LC-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) (Q-TOF Ultima with a nano-electrospray ionization source, Waters/ Micromass, UK) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using the five most intense parent ions. The peptides were loaded on a C18 column (XBridge BEH130 3.5 um, 75 um X 150 mm, Waters) and eluted with a 5-60% linear gradient at a flow rate of 200 nl/min over 90 min (buffer A: water/acetonirile (98:2, v/v) and 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: water/acetonitrile(20:80, v/v) and 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis was performed with Mascot software (http://www.matrixscience.com) licensed in house (v. 2.3), using the contig sequences of the three Leptopilina libraries. Peak lists generated for individual bands from the same gel lane were merged together into a single file before databank search submission. The parameters were set for trypsin specificity, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl-cysteine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and 0.2-Da mass tolerance on both precursor and fragment ions. Data validation criteria were (i) one eptide with individual ion score above 50 (mascot significant identity threshold corresponding to p < 0.005 is 49 in our case) or (ii) at least two peptides of individual ion score above 20 (corresponding to 1% probability that a peptide spectrum match is a random event). The mascot score is calculated as -10Log (p). The calculated FDR (based on an automatic decoy database search) was lower than 1%: FDR: 0.1%, 0.28% and 0.97% for Lbm, Lby and Lh respectively. For more details see : Extensive inter- and intraspecific venom variation in closely related parasites targeting the same host: the case of Leptopilina parasitoids of Drosophila. Colinet D, Deleury E, Anselme C, Cazes D, Poulain J, Azema-Dossat C, Belghazi M, Gatti JL, Poirié M. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;43(7):601-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.03.010.

### Publication Abstract
The arms race between immune suppressive parasites that produce virulence factors and hosts that evolve resistance to these factors is suggested to be a key driver for the diversification of both partners. However, little is known regarding the diversity of virulence factors in closely related parasites or the mechanisms underlying the variation of virulence. One of the best-described model to address this issue is the interaction between Leptopilina parasitic wasps and their Drosophila hosts, in which variation of virulence is well documented. Thanks to a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach, we have identified the main secreted proteins in the venom of Leptopilina heterotoma (Gotheron strain, 66 proteins) and of two well-characterized strains of Leptopilina boulardi, ISm and ISy (65 and 49 proteins, respectively). Results revealed significant quantitative differences in venom components between the&#xa0;L.&#xa0;boulardi strains, in agreement with their different virulence properties. Strikingly, the two related Leptopilina species did not share any abundant venom protein. The main identified proteins in L.&#xa0;boulardi were RhoGAPs and serpins while an aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA) was found abundant in L.&#xa0;heterotoma. The extensive quantitative variation observed between these species may be related with their use of different virulence strategies and/or to differences in their host range (specialist versus generalist). Altogether, our data suggests that parasitoid venom can quickly evolve, mainly through rapid changes in regulation of gene expression. It also evidences venom evolutionary processes largely described in other venomous animals i.e. the convergent recruitment of venom proteins between phylogenetically unrelated organisms, and the role of duplications in the emergence of multigenic families of virulence factors.

### Keywords
Parasitoids, Ovarian calyx, Venom, Positive selection, Rhogap, Evolution, Gene duplication

### Affiliations
CNRS
INRAE Evolution and Specificity of Multitrophic Interactions (ESIM), Sophia Agrobiotech Institute (ISA)  400 route des Chappes, Sophia Antipolis 06903, France

### Submitter
Maya BELGHAZI

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Luc gatti
INRAE Evolution and Specificity of Multitrophic Interactions (ESIM), Sophia Agrobiotech Institute (ISA)  400 route des Chappes, Sophia Antipolis 06903, France


