### Accession
PXD033975

### Title
A genetic platform to investigate the functions of bacterial drug efflux pumps

### Description
Efflux pumps are a significant challenge for the development of new antibacterial agents. Overcoming efflux requires an in-depth understanding of efflux pump functions, substrate specificities, and the development of inhibitors. However, the complexities of drug efflux networks have limited such studies. To address these challenges, we report the generation of Efflux KnockOut-35 (EKO-35), a highly susceptible Escherichia coli strain lacking 35 efflux pumps. We demonstrate the utility of this strain by constructing an efflux platform consisting of strains individually expressing genes encoding efflux pumps forming tripartite complexes with the outer membrane channel TolC. This platform was profiled against a curated diverse compound collection, which enabled us to define physicochemical properties that contribute to transport. We also show the E. coli drug efflux network is conditionally essential for growth, and that the platform can be used to investigate efflux pump inhibitor specificities and also efflux pump interplay. We believe EKO-35 and the efflux platform will have widespread application for the study of drug efflux.

### Sample Protocol
Saturated LB overnight cultures of the wild-type and EKO-35 strains were inoculated (1/100 dilution) into 50 mL of LB until the mid-exponential phase of growth was reached (OD600nm= 0.5). 3 x 109 cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000 x g), washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and the cell pellet was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Whole-cell proteome samples were generated using a modified total proteome extraction protocol90. The cell pellets were stored at -80 oC until the experiment was performed. Briefly, the cell pellet was resuspended in ice cold 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.5]. The cells were lysed using a probe sonicator (three cycles of 30 sec on/off, 30% amplitude) and the samples were treated with 2% SDS and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). To enrich for membrane proteins, bacterial membranes were isolated as described above. To minimize contamination with cytoplasmic proteins, the  membrane pellet was washed in ice cold 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.5] and ultracentrifugation was repeated. The membrane pellet was resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.5] with 2% SDS and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Both the whole-cell and membrane samples were heated to 95oC prior to treatment with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). The samples were then incubated with 100% acetone overnight at -20oC. Precipitated protein from both the whole-cell and membrane fractions were combined by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 4oC and washed twice with 80% acetone. The protein pellets were then solubilized in 40 mM HEPES [pH 5.0] with 8 M urea and quantified using a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay. The samples were digested overnight at room temperature with LysC and trypsin proteases (Promega, protein/enzyme ratio 50:1). 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was then added and 50 µm acidified peptides were purified and desalted using a STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tip with 3 layers of C18 resin using the described protocol.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analyzed using MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.14.0)93. The spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine with the E. coli K-12 proteome as reference (Accession No. P000000625, accessed June 2021 with 4391 sequences)94. A minimum of two distinct peptides were required for protein identification and the FDR was set to 1%. The ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled. Quantification was performed by label-free quantification (LFQ) using the MaxLFQ algorithm95. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD030583. All mass spectrometry experiments were performed in biological quadruplicate. In nutrient-rich conditions, biological replicate reproducibility was 96.9% and 96.6% between wild-type and EKO-35 replicates, respectively. In nutrient-limited conditions, biological replicate reproducibility was 94.8% and 96.6% between wild-type and EKO-35 replicates, respectively. Comparative analysis was performed with proteins identified in at least three biological replicates (1,880 proteins in nutrient-rich, and 1,819 proteins in nutrient-limited).   Statistical analysis and data visualization was performed using Perseus (ver 1.6.2.2)96. Further analysis was only performed on proteins present in at least three out of four biological replicates within each strain. Upon filtering, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. Significant changes in abundance of proteins between the two proteomes were defined with a false discovery rate (FDR)-correct Student's t-test (p-value ≤ 0.05) and Benjamini-Hochberg multiple hypothesis correction testing (FDR = 0.05) was applied97. 1D-annotation enrichment analysis of UniProt keywords enabled global assessment of changes in protein abundance42 using two-sample t-tests with P-value ≤ 0.05, FDR = 0.05 and score < - 0.5, < 0.5. Data visualization was performed using GraphPad (version 8).

### Publication Abstract
Efflux pumps are a serious challenge for the development of antibacterial agents. Overcoming efflux requires an in-depth understanding of efflux pump functions, specificities and the development of inhibitors. However, the complexities of efflux networks have limited such studies. To address these challenges, we generated Efflux KnockOut-35 (EKO-35), a highly susceptible Escherichia coli strain lacking 35 efflux pumps. We demonstrate the use of this strain by constructing an efflux platform comprising EKO-35 strains individually producing efflux pumps forming tripartite complexes with TolC. This platform was profiled against a curated diverse compound collection, which enabled us to define physicochemical properties that contribute to transport. We also show the E. coli drug efflux network is conditionally essential for growth, and that the platform can be used to investigate efflux pump inhibitor specificities and efflux pump interplay. We believe EKO-35 and the efflux platform will have widespread application for the study of drug efflux.

### Keywords
Efflux pumps, Escherichia coli

### Affiliations
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Laura Thompson

### Lab Head
Dr Georgina Cox
University of Guelph


