### Accession
PXD013280

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Wheat germ Isoelectric focusing

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from an isoelectric focusing separation of native wheat (Triticum aestivum) germ extract.  The non-denaturing separation was achieved using an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionation apparatus.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 mg Wheat germ extract (in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 130 mM K-acetate, 5 mM Mg-acetate,, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, plus protease inhibitors) was diluted to 3.6 ml using OFFGEL Stock solution and 150 ul were applied to each of 24 wells.  Proteins were fractionated using the OGProt24 method according to manufacturer's instructions and a pH 3-10 non-linear gradient (Immobiline Dry Strip, 24cm, GE Healthcare). Equal volumes of each fraction were denatured with 50% TFE, reduced/alkylated, and subjected to in solution trypsin digestion.  Peptides were recovered using an Amicon ultra spin filter (10 kD MWCO) and desalted using C18 spin columns.  Mass spec data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion using a data dependent 75 minute top speed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly, output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cofractionation mass spec, Offgel, Wheat germ, Ief, Isoelectric focusing, Triticum aestivum, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


