### Accession
PXD029055

### Title
CircBIRC6-2 inhibits transmissible gastroenteritis virus induced mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening by its encoding protein

### Description
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a member of coronavirus, is the pathogen of TGE. We previously found 123 circular RNAs (circRNAs) were differential expression during activation of mitochondrial permeability transition in  porcine intestinal epithelial cells-jejunum 2 cell line (IPEC-J2) in response to TGEV infection. Mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) is a transmembrane pore of mitochondria and plays a key role in MPT. mPTP abnormal opening causes MPT. Therefore, we postulated that circRNAs might be related to mPTP abnormal opening induced by TGEV. In this study, we found that circBIRC6-2 could inhibit the mPTP abnormal opening induced by TGEV. Interestingly, circBIRC6-2 encodes protein BIRC6-236aa. An open reading frame (ORF) and internal ribosomal entrance site (IRES) of circBIRC6-2 were identified. We also found that BIRC6-236aa rather than circBIRC6-2 inhibited the mPTP opening by overexpression of circBIRC6-2 related vectors. We obtained 91 proteins that interacted with BIRC6-236aa using immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS). The interaction between voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein 1 (VDAC1) and BIRC6-236aa was demonstrated through co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP). Moreover, BIRC6-236aa could inhibit the formation of VDAC1 and Cyclophilin D (CypD) complexes. Overall, these results indicated that BIRC6-236aa antagonized mPTP opening by interacting with VDAC1 to weaken the extent of interaction between VDAC1 and CypD.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis the peptide of BIRC6-236aa protein： The plasmid pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-copGFP-T2A-Puro-BIRC6-236aa (alias CD513B-1-BIRC6-236aa) which can express BIRC6-236aa protein was transfected into IPEC-J2 cells. After 48 h, IPEC-J2 were infected with 1 MOI TGEV for 12 h. Then, cells were lysed in IP lysis buffer (Beyotime, China). The lysates were gently centrifuged and cleared by incubating with 50 µL of protein A/G agarose (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 4 ℃ for 1 h. The supernatant was subjected to IP using the flag antibodies overnight at 4 ℃. The protein complexes were collected using 50 µL of protein A/G agarose at room temperature for 2 h. The total proteins of IP were analysed by SDS-PAGE. The identification of the proteins binding with BIRC6-236aa： IPEC-J2 were transfected with CD513B-1-BIRC6-236aa. After 48 h, IPEC-J2 were infected with 1 MOI TGEV for 12 h. Then, cells were lysed in IP lysis buffer (Beyotime, China). The lysates were gently centrifuged and cleared by incubating with 50 µL of protein A/G agarose (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 4 ℃ for 1 h. The supernatant was subjected to IP using the flag antibodies overnight at 4 ℃, meanwhile homologous IgG was used to be the control group.The protein complexes were collected using 50 µL of protein A/G agarose at room temperature for 2 h. The total proteins of IP were analysed by SDS-PAGE. And an independent replicate test was conducted.

### Data Protocol
Analysis the peptide of BIRC6-236aa protein： The total proteins of circBIRC6-2-Flag IP were isolated using SDS-PAGE. Then the protein bands near 30 kDa were excised according to size and chopped into 1 mm3 pieces. The peptide mixtures were then extracted from the gels and dired prior to LC-MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher, USA). The Raw MS/MS data was analyzed using Thermo proteome discoverer 2.2. The protein score was used to estimate the reliability of protein identification which was evaluated by PSMs (peptide spectrum matches - the number of identified peptides spectra matched for the proteins in second-order MS), matching rate, and peptide FDR confidence level.  The identification of the proteins binding with BIRC6-236aa： The total proteins of circBIRC6-2-Flag IP were isolated using SDS-PAGE. Then all bands were collected to analysis peptides in order to identify the proteins binding with BIRC6-236aa. Then the analytical method was the same as above. Finally, we obtained 91 proteins that may interacted with BIRC6-236aa with two independent replicates tests.

### Publication Abstract
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a member of the coronavirus family, is the pathogen responsible for transmissible gastroenteritis, which results in mitochondrial dysfunction in host cells. Previously, we identified 123 differentially expressed circular RNAs (cRNA)from the TGEV-infected porcine intestinal epithelial cell line jejunum 2 (IPEC-J2). Previous bioinformatics analysis suggested that, of these, circBIRC6 had the potential to regulate mitochondrial function. Furthermore, mitochondrial permeability transition, a key step in the process of mitochondrial dysfunction, is known to be caused by abnormal opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores (mPTPs) regulated by the voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein 1 (VDAC)-Cyclophilin D (CypD) complex. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated the effects of circBIRC6-2 on mitochondrial dysfunction and opening of mPTPs. We found that TGEV infection reduced circBIRC6-2 levels, which in turn reduced mitochondrial calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) levels, the decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential, and opening of mPTPs. In addition, we also identified ORFs and internal ribosomal entrance sites within the circBIRC6-2 RNA. We demonstrate circBIRC6-2 encodes a novel protein, BIRC6-236aa, which we show inhibits TGEV-induced opening of mPTPs during TGEV infection. Mechanistically, we identified an interaction between BIRC6-236aa and VDAC1, suggesting that BIRC6-236aa destabilizes the VDAC1-CypD complex. Taken together, the results suggest that the novel protein BIRC6-236aa encoded by cRNA circBIRC6-2 inhibits mPTP opening and subsequent mitochondrial dysfunction by interacting with VDAC1.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Peptide analysis, Interacting protein

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University (Northwest Agriculture and Forestry University)

College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, P.R.

### Submitter
Xiaomin Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaomin Zhao
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, P.R.


