### Accession
PXD039894

### Title
MBOAT7-Driven Lysophosphatidylinositol Acylation in Adipocytes Contributes to Systemic Glucose Homeostasis

### Description
We previously demonstrated that antisense oligonucleotide (ASO)-mediated knockdown of Mboat7, the gene encoding Membrane Bound O-Acyltransferase 7, in the liver and adipose tissue of mice promoted high fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis, hyperinsulinemia, and systemic insulin resistance. Thereafter, other groups showed that hepatocyte-specific genetic deletion of Mboat7 promoted striking fatty liver and NAFLD progression in mice but does not alter insulin sensitivity, suggesting the potential for cell autonomous roles. Here, we show that MBOAT7 function in adipocytes contributes to diet-induced metabolic disturbances including hyperinsulinemia and systemic insulin resistance. We generated floxed Mboat7 mice and created hepatocyte- and adipocyte-specific knockout mice using Cre-recombinase mice under the control of the albumin and adiponectin promoter, respectively. After chow and high fat diet feeding (60% kCal fat), mice were subjected to metabolic phenotyping and tissues to molecular workup and analysis. Here, we show that MBOAT7 function in adipocytes contributes to diet-induced metabolic disturbances including hyperinsulinemia and systemic insulin resistance. The expression of Mboat7 in white adipose tissue closely correlates with diet-induced obesity across a panel of ~100 inbred strains of mice fed a high fat/high sucrose diet. Moreover, we found that adipocyte-specific genetic deletion of Mboat7 is sufficient to promote hyperinsulinemia, systemic insulin resistance, and mild fatty liver. Unlike in the liver, where Mboat7 plays a relatively minor role in maintaining arachidonic acid (AA)-containing PI pools, Mboat7 is the major source of AA-containing PI pools in adipose tissue. Our data demonstrate that MBOAT7 is a critical regulator of adipose tissue PI homeostasis, and adipocyte MBOAT7-driven PI biosynthesis is closely linked to hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in mice.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were homogenized in Urea Lysis Buffer (20mM HEPES, 9M urea, 1X HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitor, pH 8.0) with lysis matrix D using FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals # 116004500). Protein concentrations were measured using Pierce BCA kit and 0.350 mg aliquot of protein was used for in-solution digestion. The samples were reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide. Twenty five μg of sequencing grade trypsin was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature overnight. The digested samples were desalted using C18 cartridges. These samples were split into two aliquots; 35 µg for global proteomics and a 315 µg aliquot for phosphopeptides enrichment. The 315 µg aliquots were lyophilized and spiked with phosphopeptides standard (Protea Biosciences Group, Inc. #PS-180-1) prior to phosphopeptides enrichment using Hi-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoScientific A32992), and the eluted peptides were dried immediately in a SpeedVac. Each sample was reconstituted in 25 μL 0.1% formic acid and ready for LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed- phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the search engine Sequest-HT which is integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software. The protein sequence database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot mouse protein database containing 25,035 entries with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences).  The protease was set to full activity trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Oxidation of Methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, and Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identification and calculated using the number of identified peptides/proteins from decoy database divided by the total number of identified peptides/proteins. Two peptides were required for positive protein identification to decrease the chance of false discovery by a random match.  A precursor intensity based label free quantification was achieved by the Minora Feature Detector node of Proteome Discoverer using peptide precursors in MS full scans and normalized by total amount of peptide in each sample. The peptides used in this quantitation correspond to unique + razor. Razor-peptides are non-unique peptides and these are assigned to the protein group containing the largest number of other peptides, according to Occam's razor principle. At least two quantifiable peptides are required for a protein.

### Publication Abstract
We previously demonstrated that antisense oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown of Mboat7, the gene encoding membrane bound O-acyltransferase 7, in the liver and adipose tissue of mice promoted high fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis, hyperinsulinemia, and systemic insulin resistance. Thereafter, other groups showed that hepatocyte-specific genetic deletion of Mboat7 promoted striking fatty liver and NAFLD progression in mice but does not alter insulin sensitivity, suggesting the potential for cell autonomous roles. Here, we show that MBOAT7 function in adipocytes contributes to diet-induced metabolic disturbances including hyperinsulinemia and systemic insulin resistance. We generated Mboat7 floxed mice and created hepatocyte- and adipocyte-specific Mboat7 knockout mice using Cre-recombinase mice under the control of the albumin and adiponectin promoter, respectively. Here, we show that MBOAT7 function in adipocytes contributes to diet-induced metabolic disturbances including hyperinsulinemia and systemic insulin resistance. The expression of Mboat7 in white adipose tissue closely correlates with diet-induced obesity across a panel of &#x223c;100 inbred strains of mice fed a high fat/high sucrose diet. Moreover, we found that adipocyte-specific genetic deletion of Mboat7 is sufficient to promote hyperinsulinemia, systemic insulin resistance, and mild fatty liver. Unlike in the liver, where Mboat7 plays a relatively minor role in maintaining arachidonic acid-containing PI pools, Mboat7 is the major source of arachidonic acid-containing PI pools in adipose tissue. Our data demonstrate that MBOAT7 is a critical regulator of adipose tissue PI homeostasis, and adipocyte MBOAT7-driven PI biosynthesis is closely linked to hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance in mice.

### Keywords
Obesity, Hyperinsulinemia, Hepatocytes, Phosphatidylinositol biosynthesis, Diabetes, Metabolism, Arachidonic acid, Acyltransferase, Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, Systemic insulin resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Sciences, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, USA
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Brown
Department of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Sciences, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, USA


