### Accession
PXD036532

### Title
Proteome profiles of skeletal muscle connective tissue: Influence of aging and physical training

### Description
Both aging and physical activity can influence the amount of connective tissue in skeletal muscle, but the impact of these upon specific extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in skeletal muscle is unknown. We investigated the proteome profile of connective tissue in skeletal muscle by label-free proteomic analysis of on cellular protein-depleted extracts from lateral gastrocnemius muscle of old (22-23 months old) and middle-aged mice (11 months old) subjected to three different levels of regular physical activity for 10 weeks (high resistance wheel running, low resistance wheel running or sedentary controls). We hypothesized that aging is correlated with increased amount of connective tissue proteins in skeletal muscle, and that regular physical activity can counteract these age-related changes. We found that dominating cellular proteins were diminished in the urea/thiourea extract, which was therefore used for proteomics. Proteomic analysis identified 482 proteins and showed enrichment for ECM proteins. Statistical analysis revealed that the abundances of 86 proteins were changed with age. Twenty-three of these differentially abundant proteins were identified as structural ECM proteins (e.g., collagens and laminins) and all of these were significantly more abundant with aging. No significant effect of training or interaction between training and advance in age was found for any proteins. Finally, we found a lower protein concentration in the urea/thiourea extracts from the old compared to middle-aged mice. These findings indicate that intramuscular connective tissue alters its protein content with age but is unaffected by training.

### Sample Protocol
Skeletal muscle tissues were decellularized using a modified protocol adapted from previous studies (de Castro Bras et al., 2013, Ramirez-Correa et al., 2013) (see Fig. 1). Samples were processed in six batches of six, one sample from each group, to ensure uniform treatment for all experimental groups. All steps were performed at room temperature unless otherwise stated. Protease inhibitors were added to all solutions used in protein extraction. First, embedded muscle tissue samples were thawed, washed with PBS, weighed, and cut into small pieces. Tissues were incubated with 0.5 M sodium chloride (NaCl) in 10 mM Tris-HCl, 25 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) for 3 h with agitation at 500 rpm. The samples were centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min, the supernatant (NaCl extract) was saved and stored at -20oC and the pelleted samples were incubated with 0.1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 25 mM EDTA, pH 8.0 for 48 h with agitation at 500 rpm. The samples were centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min, the supernatant (SDS extract) was saved and stored at -20oC and the pelleted samples were denatured with 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 30 mM Tris, pH 8.5 at 1000 rpm agitation for 72 h. The samples were centrifuged at 13 000 × g for 5 min, the supernatant (urea/thiourea extract) was saved and stored at -20oC and the pelleted samples were deglycosylated overnight with 0.05 U chondroitinase ABC (Amsbio), 600 mM NaCl, 50 mM sodium acetate at 37oC. The samples were centrifuged at 13 000 × g for 10 min, the supernatant was pooled with the urea/thiourea extract and stored at -20oC. The remaining pellet was digested with 100 µg/ml pepsin (Sigma) in 0.5M acetic acid with gentle agitation, at 4°C for 2 hours. Proteins from the supernatant fractions were precipitated with ethanol and resuspended in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, pH 8.5. Protein concentration of each extract was determined using an EZQ Protein Quantification Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 (http://maxquant.org/) and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the complete Mus musculus UniProt reference proteome (downloaded on 06/04/2017). Default settings for protein identification by Orbitrap MS/MS were used, with the match-between-runs function enabled, including a maximum of two missed cleavages, mass error tolerances of 20 ppm then 4:5 ppm for initial and main peptide searches, respectively, 0.5 Da tolerance for fragment ions, carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine and proline. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was used for both peptide-spectrum matches and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Both aging and physical activity can influence the amount of intramuscular connective tissue in skeletal muscle, but the impact of these upon specific extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in skeletal muscle is unknown. We investigated the proteome profile of intramuscular connective tissue by label-free proteomic analysis of cellular protein-depleted extracts from lateral gastrocnemius muscle of old (22-23 mo old) and middle-aged (11 mo old) male mice subjected to three different levels of regular physical activity for 10 wk (high-resistance wheel running, low-resistance wheel running, or sedentary controls). We hypothesized that aging is correlated with an increased amount of connective tissue proteins in skeletal muscle and that regular physical activity can counteract these age-related changes. We found that dominating cellular proteins were diminished in the urea/thiourea extract, which was therefore used for proteomics. Proteomic analysis identified 482 proteins and showed enrichment for ECM proteins. Statistical analysis revealed that the abundances of 86 proteins changed with age. Twenty-three of these differentially abundant proteins were identified as structural ECM proteins (e.g., collagens and laminins) and all of these were significantly more abundant with aging. No significant effect of training or interaction between training and advance in age was found for any proteins. Finally, we found a lower protein concentration in the urea/thiourea extracts from the old mice compared with the middle-aged mice. Our findings indicate that the intramuscular ECM solubility is affected by increased age but is not altered by physical training.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> We investigated the impact of aging and exercise on extracellular matrix components of intramuscular connective tissue using proteomics. Middle-aged and old mice were subjected to three different levels of regular physical activity for 10 wk (high-resistance wheel running, low-resistance wheel running, or sedentary controls). We prepared extracts of extracellular matrix proteins depleted of cellular proteins. Our findings indicate that intramuscular connective tissue alters its soluble protein content with age but is unaffected by training.

### Keywords
Intramuscular connective tissue, Exercise, Proteomics, Aging, Extracellular matrix, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


