### Accession
PXD006250

### Title
Surviving oxidative stress under iron starvation: an important lesson eminently learned by Aspergillus fumigatus in the human body

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus has to cope with a combination of several stress types after colonisng the human body, and the interplay between the different stress responses can significantly influence the survival of this human pathogen during the invasion of the host organism. In this study, we examined how the H2O2 induced oxidative stress response depends on iron availability. Surprisingly, the applied H2O2 treatment, which induced only a negligible stress response in iron fed cultures, deleteriously affected the fungus under iron starvation and the majority of stress responses on the transcript level were characteristic only for the combined H2O2-iron starvation stress treatments. Our data suggest that the survival of the fungus highly depends on fragile balances, e.g. between siderophore and ergosterol productions or between economization on iron and production of essential iron containing proteins. The applied stress conditions also affected several processes related to virulence or drug susceptibility including secondary metabolism, zinc acquisition or antifungal drug transport. Our[It would be interesting to mention the antioxidative enzymes which are upregulated/increase in abundance under iron-depleting conditions] data clearly demonstrate that studying stress responses under single stress treatments is not sufficient to understand how fungal pathogens survive in a complex habitat and support the view that the evolutionary success of A. fumigatus as an opportunistic human pathogen is not the mere consequence of the productions of certain virulence factors. Importantly, this fungal pathogen is able to mount and coordinate high-complexity and outstandingly efficient responses to multiple and superpositioning stresses in various harsh habitats like the human body.

### Sample Protocol
A. fumigatus AF293 was used throughout this study and was maintained on Barrat’s minimal nitrate agar plates (Barratt et al. 1965). Plates were incubated at 37 ºC for 5 d. Conidia obtained from the 5 d old cultures were used in these experiments. Modified Barrat’s minimal nitrate broths (100 ml in 500 ml flasks) were inoculated with freshly isolated conidia and were incubated at 37 ºC and 3.7 Hz shaking frequency. The modified Barrat’s minimal nitrate broth differed to the standard Barrat’s minimal nitrate media in the applied trace element solution, which did not contain EDTA and iron. These modified Barrat’s minimal nitrate broth were either supplemented with 30 M FeCl3 (control cultures) or were used without addition of any iron (iron depleted cultures). Control and iron depleted cultures were inoculated with 4 108 and 8 108 conidia and were incubated for 33 h and 50 h, respectively, before harvest. At the two time points the two different cultures showed similar residual glucose content as well as similar dry cell mass. Mild oxidative stress was induced by addition of H2O2 (at 3 mM final concentration) to the cultures 1 hour before sample taking. Proteomics sample preparation Each three biological replicates of four different growing conditions of A. fumigatus hyphae (wildtype) samples have been measured: Normal iron conditions with (+Fe +H2O2) and without (+Fe) oxidative stress induced by oxygen peroxide as well as iron starvation conditions with (-Fe +H2O2) and without (-Fe) oxidative stress. Proteins were isolated and digested as described previously (Baldin et al. 2015, Proteomics, 15(13):2230-43. doi: 10.1002/pmic). Labeling of tryptic peptides with iTRAQ 4-plex (Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) reagents was performed according to the manufacturer’s manual. Each biological replicate was represented in one 4-plex reaction. The three 4-plex reactions were made up as follows: 114 (+Fe #1; -Fe +H2O2 #2; +Fe +H2O2 #3), 115 (-Fe #1; +Fe #2; -Fe +H2O2 #3), 116 (+Fe +H2O2 #1; -Fe #2; +Fe #3), 117 (-Fe +H2O2 #1; +Fe +H2O2 #2; -Fe #3). Each 4-plex reaction was combined, dried (speed vac) and resolubilized in 40 µL of 0.05 % (v/v) TFA in 2/98 (v/v) ACN/H2O for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis  Proteome analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC / QExactive Plus LC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each 4-plex reaction was measured in triplicate with an injection volume of 4 µL. Peptides were measured as described previously (Baldin et al. 2015) including the following changes: Gradient elution was 0-4 min at 4% B, 150 min at 14% B, 200 min at 19% B, 300 min at 42% B, 319-329 min at 90% B, and 330-400 min at 4% B. HCD fragmentation with the help of nitrogen gas occurred at a normalized collision energy of 34 V. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 35 s and the fixed first mass was set to m/z 110 to match the iTRAQ reporter ions (m/z 114-117).

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). MS/MS spectra were searched against the AspGD protein database of A. fumigatus Af293 (www.aspergillusgenome.org/download/sequence/A_fumigatus_Af293/current/A_fumigatus_Af293_current_orf_trans_all.fasta.gz) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT and MS Amanda including up to two missed tryptic cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of Met and iTRAQ labeling of Tyr residues (not considered for quantification). Static modifications were carbamidomethylation of Cys by iodoacetamide and iTRAQ labeling of Lys residues and the peptide N-terminus. At least 2 peptides per protein and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1% were required for positive protein hits. Reporter ion quantification was based on an integration tolerance of 10 ppm using the most confident centroid. Reporter ion ratios were calculated for each 4-plex reactions based on the following comparisons: –Fe/+Fe, +Fe+H2O2/+Fe, -Fe+H2O2/+Fe, -Fe+H2O2/+Fe+H2O2, -Fe+H2O2/-Fe. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. Isotopic correction and protein median normalization was applied. The significance threshold for iTRAQ ratios were ≥1.5 (up- or down). The data was further manually evaluated based on the average reporter ion count (≥2 for medium confidence, ≥4 for high confidence). Furthermore, the average variability was observed as a function of the differential regulation and the precursor ion count.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Oxidative stress, Proteomics, Iron starvation, Tandem mass tags, Stress response, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Stress- and Immunoproteomics group, Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Kniemeyer
Stress- and Immunoproteomics group, Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


