### Accession
PXD028248

### Title
The intercellular signaling network of ovarian cancer metastases

### Description
Background: Transcoelomic spread is the major route of metastasis of ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) with the omentum as the major metastatic site. Its unique tumor microenvironment with its large populations of adipocytes, mesothelial cells and immune cells establishes an intercellular signaling network that is instrumental for metastatic growth yet poorly understood. Methods: Based on transcriptomic analysis of tumor cells, tumor-associated immune and stroma cells we defined intercellular signaling pathways for 284 cytokines and growth factors and their cognate receptors after bioinformatic adjustment for contaminating cell types. The significance of individual components of this network was validated by analyzing clinical correlations and potentially pro-metastatic functions, including tumor cell migration, pro-inflammatory signal transduction and TAM expansion. Results: The data show an unexpected prominent role of host cells, and in particular of omental adipocytes, mesothelial cells and fibroblasts (CAF), in sustaining this signaling network. These cells, rather than tumor cells, are the major source of most cytokines and growth factors in the omental microenvironment (n=176 versus n=13). Many of these factors target tumor cells, are linked to metastasis and are associated with a short survival. Likewise, tumor stroma cells play a major role in both extracellular-matrix-triggered and lipid-mediated signaling. We have verified the functional significance of our observations for three exemplary instances. We show that the omental microenvironment (i) stimulates tumor cell migration via WNT4 which is highly expressed by CAF; (ii) induces pro-tumorigenic TAM proliferation in conjunction with high CSF1 expression by omental stroma cells and (iii) triggers pro-inflammatory signaling, at least in part via a HSP70 – NFkB pathway. Conclusions: The intercellular signaling network of omental metastases is majorly dependent on factors secreted by immune and stroma cells to provide an environment that supports ovarian HGSC progression. Clinically relevant pathways within this network represent novel options for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses of conditioned media, omental CAF were first propagated in OCMI medium with 50% pooled ascites. After 16 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2, the cells were washed three times in PBS and twice in serum-free medium M199 (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific) mixed with an equal volume of DMEM/Ham’s F-12 (Biochrom, Schaffhausen, Germany) and cultured in serum-free medium for another 0 or 20 hours before harvesting the supernatants for MS-based proteomic analysis. Following acetone precipitation from supernatants, up to 40 μg of proteins were loaded on a gradient gel (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Invitrogen) and separated by SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel digestion. Analysis by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS2) was performed.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/spectrum matching as well as label free quantitation used the MaxQuant suite of algorithms against the human Uniprot database (canonical and isoforms; downloaded on 2020/02/05; 1888349 entries). Relevant instrument parameters were extracted and summarized using MARMoSET (see Supporting Information MS settings).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Hsp70, Ovarian carcinoma, Tumor microenvironment, Signaling network, Omentum, Mesothelial cell, Carcinoma-associated fibroblast, Metastasis, Wnt4

### Affiliations
Institute of Translational Proteomics, Faculty of Medicine, Philipps-Universität Marburg
Tranlational Oncology Group, Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Rolf Müller
Tranlational Oncology Group, Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany


