### Accession
PXD029775

### Title
ATP-Coated Dual-functionalized Titanium (IV) IMAC Material for Simultaneous Enrichment and Separation of Glycopeptides and Phosphopeptides

### Description
Protein glycosylation and phosphorylation are two of the most common post-translational modifications (PTMs), which plays an important role in many biological processes. However, low abundance and poor ionization efficiency of phosphopeptides and glycopeptides make direct MS analysis challenging. Previously, we explored the electrostatic and hydrophilic properties of commercial centrifuge-assisted-extraction Titanium (IV) IMAC (CAE-Ti-IMAC) material and its application in simultaneously enriching and separating common glycopeptides, phosphopeptides, and M6P glycopeptides in dual-mode. In this study, we developed a hydrophilicity enhanced dual-functional Ti-IMAC material with adenosine triphosphate as grafted group (denoted as: epoxy-ATP-Ti4+) to achieve better enrichment performance in dual-mode separation. The epoxy-ATP-Ti4+ IMAC material was prepared from commercially available epoxy functionalized silica particles in a facile way, which only required two steps of reaction. The ATP molecule not only provided superiorly strong and active metal phosphate sites to bind phosphopeptides, but also contributed significantly to the hydrophilicity to enrich glycopeptides. The epoxy-ATP-Ti4+ IMAC material showed great selectivity and sensitivity for phosphopeptide enrichment in conventional IMAC mode. With optimized buffer and fractionation, the material successfully separated glycopeptides and phosphopeptides with high specificity. Besides standard protein samples, the material was further applied to HeLa cells and mouse lung tissue samples. Our method allows simple and effective enrichment and separation of glycopeptides and phosphopeptides, which paves the way for studying the potential crosstalk between these two PTMs.

### Sample Protocol
Standard proteins, HeLa cell lysate, and mouse lung tissue were digested with trypsin. Enrichment of glycopeptides and phosphopeptides were first tested with standard protein digests, followed by MALDI-TOF analysis. Tryptic digests from HeLa cells and tissue samples were loaded onto the material and elution was performed with gradually decreased acetonitrile content and increasing pH. The fractionation method allowed glycopeptides and phosphopeptides to separate simultaneously. The eluted samples were loaded to nanoLC coupled to orbitrap MS for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Byonic software (Protein Metrics Inc, San Carlos, CA) was used to process intact N-glycopeptide data. Raw files were searched against UniProt Homo sapiens reviewed database (August 2020, 20311 entries) or UniProt Mus musculus reviewed database (January 2021, 17033 entries). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and two maximum missed cleavages were allowed. Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Fixed modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) on cysteine residues. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da, rare1) and N-glycosylation (common1). Glycan modifications were searched against a glycan database expanded from Byonic embedded human N-glycan database (182 entries) to include N-linked M-6-P glycans consisting of HexNAc (2-4) Hex (3-9) Phospho (1-2) modiﬁcation. Peptide identification results were filtered at Byonic score >150, PEP 2D < 0.05, |Log Prob| > 1and Delta Mod. Score > 10. Manual inspection of MS/MS spectra of M-6-P glycopeptide PSMs were performed to examine the existence of phosphorylated hexose diagnostic ions. The same raw files and database were also searched on MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.7.0). Precursor ion mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm were set. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation, whereas oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as the variable modiﬁcations. Trypsin was set as the speciﬁc proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Both peptides and proteins were filtered at FDR < 0.01 and a minimum score of 40 was accepted as confident peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation and phosphorylation are two of the most common post-translational modifications (PTMs), which play an important role in many biological processes. However, low abundance and poor ionization efficiency of phosphopeptides and glycopeptides make direct MS analysis challenging. In this study, we developed a hydrophilicity-enhanced bifunctional Ti-IMAC (IMAC: immobilized metal affinity chromatography) material with grafted adenosine triphosphate (denoted as epoxy-ATP-Ti<sup>4+</sup>) to enable simultaneous enrichment and separation of common N-glycopeptides, phosphopeptides, and M6P glycopeptides from tissue/cells. The enrichment was achieved through a dual-mode mechanism based on the electrostatic and hydrophilic properties of the material. The epoxy-ATP-Ti<sup>4+</sup> IMAC material was prepared from epoxy-functionalized silica particles via a convenient two-step process. The ATP molecule provided strong and active phosphate sites for binding phosphopeptides in the conventional IMAC mode and also contributed significantly to the hydrophilicity, which permitted the enrichment of glycopeptides via hydrophilic interaction chromatography. The two modes could be implemented simultaneously, allowing glycopeptides and phosphopeptides to be collected sequentially in a single experiment from the same sample. In addition to standard protein samples, the material was further applied to glycopeptide and phosphopeptide enrichment and characterization from HeLa cell digests and mouse lung tissue samples. In total, 2928 glycopeptides and 3051 phosphopeptides were identified from the mouse lung tissue sample, supporting the utility of this material for large-scale PTM analysis of complex biological samples. Overall, the newly developed epoxy-ATP-Ti<sup>4+</sup> IMAC material and associated fractionation method enable simple and effective enrichment and separation of glycopeptides and phosphopeptides, offering a useful tool to study potential crosstalk between these two important PTMs in biological systems. The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD029775.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Danqing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy


