### Accession
PXD022214

### Title
Fibrosis associated changes detected in the proteome of surface epithelium overlying Crohn’s Disease Strictures

### Description
Background and aims: Intestinal fibrosis is a common complication of Crohn’s disease (CD). It is characterised by an excessive accumulation of fibroblasts differentiating into activated myofibroblasts secreting excessive extracellular matrix. The potential role of the intestinal epithelium in this fibrotic process remains poorly defined.  Methods: A total of 113 CD and control subjects were studied. We performed a pilot proteomic study comparing the proteome of surface epithelium isolated by laser capture microdissection in normal and fibrotic zones of resected ileal CD strictures (n=5). Selected proteins were validated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in colonic and ileal samples of stricturing CD patients (n=44), pure inflammatory CD (n=29) and control subjects (n=40). Functional assays with cell lines cultures and a fibroblast to myofibroblast differentiation model were used to assess the role of the highlighted epithelial proteins in CD fibrosis.  Results: Proteomic study revealed an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) markers increase in the epithelium overlying ileal fibrotic strictures, involving Anterior gradient protein 2 homolog (AGR2) and Binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP). This was confirmed by IHC. The ER stress induction in intestinal epithelial cells increased AGR2 as well as BiP expression and led to an extracellular secreted AGR2. A fibroblast to myofibroblast differentiation was obtained with the supernatant of intestinal epithelial cells pre-conditioned by ER stress and with recombinant AGR2.  Conclusions: AGR2 and other ER stress markers are increased within the intestinal epithelium overlying fibrotic strictures and might contribute to profibrotic signals involved in CD fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Patients and tissue selection for proteomics  We selected, for our pilot proteomic study, 5 CD patients who had, in the same ileal stricture surgical resection samples, one area with high grade of fibrosis (F2-3), one area with low grade of fibrosis (F1) and, except for 2 patients, one area with normal aspect (without any sign of fibrosis) (N), allowing a paired comparison of the surface epithelium proteomic profiles according to the fibrosis grade of the tissues.  Sample tissue preparation and label free proteomics A total of 20.000 surface epithelial cells were selected by laser capture microdissection (LCM) in the different areas for each patient tissues (5 F2-3, 5 F1 and 3 N) and the 13  samples were treated as described in Longuespée et al (Methods 2016;104:154–62. Doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.12.008.). Protein extracts were analysed on an Orbitrap QExactive Plus (Thermo) coupled on line with a 2D nanoUPLC system (Waters). The methods concerning laser capture microdissection (LCM), standardised sample processing, label free proteomic data as well as the management of these proteomic data are detailed in the supplemental material. In brief, the raw data (13 biological replicates) were treated using MaxQuant for protein identifications and Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) determination (reference DOI:  10.1038/nbt.1511) and the differential analyses were performed using the Perseus program (ref DOI 10.1038/nmeth.3901). Raw data acquisition of the label free proteomic experiment All 13 protein digested samples were reconstituted in 10µL prior loading 1µL onto a nanoUPLC column in formate solution and spiked with MPDSmix using 100 fmole in ADH for both commercial mixtures. The peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 2-dimensions nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with the nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A standardized constant amount of peptide digests per biological replicates (n=13) (1µL of the reconstituted protein digest) was loaded on column for analysis without reaching signal saturation. The normalisation applied was based on the proportional constant quantity of FFPE material treated in each sample. The two steps separation applied was done on a reversed-phase column at pH 10 followed by a reversed-phase chromatography at pH 3. The first dimension was run at 2 μl/min (20 mm ammonium formate solution adjusted to pH 10) on a X-Bridge BEH C18 5 μm column (300 μm  50 mm). Three elution steps were performed on the pH 10 column by increasing the acetonitrile (ACN) percentage (three fractions at 13.3%, 19%, and 65%, respectively). After a 1:10 dilution with acidified water, the eluted peptides were loaded on the trap column Symmetry C18 5 μm (180 μm  20 mm) and an analytic final separation was done on a HSST3 C18 1.7 μm column (75 μm  250 mm) (Waters). The same 180 min analytic separation was used for the three fractions. A constant flow rate was set at 250 nl/min with a linear gradient ranging from 99% water 0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v) to 93% after 5 min and 65% after 140 min. Solvent B was ACN 0.1% FA (v/v).  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive nanoESI ion mode with the main source parameters as follow: spray voltage set at 2.2 kV, capillary temperature fixed at 270°C and a S-Lens RF level set at 50. Data-dependent mode with a Top10 method was used. A resolution of 70000 for full MS (range 400–1750 m/z) and 17 500 for MS-MS acquisitions were reached. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 1  106 and 200 ms for MS and 1  105 (minimum AGC target set to 1 x 103) with a maximum injection time of 200 ms for MS-MS. The m/z isolation window used was at 2 for selection of precursors and a normalized collision Energy (NCE) of 27 was applied for ion activations. The dynamic exclusion was set at 10 seconds and singly charged peaks, as unassigned charge states were all discarded before MS-MS selection.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were treated using MaxQuant vs 1.5.5.1 for protein identifications and Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) determination (DOI:  10.1038/nbt.1511). For protein identification, the parameters were set by default except for digestion reagent which was trypsin using the specific digestion mode, with maximum two miss-cleavages, with Oxidation (M) as variable modification, and with five as maximum number of modifications enabled per peptide. The fasta format of the human (taxid 6906) UniprotKB database, downloaded in October 2017 (containing 20237 entries with no isoform, release 2017_09) was used. LFQ intensity was determined with LFQ min ratio count set at 2 and using match between runs. The human database was implemented with the accession number of the four MPDS mix protein sequences using the fasta format bovine serum albumin (BSA, P02769), yeast enolase (ENO1, P00924), rabbit glycogen phosphorylase b (GPB, P00489) and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH, P00330).    Differential analysis was performed with the LFQ intensity using Perseus vs 1.6.0.7 (DOI 10.1038/nmeth.3901) for group comparisons based on the normalised Log2 LFQ intensity. We “filtered-in” the data based on valid value and with a minimal occurrence of protein quantitation (or absence of quantitation), in minimum 3 replicates out of 5, in at least one group. We performed unpaired analysis for N versus F1 versus F2-3 (ANOVA test) and the comparisons of N versus F1 or F2-3 (unpaired welch t-tests) and finally F1 versus F2-3 (paired T-test) to determine the p value associated to the difference in abundance between the groups (significant if p value ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inflammatory bowel disease, Fibrostenosis, Surface epithelium, Label free proteomics, Ileum

### Affiliations
translational gastroenterology laboratory
University of Liege, GIGA institute: 
university hospital CHU Liège, BE
Translational gastroenterology, GIGA institute,  University of Liege ULiege Belgium and  Hepatogastro entreology and digestive oncology University hospitalof Liège, CHU Liège

### Submitter
Marie-Alice Meuwis

### Lab Head
Dr Edouard LOUIS
Translational gastroenterology, GIGA institute,  University of Liege ULiege Belgium and  Hepatogastro entreology and digestive oncology University hospitalof Liège, CHU Liège


