### Accession
PXD014955

### Title
SopB and SifA modify the proteome of the Salmonella-containing vacuole in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum

### Description
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is a rod-shaped Gram-negative bacterium. It is a leading cause of gastroenteritis and public health problem. In the environment, it interacts with protozoa, particular amoeba, however the interactions between Salmonella and these eukaryotic microbes have not been addressed in detail. We and others recently described that S. Typhimurium is able to survive in the model amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum requiring the Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 2 (SPI-1 and SPI-2, respectively)-encoded type three secretion systems (T3SSs). In this work, we investigated the role of two particular effector proteins, SopB and SifA that are secreted by either one of the T3SSs. SopB and SifA are involved in the remodelling of the intracellular compartment that contains Salmonella (Salmonella-containing vacuole, SCV) in other cellular models. We combined genetic and proteomics analysis to investigate the roles of SopB and SifA during infections of D. discoideum. We identified over 1,000 proteins per sample performing proteomics on fractions enriched in SCVs from amoeba cells infected with wild-type, sopB or sifA S. Typhimurium. Among them, we observed several Rho GTPases, guanine nucleotide exchange factors and motor proteins. Finally, we decided to evaluate if the changes observed in the proteome from the SCV of wild-type and mutants affect the intracellular survival of S. Typhimurium. These finding suggest that Salmonella exploits this route to survive intracellularly, a process that requires SopB and/or SifA effectors. To our knowledge this is the first proteomic description of the Salmonella intracellular compartment in D. discoideum.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were loaded in a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris pre-cast Gel (Invitrogen) and run at 200 V constant during 45 min. The gel was then fixed during 30 min in a 10% acetic acid, 40% ethanol aqueous solution. Proteins were stained by O/N incubation in Colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 (8% ammonium sulfate, 0.8% phosphoric acid, 0.08% Coomassie Blue G-250, 20% ethanol) and destained in milliQ water until bands were visible. Each gel lane corresponding to a sample was cut into 10 pieces and destained in 100 µL of a 1:1 mixture of 0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 and acetonitrile. Each gel piece was incubated at 30 ºC during 30 min with shaking. The liquid was discarded and the process repeated one more time. Then, cysteines were reduced by incubating in 10 mM DTT in 67 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at 56 ºC during 1 h with shaking. The reduced cysteines were then alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide in 67 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 and incubating at 25 ºC during 45 min with shaking. The gel pieces were then desiccated by adding 100% acetonitrile and incubating at 30 ºC during 30 min with shaking. In-gel protein digestion was performed by O/N incubation of the gel pieces with 1 µg of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) in 67 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at 37 ºC. The next day, peptides were extracted by eluting them using a mixture containing 42.5% 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 42.5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid, and incubating at 30 ºC during 1 h with shaking. Tryptic digestion samples were vacuum-dried and suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in H2O (solvent A), and sonicated during 10 min in a water bath. The samples were then desalted using Bond Elute OMIX C18 tip filters (Agilent) according to the manufacturer instructions, and the peptides were finally eluted in 50% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid in H2O. These samples were vacuum-dried again and suspended in 10% of solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), sonicated during 10 min in a water bath, the peptide concentration was determined in a NanoDrop prior to its analysis by LC MS/MS. Tryptic digests were analysed by nano-LC MS/MS. Each sample was injected into a nano-HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) fitted with a reverse-phase column (Acclaim column, 15 cm x 50 µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A. Peptides were separated at a ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min on a linear gradient of 3% to 55% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid) during 30 min. Peptide analysis was conducted in a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientiﬁc) set in data dependent acquisition mode using a 30 s dynamic exclusion list. A resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) was used for MS scans. The 10 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation and fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
A target-decoy database including sequences from Dictyostelium discoideum (taxon identifier: 44689), Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhimurium strain 14028s (taxon identifier: 588858) downloaded from Uniprot consortium in March 2018, and 127 most common mass spectrometry contaminants was generated using PatternLab for Proteomics (version 4.0). For protein identification, the Comet search engine was set as follows: tryptic peptides; oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation as variable modifications; and 40 ppm of tolerance from the measured precursor m/z. XCorr and Z-Score were used as the primary and secondary search engine scores, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) and acceptable false discovery rate (FDR) criteria was set on 1% at the protein level. PatternLab’s Approximately Area Proportional Venn Diagram module was used to perform comparisons between conditions and to determine proteins uniquely identified in each situation. Proteins found in at least three biological replicates of one condition were considered as “uniquely identified” when absent in all replicates of the other condition. For enrichment analysis, the PatternLab TFold module was used to generate a volcano plot of the samples. This tool maximizes the identifications of proteins differentially expressed between two conditions that satisfies both a Fold-change cutoff (that varies with the t-test P-value) and a stringency criterion that aims to detect proteins of low abundance under a Benjamini and Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimator. For all comparisons, the FDR was fixed at 0.05. The TFold module then explored several values of the F-Stringency parameter and selected the one that maximizes the number of differentially expressed proteins between the two datasets, for the specified Q value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of Salmonella to survive and replicate within mammalian host cells involves the generation of a membranous compartment known as the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV). Salmonella employs a number of effector proteins that are injected into host cells for SCV formation using its type-3 secretion systems encoded in SPI-1 and SPI-2 (T3SS-1 and T3SS-2, respectively). Recently, we reported that S. Typhimurium requires T3SS-1 and T3SS-2 to survive in the model amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Despite these findings, the involved effector proteins have not been identified yet. Therefore, we evaluated the role of two major S. Typhimurium effectors SopB and SifA during D. discoideum intracellular niche formation. First, we established that S. Typhimurium resides in a vacuolar compartment within D. discoideum. Next, we isolated SCVs from amoebae infected with wild type or the &#x394;sopB and &#x394;sifA mutant strains of S. Typhimurium, and we characterised the composition of this compartment by quantitative proteomics. This comparative analysis suggests that S. Typhimurium requires SopB and SifA to modify the SCV proteome in order to generate a suitable intracellular niche in D. discoideum. Accordingly, we observed that SopB and SifA are needed for intracellular survival of S. Typhimurium in this organism. Thus, our results provide insight into the mechanisms employed by Salmonella to survive intracellularly in phagocytic amoebae.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Salmonella-containing vacuole, Dictyostelium

### Affiliations
Laboratorio de Microbiología, Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
DIHP, Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Camila Valenzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos A. Santiviago
Laboratorio de Microbiología, Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.


