### Accession
PXD036786

### Title
High-throughput proteomics of nanogram-scale samples with Zeno SWATH DIA

### Description
The ability to conduct high-quality proteomic experiments in high throughput has opened new avenues in clinical research, drug discovery, and systems biology. Next to an increase in quantitative precision, recent developments in high-throughput proteomics have also gained proteomic depth, to the extent that earlier gaps between classic and high-throughput experiments have significantly narrowed. Here we introduce and benchmark Zeno SWATH, a data-independent acquisition technique that employs a linear ion trap pulsing (Zeno trap pulsing) in order to increase proteomic depth and dynamic range in proteomic experiments. Combined with the high acquisition speed, these gains in sensitivity are particularly attractive for conducting high-throughput proteomics experiments with high chromatographic flow rates and fast gradients. We demonstrate that when combined with either micro-flow- or analytical-flow-rate chromatography, Zeno SWATH increases protein identification in complex samples 5- to 10-fold when compared to current SWATH acquisition methods on the same instrument. Using 20-min micro-flow chromatography, Zeno SWATH identified > 6,000 proteins from a 62.5 ng load of human cell lysate with more than 5,000 proteins consistently quantified in triplicate injections with a median CV of 6%. Using 5-min analytical-flow-rate chromatography (800 µl/min), Zeno SWATH identified 4,907 proteins from a triplicate injection of 2 µg of a human cell lysate; or more than 3,000 proteins from 250 ng tryptic digest. Zeno SWATH hence facilitates precise proteomic experiments with small sample amounts using a fast and robust high flow-rate chromatographic method, broadening the application space that requires precise proteomic experiments on a large scale.

### Sample Protocol
K562 and yeast stock samples were prepared via reconstitution of the powder form of the product using 200 µl of reconstitution buffer (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in LC grade Water) and aliquoted into 4 × 50 µl stock sample, stored at –80°C and defrosted before sample preparation. Plasma stock samples were prepared as follows: 5 µl of commercially available plasma sample was added to 55 µl of denaturation buffer (50 µl of 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 5 µl of 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)). The samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature before the addition of 5 µl of 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). After a 30 min incubation at room temperature in the dark, the samples were diluted with 340 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with 22.5 µl of 0.1 µg/µl trypsin at 37°C. The digestion was quenched by adding 50 µl of 10% formic acid. The resulting tryptic peptides were purified on a 96-well C18-based solid-phase extraction (SPE) plate (BioPureSPE Macro 96-well, 100 mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group). The purified samples were resuspended in 120 µl of 0.1% formic acid. E. coli samples were prepared from 1010 cells, thawed in 200 µl lysis buffer (7 M urea, 0.1 M ABC, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.125 U benzonase). The cell pellets were disrupted using a GenoGrinder in the presence of 100 mg of 0.1 mm ceramic beads. The lysate was incubated at 37°C for 15 min to ensure optimal benzonase activity. The supernatant was clarified by centrifugation at 4°C, 20,000 g for 15 min. Following addition of DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM the samples were incubated for 90 min at room temperature before the addition of IAA to a final concentration of 10 mM. After 30 min incubation at room temperature in the dark, the samples were diluted 5-fold with 100 mM ABC and digested overnight with 0.1 µg/µl trypsin at 37°C. The digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. The resulting tryptic peptides were purified using C18-based (AttractSPE, Affinisep) stage tips as described by Rappsilber et al. , and dried before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid. Chickpea seedling sample preparation was performed essentially as described by Wang et al. Briefly, 500 mg of chickpea seedlings, created by the germination of chickpeas in the lab, were pulverised in liquid nitrogen. The powder was washed with trichloroacetic acid/acetone, methanol, and acetone at 4°C. After removal of acetone, the pellet was dried at 50°C for 20 min, the protein was subjected to phenol extraction and precipitated by the addition of ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol. The resulting pellet was washed once with ice-cold methanol and once with ice-cold 80% acetone, then air-dried. The protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0. Following dilution to 2 M urea, the protein was reduced with 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated for 30 min with 15 mM chloroacetamide. The sample was then digested overnight with LysC and trypsin. The resulting peptides were filtered through a 30-kDa MWCO centrifugal filter and further purified by C18 stage tips as described above. LFQbench hybrid samples: to generate the hybridisation of different species samples, tryptic peptides were combined  following the previous works (Navarro et al. 2016; Meier et al. 2020) featuring similar benchmarks with the maximum injectable amount to avoid ion striking, the sample mixtures were in the following ratios: MIX A was composed of 30 ng/µl of K562 and 35 ng/µl yeast tryptic digest; MIX B was composed of 30 ng/µl of K562 and 17.5 ng/µl yeast tryptic digests.

### Data Protocol
All raw data from ZenoTOF 7600 system were acquired by SCIEX OS (v 2.1.6) (note that SciexOS 3.0 which supports Zeno SWATH is the commercial software that are available on market) processed with DIA-NN (v1.8 beta 20) (20) using mass accuracy of 20 and 12 ppm at the MS2 and MS1 level, respectively, scan window of 7, protein inference disabled (spectral library as described above) or relaxed (library-free, with additional command --relaxed-prot-inf),  quantification strategy of "Robust LC (high precision)" and library generation set as “IDs, RT& IM profiling”. All other settings were kept default.  The high-flow K562 benchmark data were analysed using the DDA-based library described above, with MBR disabled.   The plasma acquisitions analysis was performed as described previously (15). Specifically, the ‘Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction’ option was activated in DIA-NN, to replace all spectra and retention times in the public spectral library (29) with in silico predicted ones. Further, the protein annotation in the library was replaced using the ‘Reannotate’ function in DIA-NN with the annotation from the Human UniProt (30) isoform sequence database (UP000005640, 19 October 2021). The processing was performed using the MBR mode in DIA-NN, that is a two-step analysis wherein a spectral library (an empirical or in silico predicted) is first refined based on the DIA experiment in question, and subsequently used to reanalyse it. For the analysis of microflow K562 acquisition as well as samples from other species, the respective FASTA databases from Uniprot (human: UP000005640 （10 March 2022) yeast: UP000002311_559292 (28 September 2021) E. coli: UP000000625 (19 October 2021); chickpea: UP000087171_3827 (22 October 2021)) were used by DIA-NN in library-free mode. Specifically, following the two-step MBR approach described previously(20) , an in silico spectral library is first generated by DIA-NN from the FASTA file(s); this library is then refined based on the DIA dataset and subsequently used to reanalyse the dataset, to obtain the final results.

### Publication Abstract
The possibility to record proteomes in high throughput and at high quality has opened new avenues for biomedical research, drug discovery, systems biology, and clinical translation. However, high-throughput proteomic experiments often require high sample amounts and can be less sensitive compared to conventional proteomic experiments. Here, we introduce and benchmark Zeno SWATH MS, a data-independent acquisition technique that employs a linear ion trap pulsing (Zeno trap pulsing) to increase the sensitivity in high-throughput proteomic experiments. We demonstrate that when combined with fast micro- or analytical flow-rate chromatography, Zeno SWATH MS increases protein identification with low sample amounts. For instance, using 20 min micro-flow-rate chromatography, Zeno SWATH MS identified more than 5000 proteins consistently, and with a coefficient of variation of 6%, from a 62.5 ng load of human cell line tryptic digest. Using 5 min analytical flow-rate chromatography (800 &#xb5;l/min), Zeno SWATH MS identified 4907 proteins from a triplicate injection of 2 &#xb5;g of a human cell lysate, or more than 3000 proteins from a 250 ng tryptic digest. Zeno SWATH MS hence facilitates sensitive high-throughput proteomic experiments with low sample amounts, mitigating the current bottlenecks of high-throughput proteomics.

### Keywords
Zeno swath, Dia

### Affiliations
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 

### Submitter
Ziyue Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 


