### Accession
PXD014113

### Title
Bermudagrass stolon phosphoproteomics

### Description
As a widely used turfgrass species, bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon L.) can be easily propagated by colonial growth of stolons. Previous studies collectively revealed that exotic environmental factors and intrinsic hormones and genes are all involved in the differentiation, development, and diageotropically growth of stolons. However, the detailed molecular mechanism how environmental and hormone signals regulate the gene expression and biochemical activities in bermudagrass stolons remains unclear. In this study, LC-MS/MS analyses of the total protein extracts of bermudagrass stolons without preliminary phosphopeptide-enrichment successfully identified 862 nonredundant phosphorylation sites and 613 phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from fresh stolons collected from different plants of C. dactylon cultivar Yangjiang using the previously described method with minor modifications. Briefly, about 0.5 g sample was ground in liquid nitrogen to a fine powder, and the powder was suspended completely in 10 ml of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% SDS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF) with sonication on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove the remaining debris. Subsequently, 4 volume of ice-cold acetone was added and the proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the precipitate was collected and washed with ice-cold acetone for three times. The collected protein pellets were dried with N2 to remove any remaining acetone. The dried protein powder was resuspended completely in 1 ml of dissolvent buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). The protein concentration was determined using Bradford method.Before tryptic digest, the protein sample was firstly reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 50°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. For trypsin digestion, 100 μg protein was diluted by four volume of digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and 2 μg of Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added and incubated overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were desalted using a Strata-X C18 SPE column, dried by vacuum centrifugation and fractionated using a Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with Durashell C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å). Briefly, peptides were first fractionated with a gradient of 2%-60% acetonitrile in ammonium bicarbonate (10 mM, pH 10) over 60 min into 30 fractions, which were further combined into 6 final fractions and then desalted and vacuum dried. For LC-MS/MS analyses, the fractionated peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 3% acetonitrile, 97% H2O), loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (20 mm × 100 μm, 5 μm) and separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (150 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm) through the Eksigent nanoLC system (Eksigent, Livermore, CA, USA). The gradient for MS analysis was set as the following: starting from 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 97% acetonitrile, 3% H2O) over 24 min, then 20%–35% solvent B in 8 min, thereafter increasing to 80% solvent B in 55 min and holding at 80% solvent B for the last 3 min, with a flow rate of 200 nL/min. MS data of three different stolon protein samples were collected using information-dependent acquisition mode in a high speed TripleTOF™ 5600plus mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Concord, Canada) coupled with the Eksigent nanoLC system. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was operated in a manner that a 0.25 s survey scan (MS) in the mass range of 350-1500 m/z was collected, from which the top 30 ions were selected for automated MS/MS in the mass range of 100-1500 m/z and each MS/MS event consisted of a 0.05 s scan. Once a target ion had been fragmented by MS/MS, its mass and isotopes were excluded for a period of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Analyses of the raw MS spectra generated by LC-MS/MS were performed with the ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software (ABSciex) using the Paragon algorithm. Specifically, a high-confident peptide database (210,172 sequences, 69,486,195 residues) derived from a full-length transcriptome sequencing project of bermudagrass was used as the searching database. The searches were performed using the following settings: type of search, identification; enzyme, trypsin; Cys alkylation, iodoacetamide; special factors, phosphorylation emphasis; instrument, TripleTOF™ 5600plus; bias correction, true; background correction, true; ID focus, biological modifications; search effort, thorough ID; protein mass, unrestricted; unused score, ≥ 1.3; confidence, ≥ 95%; unique peptides, ≥ 1. Peptides that were reproducibly identified in all three biological replicates were considered as valid identification and used for the further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
As a widely used turfgrass species, bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon L.) can be easily propagated through colonial growth of stolons. Previous studies collectively revealed that exotic environmental factors and intrinsic hormones and genes are all involved in the differentiation, development, and diageotropical growth of stolons. However, the detailed molecular mechanism how environmental and hormone signals regulate the gene expression and biochemical activities in bermudagrass stolons remains unclear. In this study, we observed that reversible phosphorylation modification plays important roles in normal growth and physiological functions of bermudagrass stolons. LC-MS/MS analyses of the total protein extracts of bermudagrass stolons without preliminary phosphopeptide-enrichment successfully identified 646 nonredundant phosphorylation sites and 485 phosphoproteins. The phosphoproteins were significantly enriched in protein phosphorylation regulation and starch metabolism processes. Motif-X analyses further revealed that phosphoproteins containing novel phosphorylation motifs might be involved in transcription regulation of bermudagrass stolons. These results greatly expanded our understanding of the growth and development of bermudagrass stolons at the post-translational level.

### Keywords
Bermudagrass; cynodon dactylon; stolon; phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China
Yangzhou University

### Submitter
Bing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Zhang
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


