### Accession
PXD042607

### Title
Phosphoproteomic dataset comparing wild type, bob1-1 and bob1-1dbf4∆ cells in M-phase arrested S.cerevisiae.

### Description
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) can be repaired by several pathways. In eukaryotes, repair pathway choice – the cellular decision making underlying DSB repair – occurs at the level of DSB resection and is controlled by the cell cycle. Upon cell cycle-dependent activation, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) phosphorylate resection proteins and thereby stimulate DSB resection and repair by homologous recombination (HR). We uncovered a novel role for the Dbf4-dependent kinase Cdc7 (DDK) in regulating HR and DNA end resection. We therefore analyzed phosphorylation substrates of DDK by phosphoproteomics, where we compared wild type, bob1-1 and bob1-1dbf4∆ cells in M-phase arrested S.cerevisiae.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets preparation- Cells were grown in YP-supplemented with 2% glucose to an OD600 around 0.5 and arrested in the M- phase of the cell cycle with nocodazole. 200 ODs (1 OD corresponds to around 2x107 cells) of cells were then centrifuged, and the pellet washed twice in PBS 1x. Pellets were then stored at -80˚C until further use. Sample preparation- The cell pellets were incubated with 6 ml of preheated SDC buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich), 40 mM 2-cloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0. After incubation for 2 minutes at 95°C, the samples were ultrasonicated for 2 minutes with 0.5 seconds pulse (50% intensity) and 0.2 seconds pause (Sonopuls, Bandelin). Incubation and ultrasonication was repeated for a second time. After a final incubation for 2 minutes at 95°C, 1/6 of the sample was diluted 1:2 with MS grade water (VWR). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with 50 μg trypsin (Promega). The solution of peptides was then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (Merck) to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting via Sep-Pak C18 5cc vacuum cartridges (Waters). The cartridge was washed twice with 1 ml of 100 % methanol, twice with 1 ml of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN and twice with 1 ml of 0.1% FA in water prior to sample loading. After loading the acidified sample, the cartridge was washed twice with 1 ml of 0.1% FA in water. Elution was done with 2x 1 ml of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN.  Phospho-peptide enrichment- To 1 ml of the desalted peptides, 400 μl isopropanol and 100 μl of enrichment buffer (48% TFA, 8mM K2HPO4) was added and mixed at room temperature at 1500 rpm. Then, TiO2 beads (10 mg) in EP loading buffer (80% ACN/6% TFA) were subsequently and incubated at 37 °C for 5 minutes at 2000 rpm. Beads were subsequently pelleted by centrifugation for 1 minute at 3500 g, and the supernatant (containing non- phosphopeptides) was aspirated. Beads were suspended in wash buffer (60% ACN, 1% TFA) and transferred to clean vials and washed a further four times with 1 ml wash buffer. After the final wash, beads were suspended in 150 μl transfer buffer (60% isopropanol, 0.1% TFA) and transferred onto the top of a C8 StageTip, and centrifuged for 3–5 minutes at 500 g or until no liquid remained on StageTip. Bound phosphopeptides were eluted 2x with 30 μl elution buffer (40% ACN, 20% NH4OH (25%, HPLC grade)), and collected by centrifugation into clean PCR tubes. Samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac for 15 minutes at 45°C.  LC MS/MS data acquisition- Peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60°C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at 250 nl/min and percentage of buffer B (80% acetonitril, 0.1% formic acid) was ramped to 30% over 120 minutes followed by a ramp to 60% over 10 minutes then 95% over the next 5 minutes and maintained at 95% for another 5 minutes.  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 12 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5 respectively within a maximum injection time of 20 ms for MS1 and 50 ms for MS2 scans. Dynamic exclusion was set to 16 ms

### Data Protocol
Data analysis- Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the reviewed yeast proteome data base with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation and phosphorylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell-cycle, Dbf4-cdc7, Ddk, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Institute of Aerospace Medicine German Aerospace Center (DLR) Linder Höhe 51147 Cologne, Germany Phone: +49-2203-6011-277 Email: boris.pfander@dlr.de & Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany Email: bpfander@uni-koeln.de & Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany Phone:+49-89-8578-3050 Fax: +49-89-8578-2454, Email: bpfander@biochem.mpg.de

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Pfander
Institute of Aerospace Medicine German Aerospace Center (DLR) Linder Höhe 51147 Cologne, Germany Phone: +49-2203-6011-277 Email: boris.pfander@dlr.de & Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany Email: bpfander@uni-koeln.de & Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany Phone:+49-89-8578-3050 Fax: +49-89-8578-2454, Email: bpfander@biochem.mpg.de


