### Accession
PXD009522

### Title
The circadian E3 ligase complex SCFFBXL3+CRY targets TLK2

### Description
We recently demonstrated that the circadian clock component CRY2 is an essential cofactor in the SCFFBXL3-mediated ubiquitination of c-MYC. Because our demonstration that CRY2 recruits phosphorylated substrates to SCFFBXL3 was unexpected, we investigated the scope of this role by searching for additional substrates of FBXL3 that require CRY1 or CRY2 as cofactors. Here, we describe an affinity purification mass spectrometry (APMS) screen through which we identified more than one hundred potential substrates of SCFFBXL3+CRY1/2, including the cell cycle regulated Tousled-like kinase, TLK2. Both CRY1 and CRY2 recruit TLK2 to SCFFBXL3, and TLK2 kinase activity is required for this interaction. Overexpression or genetic deletion of CRY1 and/or CRY2 decreases or enhances TLK2 protein abundance, respectively. These findings reinforce the idea that CRYs function as co-factors for SCFFBXL3, provide a resource of potential substrates, and establish a molecular connection between the circadian and cell cycle oscillators via CRY-modulated turnover of TLK2.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis following the sequential immunoprecipitation protocol previously outlined. After the anti-HA beads were then spun down and washed 3X with lysis buffer containing 1%TX-100, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 138 mM KCl, 4 mM NaCl, 50 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 100 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA pH 8, 50 μM PMSF, 1mM β-Glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, and protease inhibitors (Roche cat # 11697498001) similar to previously described, they were incubated in 150uL HA peptide (Sigma cat# I2149), diluted 1:50 in PBS, for 1.5 hours at 4°C while nutating. 90% of the eluates were flash frozen for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis, while 10% were boiled in SDS sample buffer, run on an SDS-PAGE gel and stained using a silver stain kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce Biotech cat# P124612).

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and protein quantitation were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA.  http://www.integratedproteomics.com/). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter 41 and were searched against a Uniprot human protein database with fusion proteins and reversed sequences using ProLuCID. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates with a fixed modification of 57.02146 on cysteine. Peptide candidates were filtered using DTASelect

### Publication Abstract
We recently demonstrated that the circadian clock component CRY2 is an essential cofactor in the SCF<sup>FBXL3</sup>-mediated ubiquitination of c-MYC. Because our demonstration that CRY2 recruits phosphorylated substrates to SCF<sup>FBXL3</sup> was unexpected, we investigated the scope of this role by searching for additional substrates of FBXL3 that require CRY1 or CRY2 as cofactors. Here, we describe an affinity purification mass spectrometry (APMS) screen through which we identified more than one hundred potential substrates of SCF<sup>FBXL3+CRY1/2</sup>, including the cell cycle regulated Tousled-like kinase, TLK2. Both CRY1 and CRY2 recruit TLK2 to SCF<sup>FBXL3</sup>, and TLK2 kinase activity is required for this interaction. Overexpression or genetic deletion of CRY1 and/or CRY2 decreases or enhances TLK2 protein abundance, respectively. These findings reinforce the idea that CRYs function as co-factors for SCF<sup>FBXL3</sup>, provide a resource of potential substrates, and establish a molecular connection between the circadian and cell cycle oscillators via CRY-modulated turnover of TLK2.

### Keywords
Circadian clock

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Katja A. Lamia
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA


