### Accession
PXD030527

### Title
MITF deficiency accelerates GNAQ-driven uveal melanoma

### Description
Cutaneous melanoma (CM) and uveal melanoma (UM) both originate from the melanocytic lineage but are primarily driven by distinct oncogenic drivers, BRAF/NRAS or GNAQ/GNA11 respectively. The melanocytic master transcriptional regulator, MITF, is essential for both CM development and maintenance, but its role in UM is largely unexplored. Here, we use zebrafish models to dissect the key UM oncogenic signaling events, and establish the role of MITF in UM tumors. Remarkably, mitfa deficiency was profoundly UM promoting, dramatically accelerating the onset and progression of tumors induced by Tg(mitfa:GNAQQ209L);tp53M214K/M214K. To further explore the role of MITF in GNAQ-driven tumorigenesis, we performed phospho-proteomics and total proteomics on 5 zebrafish GNAQ Tg(mitfa:GNAQQ209L);tp53M214K/M214K tumors and 5 zebrafish GNAQ Tg(mitfa:GNAQQ209L);tp53M214K/M214K;mitfa-/- tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish with large external tumors were euthanized in ice water and the tumor excised, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized using GenoGrinder. These samples were resuspended in protein lysis buffer [150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% NP-40, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1X EDTA-free PICS (Roche, COEDTAF-RO), 1X PhosSTOP (Roche, PHOSS-RO)], and lysed for 10min on ice with intermittent vortexing. The debris was pelleted and the supernatant quantified using a Bradford assay. 0.5-1 mg of protein from each sample was used for proteomics analyses (n = 5 per genotype).  Proteins were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 10 minutes at 95oC and then alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 minutes at 25oC in the dark.  Proteins were then digested with trypsin on S-trap micro columns (Protifi part number C02-micro-80) per the manufacturer’s instruction.  Eluted peptides from the S-trap were dissolved in 100 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, and the TMT 10plex reagents was dissolved in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile. The solution containing peptides were mixed the appropriate TMT reagent, vortexed and incubated at room temperature for 1 h.  Samples labeled with the ten different isotopic TMT reagents were combined and concentrated to completion in a vacuum centrifuge.  TMT labeled peptides were desalted using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns(cat#89851) per manufacturer’s instructions.  A portion of the desalting material was saved for non-phospho enrichment fractionation.   The remainder of the desalted material was enriched for phosphopeptides using the High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo cat#A32992) per manufacturer’s instructions.  The flow-through (peptides that did not bind to beads) was retained, a portion was saved for LC-MS analysis and the rest was enriched for phosphopeptides a second time with High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo cat#A32993) per manufacturer’s instruction.  The flow-through was retained for LC-MS analysis.  The eluted phosphopeptides from Fe-NTA and TiO2 were combined.  A portion of the eluted peptides was retained for LC-MS analysis and the remainder was fractionated.  The eluted phosphopeptides were fractionated via Pierce High pH Reveresed-phase peptide fractionation kit(cat#84868) per manufacturer’s instruction.  Each of the fractions were speed-vac to dryness than re-suspended in 0.2% formic acid and run on the LC-MS.  The saved portion of the desalted material was also fractionated via Pierce High pH Reveresed-phase peptide fractionation kit (cat#84868) per manufacturer’s instruction.  Each of the fractions were speed-vac to dryness than re-suspended in 0.2% formic acid and run as a non-phospho enrich set.  The tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Ultimate 3000) using a Thermo PepMap RSLC C18 column (2um tip, 75umx50cm PN# ES903) over a 100 minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo).  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The gradient conditions were 1% B (0-10 min at 300nL/min) 1% B (10-15 min, 300 nL/min to 200 nL/min) 1-10% B (15-20 min, 200nL/min), 10-25% B (20-68.4 min, 200nL/min), 25-36 B (68.4-75 min, 200nL/min), 36-80% B (75-75.5 min, 200 nL/min), 80% B (75.5-80 min, 200nL/min), 80-1% B (80-80.1 min, 200nL/min), 1% B (80.1-100 min, 200nL/min). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.  The parameters for the full scan MS were: resolution of 120,000 across 375-1600 m/z and maximum IT 25 ms.  The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for as many precursor ions in a two second cycle with a NCE of 36, dynamic exclusion of 30 s and resolution of 45,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo).  Sequest search parameters were:  20 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.05 Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10-plex modification on the lysines and peptide N-termini; variable modifications were methionine oxidation, tyrosine, serine and threonine phosphorylation, methionine loss at the N-terminus of the protein, acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein and also Met-loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus.  For peptide groups data only PSMs with a Xcorr score greater than 2, isolation interference less than or equal to 30 and a deltaM(ppm) between -3 and 3 were used.

### Publication Abstract
Cutaneous melanoma (CM) and uveal melanoma (UM) both originate from the melanocytic lineage but are primarily driven by distinct oncogenic drivers, BRAF/NRAS or GNAQ/GNA11, respectively. The melanocytic master transcriptional regulator, MITF, is essential for both CM development and maintenance, but its role in UM is largely unexplored. Here, we use zebrafish models to dissect the key UM oncogenic signaling events and establish the role of MITF in UM tumors. Using a melanocytic lineage expression system, we showed that patient-derived mutations of GNAQ (GNAQQ209L) or its upstream CYSLTR2 receptor (CYSLTR2L129Q) both drive UM when combined with a cooperating mutation, tp53M214K/M214K. The tumor-initiating potential of the major GNAQ/11 effector pathways, YAP, and phospholipase C-&#x3b2; (PLC&#x3b2;)&#x2013;ERK was also investigated in this system and thus showed that while activated YAP (YAPAA) induced UM with high potency, the patient-derived PLC&#x3b2;4 mutation (PLCB4D630Y) very rarely yielded UM tumors in the tp53M214K/M214K context. Remarkably, mitfa deficiency was profoundly UM promoting, dramatically accelerating the onset and progression of tumors induced by Tg(mitfa:GNAQQ209L);tp53M214K/M214K or Tg(mitfa:CYSLTR2L129Q);tp53M214K/M214K. Moreover, mitfa loss was sufficient to cooperate with GNAQQ209L to drive tp53&#x2013;wild type UM development and allowed Tg(mitfa:PLCB4D630Y);tp53M214K/M214K melanocyte lineage cells to readily form tumors. Notably, all of the mitfa&#x2212;/&#x2212; UM tumors, including those arising in Tg(mitfa:PLCB4D630Y);tp53M214K/M214K;mitfa&#x2212;/&#x2212; zebrafish, displayed nuclear YAP while lacking hyperactive ERK indicative of PLC&#x3b2; signaling. Collectively, these data show that YAP signaling is the major mediator of UM and that MITF acts as a bona fide tumor suppressor in UM in direct opposition to its essential role in CM.

### Keywords
Phospho, Uveal melanoma, Zebrafish, Mitf

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Grace Phelps

### Lab Head
Dr Jacqueline A. Lees
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology


