### Accession
PXD021881

### Title
A novel paracrine induction of RNA Granules by Feline Calicivirus

### Description
We are here presenting a new paracrine induction of RNA granules by viruses. Infection by viruses imposes major stress on the host cell. In response to this stress, infected cells can induce several defence mechanisms, which include the activation of stress response pathways and the innate immune response. These often result in an inhibition of translation culminating in the assembly of cytoplasmic granules called stress granules (SGs). SGs assembly follows from liquid phase separation of aggregation-prone proteins such G3BP1 and TIA-1, leading to the sequestration of mRNAs. Because this threatens viral gene expression, viruses need to evade these stress response pathways to propagate. Using feline calicivirus (FCV), surrogate for norovirus, the main virus responsible for gastroenteritis outbreaks worldwide, we previously showed that FCV impairs SGs assembly by cleaving the scaffold protein G3BP1. Interestingly, we observed that uninfected bystander cells assembled G3BP1 granules, suggesting a paracrine response trigged by the infection. We now present evidence that virus-free supernatant generated from infected cells can induce the formation of RNA granules. We have characterised the dynamic of the granules assembly via confocal microscopy. Moreover, we provide an understanding of paracrine granules function and specificity through their affinity purification followed by proteomics and RNAseq analysis of their proteins and mRNAs content. This helps to define rules of assembly and novel functions for paracrine granules highlighting fundamental differences with canonical stress granules.

### Sample Protocol
Virus free supernatant preparation   CRFK cells were seeded in 10cm dishes at concentration of 2 x 106 cells and incubated overnight. On the following day, the cells were infected with FCV at 0.2 MOI for 1h and the supernatant was collected 5h.p.i. and then transferred to falcon tube and spun at 4000 rpm at 4ºC (Micro 22R, Hettich) for 30 min. After centrifugation, supernatant was filtered through a 0.2 μm Millex filter. The FCV particles were removed via precipitation adding 0.2 M of solid NaCl and 10% of  PEG3350 and incubated overnight at 4ºC in constant rotation. Then the samples were fisrt centrifuged for 60 minutes at 14000 rpm (Micro 22R, Hettich) at 4ºC and then ultracentrifuged at 40000 rpm for 4h30min at 4ºC using SW41Ti rotor (Beckman). The supernatant was then UV inactivated at a wavelength of 254 nm for 4 min (3 times) using a cross linker (Stratalinker® UV Crosslinker). filtered through a 0.2 μm Millex filter,  and stored in -20ºC until. Secretome analysis: TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography The virus free and the mock supernatant were collected and depleted of bovine serum albumin using the Pierce Albumin Depletion kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK).  Post-depletion, an equal volume of each sample was digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the labelled samples pooled. The pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Secretome analysis:Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Felis catus database (downloaded December 2019; 32881 sequences), the Uniprot Bos taurus database (downloaded June 2019; 46309 sequences) and an in-house common contaminants database using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Searches were also performed against these databases plus the Uniprot Human database (downloaded October 2019; 150786 sequences) or the Uniprot Feline calicivirus database (downloaded December 2019; 3 sequences). Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%

### Publication Abstract
To rapidly adapt to stresses such as infections, cells have evolved several mechanisms, which include the activation of stress response pathways and the innate immune response. These stress responses result in the rapid inhibition of translation and condensation of stalled mRNAs with RNA-binding proteins and signalling components into cytoplasmic biocondensates called stress granules (SGs). Increasing evidence suggests that SGs contribute to antiviral defence, and thus viruses need to evade these responses to propagate. We previously showed that feline calicivirus (FCV) impairs SG assembly by cleaving the scaffolding protein G3BP1. We also observed that uninfected bystander cells assembled G3BP1-positive granules, suggesting a paracrine response triggered by infection. We now present evidence that virus-free supernatant generated from infected cells can induce the formation of SG-like foci, which we name paracrine granules. They are linked to antiviral activity and exhibit specific kinetics of assembly-disassembly, and protein and RNA composition that are different from canonical SGs. We propose that this paracrine induction reflects a novel cellular defence mechanism to limit viral propagation and promote stress responses in bystander cells.

### Keywords
G3bp1, Paracrine, Fcv, Stress granules

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences and Medicine  Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences  University of Surrey UK
University of Surrey

### Submitter
Valentina Iadevaia

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Locker
School of Biosciences and Medicine  Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences  University of Surrey UK


