### Accession
PXD024965

### Title
Low-Dose CDK4/6 Inhibitors Induce Presentation of Pathway Specific MHC ligands as Potential Targets for Cancer Immunotherapy

### Description
Cyclin dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) lead to cell-cycle arrest but also trigger T cell-mediated immunity, which might be mediated by the qualitative and quantitative changes in human leukocyte antigen (HLA) ligands on the cancer cell surface. We investigated the effects of CDK4/6i, Abemaciclib and Palbociclib, on the immunopeptidome at subclinical, non-toxic, levels in breast cancer cell lines by biochemical isolation and identification of HLA ligands followed by network analyses. This treatment led to upregulation of cell surface HLA and revealed hundreds of induced HLA ligands in breast cancer cell lines. These new ligands were significantly enriched for peptides derived from proteins involved in the “G1/S phase transition of cell cycle” including HLA ligands from CDK4/6, Cyclin D1 and the 26S regulatory proteasomal subunit 4 (PSMC1). Interestingly, peptides from this essential biological process, that is targeted by Abemaciclib and Palbociclib, were predicted to be the most likely to induce a T cell response within the group of all induced HLA ligands when compared to HLA ligands from the DMSO-treated group. In strong contrast, peptides induced by solely one of the drugs had a lower T cell recognition score compared to the DMSO control suggesting that the observed effect is class dependent. This general hypothesis was exemplified by a peptide from PSMC1 which was among the HLA ligands with highest prediction scores and which elicited a T cell response in healthy donors.  Overall, these data demonstrate that CDK4/6i treatment gives rise to drug-induced HLA ligands, that have the highest chance for being recognized by T cells if they are derived from the inhibited process of G1/S phase transition, thus providing evidence that inhibition of a distinct cellular process leads to increased presentation of the involved proteins that may be targeted by immunotherapeutic agents.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I ligands (HLA-A,B and -C) were isolated as described previously. In brief, 40 mg of Cyanogen bromide-activated-Sepharose 4B (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. # C9142) were activated with 1 mmol/L hydrochloric acid (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. # 320331) for 30 minutes. Subsequently, 0.5 mg of W6/32 antibody (Bio X Cell, BE0079; RRID: AB_1107730) was coupled to sepharose in the presence of binding buffer (150 mmol/L sodium chloride, 50 mmol/L sodium bicarbonate, pH 8.3; sodium chloride: Sigma-Aldrich, cat. # S9888, sodium bicarbonate: SigmaAldrich, cat. #S6014) for at least 2 hours at room temperature. Sepharose was blocked for 1 hour with glycine (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. # 410225). Columns were was with PBS twice and equilibrated for 10 minutes. MCF7 and T47D breast cancer cells were treated with DMSO, 100 nmol/L Abemaciclib, or 100 nmol/L Palbociclib for seven days. Cells (1x〖10〗^7  per condition) were harvested with Cellstripper (Corning, cat. # 25-056-CI) and washed three times in ice-cold sterile PBS (Media preparation facility MSKCC). Afterward, cells were lysed in 1 mL 1% CHAPS (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. # C3023) in PBS, supplemented with 1 tablet of protease inhibitors (Complete, cat. # 11836145001) for 1 hour at 4ºC. This lysate was spun down for 1 hour at 20,000 g at 4°C. Supernatant was run over the affinity column through peristaltic pumps at 1 mL/minute overnight at 4°C. Affinity columns were washed with PBS for 15 minutes, run dry, and HLA complexes subsequently eluted five times with 200 mL 1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA, Sigma/Aldrich, cat. # 02031). For the separation of HLA ligands from their HLA complexes, tC18 columns (Sep-Pak tC18 1 cc VacCartridge, 100 mg Sorbent per Cartridge, 37–55 mm Particle Size, Waters, cat. # WAT036820) were prewashed with 80% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich, cat. # 34998) in 0.1% TFA and equilibrated with two washes of 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded, washed again with 0.1% TFA, and eluted in 400 mL 30% ACN in 0.1%TFA followed by 400 mL 40% ACN in 0.1%TFA, then 400 mL 50% ACN in 0.1%TFA. Sample volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed using Byonic software (version 2.7.84, Protein Metrics) through a custom-built computer server equipped with 4 Intel Xeon E5-4620 8-core CPUs operating at 2.2 GHz, and 512 GB physical memory (Exxact Corporation). Mass accuracy for MS1 was set to 6 ppm and to 20 ppm for MS2, respectively. Digestion specificity was defined as unspecific and only precursors with charges 1, 2, and 3, and up to 2 kDa were allowed. Protein FDR was disabled to allow complete assessment of potential peptide identifications. Oxidization of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications for all samples. All samples were searched against the UniProt Human Reviewed Database (20,349 entries, http://www.uniprot.org, downloaded June 2017). Peptides were selected with a minimal log prob value of 2 corresponding to p-values<0.01 for PSM in the given database and were HLA assigned by netMHC 4.0 with a 2% rank cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) lead to cell-cycle arrest but also trigger T cell-mediated immunity, which might be mediated by changes in human leukocyte antigen (HLA) ligands. We investigated the effects of CDK4/6i, abemaciclib and palbociclib, on the immunopeptidome at nontoxic levels in breast cancer cell lines by biochemical identification of HLA ligands followed by network analyses. This treatment led to upregulation of HLA and revealed hundreds of induced HLA ligands in breast cancer cell lines. These new ligands were significantly enriched for peptides derived from proteins involved in the "G1/S phase transition of cell cycle" including HLA ligands from CDK4/6, Cyclin D1 and the 26S regulatory proteasomal subunit 4 (PSMC1). Interestingly, peptides from proteins targeted by abemaciclib and palbociclib, were predicted to be the most likely to induce a T cell response. In strong contrast, peptides induced by solely one of the drugs had a lower T cell recognition score compared to the DMSO control suggesting that the observed effect is class dependent. This general hypothesis was exemplified by a peptide from PSMC1 which was among the HLA ligands with highest prediction scores and which elicited a T cell response in healthy donors. Overall, these data demonstrate that CDK4/6i treatment gives rise to drug-induced HLA ligands from G1/S phase transition, that have the highest chance for being recognized by T cells, thus providing evidence that inhibition of a distinct cellular process leads to increased presentation of the involved proteins that may be targeted by immunotherapeutic agents.

### Keywords
Abemaciclib, Mhc ligand, Palbociclib, Cdk4/6 inhibition, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Department of Molecular Pharmacology
MSKCC

### Submitter
Martin Klatt

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Scheinberg
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Department of Molecular Pharmacology


