### Accession
PXD028092

### Title
Transcriptome-wide identification of coding and noncoding RNA-binding proteins defines the extended RNA interactome of Leishmania mexicana

### Description
Non-poly(A) RNA molecules including noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) comprise the major portion of the total transcribed molecules in the cell. In addition to the mRNAs the ncRNAs also function as ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs) and carry out biological functions including synthesis of new proteins, RNA processing, genome remodelling and regulation of transcription. We therefore envisaged a comprehensive transcriptome-wide identification of coding and non-coding RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in the Leishmania spp. Towards this we applied the recently reported orthogonal organic phase separation (OOPS) method in combination with tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling-based quantitative proteomic mass spectrometry (MS) and report herein the most comprehensive identification of RBPs in Leishmania mexicana (L. mexicana) parasites. This study identified novel RNA binding property of thousands of L. mexicana proteins, significantly expanding the RBP landscape of the parasite. Furthermore, we showed that the classical Hsp90 inhibitor tanespimycin differentially regulates the RNA-binding property of hundreds of L. mexicana RBPs, shedding light into hitherto unknown large-scale downstream molecular effects of the small molecule inhibitor in the parasite.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were resuspended in 200 µL of 100 mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich), reduced with 20 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 60 min and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 60 min. Samples were digested overnight at 37 oC with 5 µg sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega). The samples were then acidified with TFA (0.1% v/v final concentration; Sigma-Aldrich), centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 min and the supernatant was collected. The tryptic peptides were then desalted on C-18 Sep-Pak Classic cartridges (Waters; WAT051910) following manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were evaporated to complete dryness under a vacuum and stored at -80 oC until required.  TMT labelling of the desalted tryptic peptides was carried out using TMTsixplex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo Scientific). The peptides of each experimental condition were dissolved in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and treated with a room-temperature equilibrated and freshly dissolved unique TMT label reagent in 41 µL anhydrous acetonitrile. The labelling reactions were run for 1 h at room temperature, following which 10 µL of 5% solution of hydroxylamine was added and incubated for 15 min at room temperature to quench the reactions. The six samples of three replicates of each life cycle stage were then combined together and concentrated to complete dryness under a vacuum. The samples were then redissolved in 0.1% TFA, desalted and cleaned-up using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were dried on a SpeedVac and stored at -80 oC until required.  The LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides dissolved in 0.1% FA were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (5 µm particle size, 100 µm id X 20 mm, TF164564) heated to 45 oC using 0.1% FA/H2O with a flow rate of 10 µL/min, then separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 NanoViper C18 column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm id X 50 cm, TF164942) with a 5% to 38% ACN gradient in 0.1% FA over 80 min (L. mexicana amastigote and promastigote OOPS-TMT-6plex MS2 runs) or over 120 min (L. mexicana amastigote and promastigote tanespimycin-OOPS-TMT-6plex MS3 runs) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The full MS spectra (m/z 375 to 1,500) were acquired in Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target value of 4e5 for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. High-resolution HCD MS2 and MS3 spectra were generated in positive ion mode using a normalised collision energy of 36% and 65% respectively within a 0.7 m/z isolation window using quadrupole isolation. The AGC target value was set to 10e4, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. The MS2 spectra were acquired in Orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 86 ms at a resolution of 50,000 with an instrument determined scan range beginning at m/z 100. The MS3 spectra were acquired in Orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 100 ms at a resolution of 50,000. The scan range of MS3 was m/z 100 to 500. To ensure quality peptide fragmentation a number of filters were utilised, including peptide monoisotopic precursor selection, minimum intensity exclusion of 10e3 and exclusion of precursor ions with unassigned charge state as well as charge state of +1 or superior to +7 from fragmentation selection. To prevent repeat sampling, a dynamic exclusion with exclusion count of 1, exclusion duration of 45 ms, mass tolerance window of +/- 7 ppm and isotope exclusion were used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against L. mexicana sequences from UniProt KB (8,524 sequences). The following search parameters were used: reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 6plex TMT for the amastigote and promastigote OOPS-TMT-6plex MS2 runs and reporter ion MS3 with multiplicity 6plex TMT for the amastigote and promastigote tanespimycin treatment-OOPS-TMT-6plex MS3 runs, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, minimum peptide length of 6, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, and protein false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01. Appropriate correction factors for the individual TMT channels for both lysine side-chain labelling and peptide N-terminal labelling as per the TMT-6plex kits used (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were configured into the database search. The proteinGroups.txt files from the MaxQuant search outputs were processed using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). Sequences only identified by site, reverse sequences, and potential contaminants were filtered out. A requirement of six non-zero valid value were set across the six replicates within the OOPS-TMT-6plex MS2 experiments. For the tanespimycin treatment OOPS-TMT-6plex MS3 runs, a requirement of three non-zero valid value were set across the 3 replicates of the amastigote and promastigote samples separately. Proteins identified with fewer than 2 unique peptides were discarded and a modified t test with permutation-based FDR statistics was applied (250 permutations) to compare the CL and NC groups, amastigote and promastigote samples, and tanespimycin treated and non-treated groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Leishmania

### Affiliations
Durham University
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, South Road, Durham, UK

### Submitter
Kalesh Karunakaran

### Lab Head
Dr Kalesh Karunakaran
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, South Road, Durham, UK


