### Accession
PXD008106

### Title
5HT -  Histone serotonylation is a permissive modification that enhances TFIID binding to H3K4me3

### Description
we provide evidence for a new class of histone posttranslational modification (PTM): serotonylation.

### Sample Protocol
100 microgram of each peptide was resuspended with 100 microl of prewashed immobilized Streptavidin beads in 0.01% DPBS/Triton-X, followed by incubation overnight rotating at 4°C. For each peptide IP, 40 ?l of 50% peptide-bead slurry was added to dialyzed HeLa cells extracts (10 mg/IP) and each sample rotated for 4 hr at 4°C. The IPs were then centrifuged for 1 min at 1000 rpm to pellet the beads. Beads were then washed six times in binding buffer substituted with 300 mM KCl.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer/Mascot. Data were filtered using a Percolator 28 calculated False Discovery Rate of 1% or better and requiring a mass accuracy of 5 ppm or better. General search parameters: up to 3 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed. Proteins were quantitated using peptide areas and requiring that a minimum 3 unique peptides were matched for a given quantitated protein

### Publication Abstract
Chemical modifications of histones can mediate diverse DNA-templated processes, including gene transcription<sup>1-3</sup>. Here we provide evidence for a class of histone post-translational modification, serotonylation of glutamine, which occurs at position 5 (Q5ser) on histone H3 in organisms that produce serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)). We demonstrate that tissue transglutaminase 2 can serotonylate histone H3 tri-methylated lysine 4 (H3K4me3)-marked nucleosomes, resulting in the presence of combinatorial H3K4me3Q5ser in vivo. H3K4me3Q5ser displays a ubiquitous pattern of tissue expression in mammals, with enrichment observed in brain and gut, two organ systems responsible for the bulk of 5-HT production. Genome-wide analyses of human serotonergic neurons, developing mouse brain and cultured serotonergic cells indicate that H3K4me3Q5ser nucleosomes are enriched in euchromatin, are sensitive to cellular differentiation and correlate with permissive gene expression, phenomena that are linked to the potentiation of TFIID<sup>4-6</sup> interactions with H3K4me3. Cells that&#xa0;ectopically express a H3 mutant that cannot be serotonylated display significantly altered expression of H3K4me3Q5ser-target loci, which leads to deficits in differentiation. Taken together, these data identify a direct role for 5-HT, independent from its contributions to neurotransmission and cellular signalling, in the mediation of permissive gene expression.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Ptm, Serotonylation.

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Mount Sinai School of Medicine

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Maze
Mount Sinai School of Medicine


