### Accession
PXD006732

### Title
Discovery of Tamoxifen and N-Desmethyl Tamoxifen Protein Targets in MCF-7 Cells Using Large-Scale Protein Folding and Stability Measurements

### Description
The proteins in an MCF-7 cell line were probed for tamoxifen (TAM) and n-desmethyl tamoxifen (NDT) induced stability changes using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique in combination with two different quantitative proteomics strategies. Together the SILAC- and iTRAQ-SPROX experiments described here enabled over 1000 proteins to be assayed for TAM- and NDT- induced protein stability changes, and a total of 163 and 200 protein hits were identified in the TAM and NDT studies, respectively. A subset of high confidence hits were assessed for experimental links to the ER using a STRING analysis. TAM was shown to induce stabilization of Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), a protein recently shown to bind the estrogen receptor. TAM was shown to directly interact with purified recombinant YBX1 with Pulse Proteolysis (PP). These results support YBX1 as a direct protein target of TAM. Proteins with altered expression levels with TAM and NDT treatment were identified with SILAC quantitation. In total, 799 and 671 proteins were probed for TAM- and NDT- induced expression changes, respectively, and 49 and 30 proteins had altered expression. This work also involved the use of a novel data analysis strategy to identify protein targets of ligands using the SPROX technique.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 cells were cultured using heavy-labeled or light-labeled lysine and arginine according to established protocol.20,21 The heavy-labeled lysine was enriched with six 13C and two 15N atoms. The heavy-labeled arginine was enriched with six 13C atoms (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). MCF-7 heavy-labeled cells were treated with drug and MCF-7 light-labeled cells were treated with vehicle as previously described.8 Briefly, NDT (Sigma) and TAM (Sigma) stock solutions were prepared in DMSO at a concentration of 1 mM. The heavy-labeled MCF-7 cell line was incubated with a final concentration of either 1 µM NDT/(1:1000 v/v)DMSO or 1 µM TAM/(1:1000 v/v)DMSO. Light-labeled MCF-7 was incubated with 1:1000 v/v DMSO. MCF-7 cells were incubated with NDT/DMSO, TAM/DMSO or DMSO for a total of 96 hours. The media and drug solutions were replaced after 48 hours. The cells were washed twice with PBS and harvested with HyQtase (Hyclone) in a 15 mL tube. Cells were pelleted at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The pelleted cells were resuspended with PBS, and pelleted at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and pellets were stored at -20°C. Aliquots of the heavy- and light-labeled MCF-7 cell lysates were distributed into a series of 10 buffers containing 20 mM phosphate (pH 7.4) and increasing concentrations of GdmCl. The SPROX reaction was performed by treatment of the lysate samples in the denaturant-containing buffers with 3% H2O2 (v/v), and the oxidation reaction was quenched with excess methionine. The final denaturant concentrations were 0 M, 0.5 M, 0.75 M, 1.0 M, 1.25 M, 1.5 M, 1.75 M, 2.0 M, 2.5 M and 3.0 M. After the SPROX reaction was performed, the heavy- and light-labeled samples from the same denaturant concentration were combined. The proteins in the combined samples were precipitated with TCA, and the samples were subjected to a quantitative, bottom-up proteomics analysis using SILAC quantitation. In total, three iTRAQ-SPROX analyses were performed on the control, +TAM, and +NDT samples. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite ETD mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-nLC system at the Proteomics Resource at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) also at the Proteomics Resource at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, or on a Q-Exactive Plus high-resolution mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoAcuity UPLC system (Waters Corp) and a nanoelectrospray ionization source at the Duke Proteomics Facility.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data generated in the SILAC-SPROX experiments were searched on MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 against the 201-04 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase (downloaded on 5/16/2014 at ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_releases /release 2014_04/knowledgebase/). Modifications searched included: two SILAC labels of the heavy sample (Arg6 and Lys8), variable acetylation of protein N-terminus, variable oxidation of methionine, variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and fixed MMTS modification of cysteines. Trypsin was set as a specific enzyme with up to two missed cleavages with matching from and to. The default settings of mass tolerances for the orbitrap were employed. Match between runs and re-quantification of searched peptides was checked.

### Publication Abstract
The proteins in an MCF-7 cell line were probed for tamoxifen (TAM) and n-desmethyl tamoxifen (NDT) induced stability changes using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique in combination with two different quantitative proteomics strategies, including one based on SILAC and one based on isobaric mass tags. Over 1000 proteins were assayed for TAM- and NDT-induced protein stability changes, and a total of 163 and 200 protein hits were identified in the TAM and NDT studies, respectively. A subset of 27 high-confidence protein hits were reproducibly identified with both proteomics strategies and/or with multiple peptide probes. One-third of the high-confidence hits have previously established experimental links to the estrogen receptor, and nearly all of the high-confidence hits have established links to breast cancer. One high-confidence protein hit that has known estrogen receptor binding properties, Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), was further validated as a direct binding target of TAM using both the SPROX and pulse proteolysis techniques. Proteins with TAM- and/or NDT-induced expression level changes were also identified in the SILAC-SPROX experiments. These proteins with expression level changes included only a small fraction of those with TAM- and/or NDT-induced stability changes.

### Keywords
N-desmethyl tamoxifen, Mcf-7, Sprox, Silac, Tamoxifen

### Affiliations
Duke University
Department of Chemistry,  Duke University Durham, North Carolina

### Submitter
Ryenne Ogburn

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Department of Chemistry,  Duke University Durham, North Carolina


