### Accession
PXD011094

### Title
Comparative endometrial proteomics among fertile women, intrauterine device carriers, and recurrent implantation failure patients using iTRAQ methodology

### Description
Endometrial receptivity is imperative to achieving pregnancy in humans. A disruption in the development of endometrial receptivity is responsible for recurrent implantation failures (RIF) of endometrial origin. To further understand the molecular mechanisms behind the endometrial receptivity process, we used the 8-plex isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) method to compare and quantify the proteomes from endometrial biopsies of three different endometrial statuses (fertile women, IUD carriers and RIF patients). Overall, iTRAQ allowed to identify 1,889 non-redundant proteins. Of these, 188 were differentially expressed proteins (DEP) (p-value < 0.05) among the three endometrial groups. Pairwise comparisons revealed 133 significant DEP in fertile vs. IUD carriers and 158 DEP in RIF vs. IUD carriers. However, no DEP were identified between fertile and RIF patients. Western blot validation of three DEP involved in endometrial receptivity (Plastin 2, Lactotrasferrin, and Lysozyme) confirmed our iTRAQ results. Moreover, functional KEGG enrichment revealed that complement and coagulation cascades and peroxisome were the two most significant pathways for the RIF vs. IUD comparison and ribosome and spliceosome for the fertile vs. IUD comparison, as possible important pathways involved in the endometrial receptivity acquisition. Our findings confirm that an IUD introduces numerous changes in the endometrial protein profile when compared to fertile and RIF endometria, revealing some key proteins involved in endometrial receptivity. The lack of DEP between fertile and RIF patient endometria suggest either that idiopathic RIF may not have an endometrial origin, with other as-yet-unknown factors involved.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using iTRAQ 8-plex and MS (Figure 1). As we mentioned above, a sample size of 28 endometrial biopsies was included in our proteomic analysis and comprised biopsies from fertile women (n=10), IUD carriers (n=10) and RIF patients (n=8). This sample size was established according to the amount of RIF patients attending for in vitro fecundation (IVF) treatments in IVI Valencia and the endometrial biopsies availability with informed consent. The aim was to obtain the same number of endometrial biopsies from each group (without losing statistical power). Samples were distributed in 4 iTRAQ independent experiments, considered as technical replicates. Each iTRAQ analysis included 7 endometrial samples and an internal standard. Samples from the three groups were equally shared out among the 4 iTRAQ analysis, so that in each iTRAQ analysis, 2-3 samples of each group were included. The internal standard was comprised of equals amounts of the all biological samples in the experiment and each iTRAQ ratio was given regarding this standard (fold change value expressed as Log2 fold change). Protein extraction and quantificationProteins from endometrial biopsies were extracted in Lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30mM Tris‐pH 8.5) using 2D Grinding Kit (GE Healthcare). An aliquot of each sample were precipitated with TCA (5 μL; Cf=10%) overnight at 5 ºC. After centrifugation, the final pellets were washed with cold (‐18ºC) acetone and centrifuged. Pellets were air dried. The washed pellets were dissolved with 40 μL of 8 M urea 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and quantitated by Qubit (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer instructions. For the iTRAQ proteomic analysis, 100 μg of total protein were used for each sample. Cysteine residues were reduced with 4 μL of 50 mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) (AB  SCIEX) at 37ºC for 180 min and sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using 2 μL of methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) 100 mM at room temperature for 10 min.  Then proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion (Promega, Madison, WI) with 10 μg of trypsin (at a ratio 1:10) overnight at 37ºC. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and each sample labeled with corresponding iTRAQ reagents from 8plex kit (AB SCIEX 2010) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Due to the number of samples employed, four independent 8-plex iTRAQ experiments with a common internal standard (IS) (113 marked position) were carried out (Figure 1).  Then, the eight labeled samples of each iTRAQ analysis were then pooled and mixed in equal proportions (1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1), dried by vacuum centrifugation and prepared for fractionation by IEF separation. For IEF separation, 250 µg of every iTRAQ experiment peptide mixture were dissolved with sample Buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 1.6% IPG buffer 3‐11NL) to incorporate reducing agents and ampholytes. One 13 cm IPG pH 3-11 NL strip (GE) for every iTRAQ experiment was hydrated with the peptide solution before overnight at room temperature and the peptides were isoelectrofocused with 5000-25000 Vh. To increase reproducibility the four iTRAQs were isoelectrofocused at the same time. After focusing, the strips were washed with milliQ grade water and cut into 11 equal pieces. The peptides were extracted with 120 μL of the increased concentration ACN solutions (A. 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA; B. 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA; C. 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA; D. ACN 0.1% TFA). All the peptide fractions were combined, dried by vacuum centrifugation and re-dissolved with 40 µL of 2% ACN 0.1% TFA. The samples (11 for every iTRAQ experiment) were cleaned and concentrated by POROS R2 (Millipore). The clean peptide mixture was dried by speed vacuum and re-suspended to a concentration of 0.30 μg/μL in 2% ACN 0.1% TFA. First, peptide separation was performed on a chromatography system, where 5 µL of each individual IEF fractions were injected and captured onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3 μm C18‐CL, 75um x 15cm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 μl/min for 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 75umx25cm, Eksigen) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% (v/v) B in A for 90min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in information‐dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25‐s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.075‐s product ion scans from 100–1500 m/z on the 25 most intense 2‐5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using the Protein Pilot search engine (version 5.0, AB SCIEX).  Protein Pilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of Protein Pilot was used to search against the Expasy protein database (SwissProt_150202). The search was done with the following parameters: 8-plex iTRAQ quantitation, trypsin digestion, methyl methanethiosulfonate cys-alkylation (MMTS), Homo sapiens taxonomy restriction, the search effort set to throughout, and bias correction. The False discovery rate (FDR) analysis conducted by the ProteinPilot software utilized a reversed-sequence decoy database to determine the false discovery rate (Supplemental Figure 1).  To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein‐Pilot Progroup algorithm. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with at least 95% confidence were regarded as identified and each confident protein identification involved at least one unique peptide. Only Proteins showing an unused score > 1.3 (identified with confidence ≥ 95%), a p value less than 0.05 (established by a t test analysis between conditions) and a (Log2 fold change greater than 0.80 or less than -0.80) were considered for further analysis. The ProteinPilot summary of peptides and proteins identified and quantified in each iTRAQ experiment can be found in supplemental data (Supplemental Tables 2-9).

### Publication Abstract
Endometrial receptivity is a limiting step in human reproduction. A disruption in the development of endometrial receptivity is responsible for recurrent implantation failures (RIF) of endometrial origin. To understand the molecular mechanisms behind the endometrial receptivity process, we used the isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) method to compare three different endometrial statuses: fertile women, intrauterine device (IUD) carriers, and RIF patients. Overall, iTRAQ allowed identified 1889 non-redundant proteins. Of these, 188 were differentially expressed proteins (DEP) (p-value&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;.05). Pairwise comparisons revealed 133 significant DEP in fertile vs. IUD carriers and 158 DEP in RIF vs. IUD carriers. However, no DEP were identified between fertile and RIF patients. Western blot validation of three DEP involved in endometrial receptivity (plastin 2, lactotransferrin, and lysozyme) confirmed our iTRAQ results. Moreover, functional KEGG enrichment revealed that complement and coagulation cascades and peroxisome were the two most significant pathways for the RIF vs. IUD comparison and ribosome and spliceosome for the fertile vs. IUD comparison, as possible important pathways involved in the endometrial receptivity acquisition. The lack of DEP between fertile and RIF patient endometria suggest that idiopathic RIF may not have an endometrial origin, with other as-yet-unknown factors involved. SIGNIFICANCE: A pilot study where a comparison of the endometrial protein profile from women with different endometrial receptive grade (fertile women, IUD carriers and RIF patients) during the same period of time (overlapping with the window of implantation) of a hormone replacement therapy was performed using a high-throughput proteomic technique. This approach lead us to better understand the molecular mechanisms undergoing endometrial receptivity, a time-limiting step to achieve pregnancy in humans. Moreover, the number of samples per group (10 Fertile women, 10 IUD carriers and 8 RIF patients) according to the methodology here employed (8plex iTRAQ), give more robustness to our results. Our findings confirm that an IUD introduces numerous changes in the endometrial protein profile when compared to fertile and RIF endometria, revealing some key proteins involved in endometrial receptivity. Finding no significant differences between Fertile and RIF patient endometria could suggest that other as-yet-unknown factors could be involved in the etiology of idiopathic RIF.

### Keywords
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (itraq), Intrauterine device (iud), Endometrial receptivity, Recurrent implantation failure (rif), Endometrium

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI), Valencia, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Domínguez
Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI), Valencia, Spain.


