### Accession
PXD027505

### Title
Altered porcine PBMC proteome and secretome after stimulation with BanLec

### Description
With this experiment, we aimed at showing changes in the proteome and secretome of porcine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) after stimulation with Banana Lectin (BanLec).

### Sample Protocol
Porcine PBMC were isolated by density gradient centrifugation (23°C, 500 x g, 25 min, brake off) using Pancoll separating solution (PanBiotech, Aidenbach, Germany). 2 x 10^7 cells were stimulated with 1 µg/ml BanLec at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 48h. Unstimulated controls were incubated under the same conditions.  After stimulation, cells and supernatant were separated by centrifugation (500xg, 10min). Supernatant was centrifuged again (1000xg, 10min) for elimination of residual PBMC. Cells were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline solution (500xg, 10min, 4°C) and aliquots of of 6x10^5 cells each were used for mass spec analyses. PBMC and supernatant samples were digested separately by a modified FASP protocol as described (Grosche et al., 2016). Eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in the data-dependent mode. Approximately 0.5 µg peptides per sample were automatically loaded to the online coupled ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (UltiMate 3000 –RSLCnano System, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A nano trap column was used (300-µm ID X 5mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UHPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75 µm ID X 250 mm, 1.8 µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. Peptides were eluted from the column at 250 nL/min using increasing ACN concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 41% over a linear 95-min gradient. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60 000 with an AGC target of 3e^6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms from 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of 28, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15 000 with a AGC target of 1e^5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Unassigned charges, and charges of +1 and above +8 were excluded from precursor selection.   Grosche A, Hauser A, Lepper MF, Mayo R, von Toerne C, Merl-Pham J and Hauck SM. The proteome of native adult Muller glial cells from murine retina. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Feb;15(2):462-80.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification Data recorded for lysates and secretomes were processed separately. Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against Ensembl Pig database (Release 75, Sscrofa10.2; 25 859 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator (ref)  was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle. Label-free quantification The quantification of proteins, after precursor recalibration, was based on abundance values (intensity) for unique peptides. Abundance values were normalized to the total peptide amount to account for sample load errors. The protein abundances were calculated summing the abundance values for admissible peptides and these abundances were used for ratio calculations. Ratios above 100 fold and below 0.1 fold were combined into these bins. The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the approach described (Navarro et al., 2014 ), which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes for proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner.   Navarro P, Trevisan-Herraz M, Bonzon-Kulichenko E, Núñez E, Martínez-Acedo P, Pérez-Hernández D, Jorge I, Mesa R, Calvo E, Carrascal M, Hernáez ML, García F, Bárcena JA, Ashman K, Abian J, Gil C, Redondo JM, Vázquez J. J Proteome Res. 2014 Mar 7;13(3):1234-47. doi: 10.1021/pr4006958. Epub 2014 Feb 10. PMID: 24512137

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Banlec, Plant lectin, Musa banana, Lc-ms/ms, Polyclonal cell stimulation, Pbmc, Pig

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany


