### Accession
PXD003821

### Title
Arabidopsis Col-0 and cerk1 treated with chitosan or water

### Description
Microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP)-triggered immunity (MTI) is the first layer of molecular defense encountered by pathogens when they attempt to infect plants. MTI is dependent on cell surface pattern-recognition receptors (PRR) which act upstream of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. Genetic screening and mutant knock-out lines have largely contributed to our knowledge of MTI. However, genetic screening is confined to phenotype-causing mutations and scarcely enables the discovery of redundantly-acting proteins. We sought to discover protein components that contribute in MTI, using a phenotype-independent approach to discern nucleus-localized proteins after MTI induction. We report on the nuclear proteome of Columbia-0 (Col-0) and chitin elicitor receptor kinase 1 (cerk1) mutant plants 15 min after MTI induction. Our approach revealed that MAMP-treated cerk1 plants had many proteins in common with Col-0-treated plants following chitosan treatment. cerk1 plants also manifested several unique proteins that were absent from Col-0 plants when elicited with chitosan indicating that they also perceive chitosan. Detailed analysis of the identified proteins revealed a nuclear accumulation of transcriptional regulators and transcription factors, DNA-modifying enzymes, RNA-binding proteins and ribosomal proteins. No novel MAPKs were found although Receptor for activated C kinase 1, a scaffold protein involved in defense, and a nucleotide binding leucine-rich repeat protein, implicated in resistance to Leptosphaeria maculans, were discovered in the nucleus of chitosan-treated plants and absent from water-treated control plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and growth conditions Arabidopsis thaliana cerk1 seeds (SALK_007193) were obtained from the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Centre. Col-0 and cerk1 seeds were sterilized for 2 min in 5% (v∕v) bleach solution and 0.1% Tween-20, then rinsed in sterile water. The seeds were incubated at 4˚C for 2 days and transferred to a growth room at 22˚C under a 16h light/8h dark cycle. The plants were grown for 3 weeks in soil before chitosan treatment. Chitosan preparation and treatment Low-viscosity chitosan was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Oakville, ON, Can) and tested at a concentration of 100 µg/ml. Arabidopsis leaves were treated by spraying a chitosan solution until imminent run off, and harvested after 15 min and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Chitosan was solubilized in glacial acetic acid, then diluted at 100 µg/ml. Control samples were treated with similarly-diluted acetic acid solution.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Peptide samples were separated by online reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) and analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry (ES MS/MS). The experiments were performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) connected to a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA,USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were trapped at 20 μl/min in loading solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) on a 5mm x 300 μm C18 pepmap cartridge pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) during 5 minutes. Then, the pre-column was switched online with a self-made 50 cm x 75µm internal diameter separation column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and the peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40% solvent B (A: 0,1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 35 minutes, at 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent acquisition mode using Thermo XCalibur software version 3.0.63. Full scan mass spectra (350 to 1800m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120 000. Each MS scan was followed by acquisition of fragmentation spectra of the most intense ions for a total cycle time of 3 seconds (top speed mode). The selected ions were isolated using the quadrupole analyzer and fragmented by Higher energy Collision-induced Dissociation (HCD. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap.  Dynamic exclusion was set for a period of 20 sec and a tolerance of 10 ppm.    Database searching All MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher). MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.0). Mascot was set up to search TAX_Arabidopsis_3701_20141111 database (release 11/2014 containing  91679 proteins) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm.  Dehydrated of the n-terminus, glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification.  Two missed cleavages were allowed.  Criteria for protein identification Scaffold (version 4.0.1), Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Proteins/peptides FDR rate was set to 1%  or less based on decoy database searching (vérifier dans le scaffold). Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, AI Anal Chem. 2003 Sep 1;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
(MAMP)-triggered immunity (MTI) is the first layer of molecular defense encountered by pathogens. Genetic screens have contributed to our knowledge of MTI, but are limited to phenotype-causing mutations. Here we attempt to identify novel factors involved in the early event leading to plant MTI by comparing the nuclear proteomes of two Arabidopsis genotypes treated with chitosan. Our approach revealed that following chitosan treatment, cerk1 plants had many nuclear accumulating proteins in common, but also some unique ones, when compared with Col-0 plants. Analysis of the identified proteins revealed a nuclear accumulation of DNA-modifying enzymes, RNA-binding proteins and ribosomal proteins. Our results demonstrate that nuclear proteomic is a valid, phenotype-independent approach to uncover factor involved in cellular processes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Cerk1, Pamp- triggered immunity, Chitosan

### Affiliations
Departement de Chimie, Biochimie et Physisque, Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières
Universite du Quebec a Trois-Rivieres

### Submitter
Hugo Germain

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Germain
Departement de Chimie, Biochimie et Physisque, Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières


