### Accession
PXD023967

### Title
Proteomics of motor neuron in ASL model sorted by FACS

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the most common form of motor neuron disease, is characterized by progressive muscle weakness and paralysis caused by degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons. A major breakthrough in understanding the genetics of ALS was the discovery of a GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion (HRE) within the non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) as the most common mutation in both familial and sporadic forms of ALS [25, 80]. We report that C9orf72 loss of function and poly(GP) expression act together to induce motor neuron degeneration and paralysis. These synergistic properties of C9orf72 mutation affect autophagy, thus resulting in poly(GP) and p62 aggregation. In this context, poly(GP) accumulation occurs in motor neurons preferentially, along with swollen mitochondria, a typical signature of mitophagy defects. In motor neurons, accumulated abnormal mitochondria engage caspase cascade, ultimately giving rise to apoptotic cell death of motor neurons that results in paralysis

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, USA) digestion was performed on lysates of zebrafish motoneurons isolated by FACS. Proteins were alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2%. Colloidal protein particulate was formed with the addition of 6 times the sample volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). The mixtures were put on the S-Trap micro 1.7 mL columns and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 30 seconds. The columns were washed four times with 150 µL S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 30 seconds with 180 degrees rotation of the columns between washes. Samples were digested with 0.8 µg of trypsin (Promega, USA) at 47°C 1h30. Samples were resuspended in 21 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. Each sample was injected three times. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific, USA), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific, USA). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 126 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each replicates to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.14.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot Danio rerio database (release 15/04/2019, 3126 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously [22]. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein. Match between run was allowed. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org [99]. For statistical comparison, we set two groups, c9orf72 KD + GP100 (“C9”) and mismatch + GP100 (“Mis”), each containing biological triplicate. Each sample was run in technical triplicates as well. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 2.5 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of very low signal values. We performed an Ttest, FDR=0.05, S0=0.1.  Protein interaction analysis of the enriched expressed proteins of mismatch + GP100 condition was done using String database with a minimum required interaction score of 0,700 (high confidence). We reported experimentally determined interactions only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Motor neuron, Mitophagy, Autophagy, Apoptosis, C9orf72

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France


