### Accession
PXD045402

### Title
COL1A2 Barcoding: Bone Species Identification via Shotgun Proteomics

### Description
Species identification of fragmentary bones remains a challenging task in archeology and forensics. A species identification method for such fragmentary bones that has recently attracted interest is the use of bone collagen proteins. We developed a method similar to DNA barcoding that reads collagen protein sequences in bone and automatically determines the species by performing sequence database searches. We tested our method using bone samples from 30 vertebrate species ranging from mammals to fish.

### Sample Protocol
Bone powder was decalcified in 1 mL of 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) on a tube rotator at 56°C for 16 h. The pellet was resuspended in 300 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated at 80°C for 3 h to gelatinize the collagen. The filtered supernatant was digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 2 h at 37°C. The digested peptides were desalted using commercial SDB StageTips (GL-Tip SDB; GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC1000 and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST HT in Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The protein sequence database used in the SEQUEST HT search was specified as the FASTA database consisting only of COL1A2 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Species identification of fragmentary bones remains a challenging task in archeology and forensics. A species identification method for such fragmentary bones that has recently attracted interest is the use of bone collagen proteins. Here, we describe a method similar to DNA barcoding that reads collagen protein sequences in bone and automatically determines the species by performing sequence database searches. The method is almost identical to conventional shotgun proteomics analysis of bone samples, except that the database used by the SEQUEST search engine consisted only of entries for collagen type 1 alpha 2 (COL1A2) proteins from various vertebrates. Accordingly, the COL1A2 peptides that differ in sequence among species act as species marker peptides. In SEQUEST-based shotgun proteomics, the protein entries that contain more marker peptide sequences are assigned higher scores; therefore, the highest-scoring protein entry will be the COL1A2 entry for the species from which the analyzed bone was derived. We tested our method using bone samples from 30 vertebrate species and found that all species were correctly identified. In conclusion, COL1A2 can be used as a bone protein barcode and can be read through shotgun proteomics, allowing for automatic bone species identification. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD045402.

### Keywords
Col1a2, Protein barcoding, Species identification, Sequest

### Affiliations
National Research Institute of Police Science

### Submitter
Kei Taniguchi

### Lab Head
Dr Hajime Miyaguchi
National Research Institute of Police Science


