### Accession
PXD006510

### Title
Crosslinking mass spectrometry of yeast Pol I pre-initiation complex

### Description
In eukaryotic cells, ribosomal RNA is transcribed by RNA polymerase I (Pol I). To initiate transcription, Pol I requires the assembly of a multi-subunit pre-initiation complex (PIC). In yeast, the minimal PIC includes Pol I, the transcription factor Rrn3 and Core Factor (CF) composed of subunits Rrn6, Rrn7 and Rrn11. We have determined the cryo-EM structure of a 18-subunit yeast Pol I complex together with CF, Rrn3 and transcription scaffold. To aid in modeling the structure based on the cryo-EM map, we performed crosslinking mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
50 μg (1 mg/ml) of purified Pol I pre-initiation complex was cross-linked by addition of an iso-stoichiometric mixture of H12/D12 isotope-coded, di-succinimidyl-suberate (DSS, Creative Molecules). Cross-linker was added to the final concentration of 2 and 5 mM. The cross-linking reactions were allowed to proceed for 30 min at 37 °C and quenched by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM for 10 min at 37 °C. Cross-linked proteins were denatured using urea and Rapigest (Waters) at a final concentration of 4 M and 0.05% (w/v), respectively. Samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT (30 min at 37 °C) and cysteines were carbamidomethylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (30 min in the dark). Protein digestion was performed first using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH, Neuss, Germany) for 3.5 h at 37 °C then followed 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37 °C, after the urea concentration was diluted to 1.5 M. Samples were then acidified with 10% (v/v) TFA and desalted using MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus). Cross-linked peptides were enriched using size exclusion chromatography. In brief, desalted peptides were reconstituted with SEC buffer (30% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) TFA) and fractionated using a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE) on an Agilent 1200 Infinity HPLC System at a flow rate of 50 ml/min. Fractions eluting between 1 and 1.8 ml were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 50 µl 5% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Fractions were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) connected online to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 mm x 250 mm, 1.7 mm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters) using a stepwise 60 min gradient between 3% and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed using a TOP-20 strategy where survey-MS scans (m/z range 375-1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap (R = 30,000) and up to 20 of the most abundant ions per full scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 40, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzed in the LTQ. In order to focus the acquisition on larger cross-linked peptides, charge states 1, 2 and unknown were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window ± 15 ppm. Ion target values were 1,000,000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) for full scans and 10,000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans

### Data Protocol
To assign the fragment ion spectra, raw files were converted to centroid mzXML using the Mass Matrix file converter tool and then searched using xQuest against a fasta database containing the sequences of the cross-linked proteins. Posterior probabilities were calculated using xProphet

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotic cells, RNA polymerase I (Pol I) synthesizes precursor ribosomal RNA (pre-rRNA) that is subsequently processed into mature rRNA. To initiate transcription, Pol I requires the assembly of a multi-subunit pre-initiation complex (PIC) at the ribosomal RNA promoter. In yeast, the minimal PIC includes Pol I, the transcription factor Rrn3, and Core Factor (CF) composed of subunits Rrn6, Rrn7, and Rrn11. Here, we present the cryo-EM structure of the 18-subunit yeast Pol I PIC bound to a transcription scaffold. The cryo-EM map reveals an unexpected arrangement of the DNA and CF subunits relative to Pol I. The upstream DNA is positioned differently than in any previous structures of the Pol II PIC. Furthermore, the TFIIB-related subunit Rrn7 also occupies a different location compared to the Pol II PIC although it uses similar interfaces as TFIIB to contact DNA. Our results show that although general features of eukaryotic transcription initiation are conserved, Pol I and Pol II use them differently in their respective transcription initiation complexes.

### Keywords
Transcription, Ribosomal rna, Crosslinking, Pol i, Pol i pre-initiation complex, Core factor

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Structural and Computational Biology Unit,  Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Müller
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Structural and Computational Biology Unit,  Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany


