### Accession
PXD019219

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of an enriched anaerobic rumen consortium (ERAC)

### Description
Metaproteomic analysis of an enriched anaerobic rumen consortium (ERAC) using sugarcane bagasse and rumen as unique carbon and microbial sources

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of 12 µg from the concentrated supernatants were subjected in duplicates to SDS-PAGE using 12 % polyacrylamide gel at 100 V for one and a half hours. Gel was stained by incubating with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 solution and cut manually into 12 slices, which were distained with methanol and acetic acid, and then dehydrated using acetonitrile. Subsequently, the bands were reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide solutions, respectively, to then get washed with ammonium bicarbonate, and dehydrated and rehydrated using acetonitrile and sodium bicarbonate, respectively. The proteins embedded in gel slices were digested with trypsin, dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate solution and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The resulting peptides were purified and desalted using self-assembled C18 stage tips. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an ETD-enabled LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer  coupled with LC-MS/MS by an EASY-nLC system through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. The peptides were separated by a 2 to 90 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid at 0.6 µL/min using a PicoFrit Column analytical column (20 cm × ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 27 min. The instrument method for the LTQ Velos Orbitrap was set up in the data-dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1 × 106. The resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000, and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy Collision-Induced Dissociation–CID (normalized collision energy of 35 %). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 1000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 s and a repeat count of 1. An activation q value of 0.25 and an activation time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was converted into a peak list format (.mgf) using Mascot server. The resulting peaks were searched against the predicted protein sequences from ERAC metagenome using the Mascot server (Matrix Science). The following search criteria were applied: carbamidomethylation as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as a variable modification, one trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 1 Da for-fragment ions. The ScaffoldQ+ software was applied to further analyze the data processed by Mascot server to validate the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification. The following parameters were applied: minimum protein probability of 90 %, minimum peptide probability of 50 % and unique different minimum peptide of 2. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to 1 %. Protein quantification was based on the normalized spectrum abundance, which is calculated as the number of spectral counts identifying a protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anaerobic consortium, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
Universidade de Sorocaba - Sorocaba, São Paulo, Brazil
Universidade de Sorocaba, Sorocaba, São Paulo - Brazil

### Submitter
Geizecler  Tomazetto

### Lab Head
Dr Geizecler Tomazetto
Universidade de Sorocaba - Sorocaba, São Paulo, Brazil


