### Accession
PXD031656

### Title
Cntnap2 KO mouse mPFC proteome for ASD

### Description
Autism Spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder where patients have impaired social behavior and communication, and restricted interests. Although various studies have been carried out to unveil the mechanisms associated with ASD, its pathophysiology is still poorly understood. Genetic variants on CNTNAP2 have been found and considered representative ASD genetic risk factors, and disruption of Cntnap2 causes ASD phenotypes in mice. Here, we performed an integrative multi-omics analysis by combining quantitative proteometabolomics data of Cntnap2 knockout (KO) mice with multi-omics data from ASD patients and forebrain organoids to elucidate Cntnap2-dependent molecular networks of ASD. First, we found Cntnap2-associated molecular signatures and cellular processes by conducting mass spectrometry-based proteometabolomic analysis of the medial prefrontal cortex of the Cntnap2 KO mouse model. Then, we narrowed these identified processes into bona fide ASD molecular processes by incorporating multi-omics data of ASD patients' prefrontal cortex. Further, we mapped cell-type-specific ASD networks by reanalyzing single-cell RNA-seq data of forebrain organoids derived from patients with CNTNAP2 mutation. Finally, we constructed a Cntnap2-associated ASD network model consisting of mitochondrial dysfunction, axonal impairment, and synaptic activity. Our results may shed light on understanding of the Cntnap2-dependent molecular networks of ASD.

### Sample Protocol
The Cntnap2-/- and control mice mPFC tissues were pulverized. The sample preparation was performed by the following published FASP protocol [13]. A filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol was implemented for proteomic digestion. The pulverized tissue samples were lysed in a lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100mM DTT,100mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.6/8.5) in HPLC grade water aided by probe sonication. The bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) determined the exact amount of proteins in each sample by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). The integrity of the BCA result was confirmed by SDS-page using 20 ug of proteins, and 180 ug of samples from each sample was used for analysis. Additional buffer triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) 100 mM, 8.0 M urea, and phosphatase inhibitor were added so that 4% SDS lysis buffer solution was diluted to 0.1% SDS. The disulfide bonds were reduced by incubating the samples at 60o Celsius for 30 minutes. The samples were transferred to PBS washed Amicon 10 spin column). The samples were washed with 40 mM of ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by 1 mL of iodoacetamide and kept in the dark for 30 minutes to free alkylate free sulfhydryl functional groups. Samples were washed with 1 mL TEAB buffer ten times. After changing the collection tube, proteins were digested using MS grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 for 12 hours at 37℃. The reaction was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to lower the pH (<2.5) of the sample. The peptides were desalted using a Harvard C-18 spin column to remove salts and contaminants. After drying the sample, the peptides were isotopically labeled using the 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reaction was proceeded for 2 hours at room temperature with an intermediate vortex and spin down every 15 minutes. The TMT labeled peptide samples were dried. The chemical labeling of TMT and TMT efficiency was confirmed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Once verified, the labeled samples were pooled and resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, then fractionation by basic reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) (C18, 5 μm pore size, 4.6 mm × 250 mm, XBridge, Waters) into 24 fractionated peptide samples. The following 24 fractions were analyzed using a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system. The fractionated peptides were analyzed using an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) nanoflow liquid chromatography system and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded on a trap column (100 μm of inner diameter, 2 cm of length, 5 μm of C18 particles , Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being separated on an EASY-Spray HPLC column (75 μm of inner diameter, 50 cm of length, and 2 μm of C18 particles,  PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A and B were composed of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 0.1% FA in 95% acetonitrile (ACN), respectively. The peptides were resolved changing the gradient of mobile phase B as follows; 6% - 7% for 2 min, 7% - 30% for 75 min, 30% - 100% for 2 min, 100% - 100% for 2 min, 100% - 5% for 2 min and 5% - 5% for 7 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was conducted in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between MS1 and MS2. The voltage for an electrospray ionization was set to 2,300 V. MS1 and MS2 were acquired for the precursor ions and fragmented ions, respectively. MS1 scan range was set to 350-1800 m/z in the “Top Speed” setting with three seconds per cycle. MS1 and MS2 scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 and 50,000, respectively, at an m/z of 200. MS2 spectra were acquired by fragmenting precursor ions with high energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 35% normalized collision energy. Automatic gain control (AGC) for MS1 and MS2 were set to 1,000,000 and 50,000, respectively. The isolation window for precursor ions were set to 0.7 m/z. Ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set to 50 and 86 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25 sec. Precursor ions with charge states 2-7 were included for MS2, rejecting singly-charged ions. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option for polydimethyl-cyclosiloxane ions (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were refined by PE-MMR for precursor mass calibration and refinement (ref). Using MS-GF+ search engine (v2020.07.02), the processed spectral data were searched against mouse proteome (Uniprot DB: released November 2020) with allowance of semi-tryptic cleavage, maximum 2 miss-cleavage, and 10 ppm of precursor mass tolerance using target-decoy method. TMT to lysine and N-terminus and carbamidomethylated cysteine were used as static modifications. Oxidation to methionine was used as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) with false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 were selected from resultant search data (mzid files), and reassigned to the peptides with the highest scored PSM per tandem mass spectrum for peptide identification. For protein inference, unique peptides which were aligned to single protein-coding gene in a whole mouse genome were selected from identified peptides. The proteins having two or more unique peptides were selected as identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a major neurodevelopmental disorder in which patients present with core symptoms of social communication impairment, restricted interest, and repetitive behaviors. Although various studies have been performed to identify ASD-related mechanisms, ASD pathology is still poorly understood. CNTNAP2 genetic variants have been found that represent ASD genetic risk factors, and disruption of Cntnap2 expression has been associated with ASD phenotypes in mice. In this study, we performed an integrative multi-omics analysis by combining quantitative proteometabolomic data obtained with Cntnap2 knockout (KO) mice with multi-omics data obtained from ASD patients and forebrain organoids to elucidate Cntnap2-dependent molecular networks in ASD. To this end, a mass spectrometry-based proteometabolomic analysis of the medial prefrontal cortex in Cntnap2 KO mice led to the identification of Cntnap2-associated molecular features, and these features were assessed in combination with multi-omics data obtained on the prefrontal cortex in ASD patients to identify bona fide ASD cellular processes. Furthermore, a reanalysis of single-cell RNA sequencing data obtained from forebrain organoids derived from patients with CNTNAP2-associated ASD revealed that the aforementioned identified ASD processes were mainly linked to excitatory neurons. On the basis of these data, we constructed Cntnap2-associated ASD network models showing mitochondrial dysfunction, axonal impairment, and synaptic activity. Our results may shed light on the Cntnap2-dependent molecular networks in ASD.

### Keywords
Cntnap2, Mpfc, Mouse

### Affiliations
DGIST
Department of New Biology, DGIST, Daegu 42988, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
jihwan park

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Department of New Biology, DGIST, Daegu 42988, Republic of Korea


