### Accession
PXD039847

### Title
Bottom-up Proteomics of Saliva in Autoimmune Hepatitis and Primary Biliary Cholangitis

### Description
Autoimmune Hepatitis (AIH) and Primary Biliary Cholangitis (PBC) are autoimmune diseases that target the liver in which the immune system produces an inappropriate response to self-antigens resulting in inflammation, damage, and dysfunction of hepatic tissues. Despite progress in the understanding of the etiopathogenesis and in the diagnostic and therapeutic approach of these diseases, critical issues remain concerning the early diagnosis of affected individuals. The present study aims to detect and characterize by a gel-based bottom-up proteomic approach the acid-insoluble fraction of salivary proteome from patients affected by AIH and PBC with respect to healthy controls (HCs). The study was performed on the salivary acid-insoluble proteins after in-gel digestion starting from: i) the entire SDS-PAGE lane; ii) a portion of the SDS-PAGE at lowest molecular weight (MW </= 25 kDa).

### Sample Protocol
For the first part of the study, a total of 17 AIH patients (AIHp) 60.6 ± 12.8 (mean ± standard deviation) years old, males n = 2, females n = 15, 17 PBC patients (PBCp) 63.0 ± 9.4 years old, all females, and 17 HCs 58.9 ± 13.4 years old, all females, were recruited. For the second part of the study, focused on the analysis of the low-MW proteins, a total of 15 AIHp 60.6 ± 10.9 years old, 15 PBCp 61.7 ± 11.9 years old, and 15 HCs 61.3 ± 12.5 years old, all females, were recruited. All AIHp and PBCp were recruited from the Liver Unit of University Hospital of Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy, with diagnosis based on the criteria reviewed by the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Study Group (IAIHG) in 1999 (Boberg, 2002) and by the EASL clinical practice guidelines (EASL, 2017). The informed consent process agreed with the latest stipulations established by the Declaration of Helsinki. The Committee of the “Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Cagliari”, Cagliari, Italy, approved the study on July 21st, 2021 (reference number PG/2021/11303). Unstimulated whole saliva (WS) (from 0.2 to 1 mL) was collected with a soft plastic aspirator at the basis of the tongue from 9.00 am to 1.00 pm and, to preserve salivary proteins from proteolytic degradation, samples were immediately mixed with an equal volume of 0.2% (v/v) 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuged at 14,000 xg for 10 min at 4°C. The acid-insoluble fraction of whole saliva was separated by the acid-soluble part and stored at -80°C until the analysis. The acid-insoluble proteins of each sample were subjected to a solubilization procedure and to total protein concentration assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The volume of each sample correspondent to the desired protein amount (10 μg for the first part, and 50 μg for the second part of the study) was used for SDS-PAGE (4–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels, Bio-Rad) under reducing condition. After the electrophoretic separation (180 constant Volt, 30 min), gels were submitted to staining procedure and for the first part of the study (Part I) each gel lane was entirely excised and divided in 3 portions (A: 250 kDa > zone < 75 kDa; B: 75 kDa > zone < 25 kDa; C: zone < 25 kDa), and for the second part of the study (Part II) only gel portions corresponding to proteins with MW </= 25 kDa were excised and divided in 2 portions (C1-2: 25 KDa > zone < 15 KDa; C3: zone < 15 kDa). Gel fractions were cut into small pieces and submitted to in-gel digestion. The trypsin was added to gels samples in an enzyme/proteins ratio between 1/80 (w/w) for Part I, and 1/30 (w/w) for Part II. The extracted peptides samples were lyophilized and solubilized in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA) for RP-nanoHPLC-high resolution ESI-MS/MS. Part I: one hundred fifty-three (153) samples from entire gel lane digestion were analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano System HPLC coupled with a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The Easy Spray reverse-phase nano column (250 mm x 75 μm inner diameter I.D., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was a C18 with 2 μm beads and elution of peptides was achieved with aqueous solvent A (0.1% FA) and aqueous solvent B (0.1% FA/80% acetonitrile v/v) in 100 min at flow rate of 0.3 μl/min with the following gradient: 0-3 min 4% B, 3-70 min 50% B, 70-90 min 80% B, 90-92 90% B and 92-100 min 90% B. The mass spectrometer was operating at 1.7 kV in the data dependent acquisition mode with the capillary temperature set at 275 °C and S-Lens RF level 68.4%. Full MS experiments were performed in positive ion mode with mass ranging from 350 to 1600 m/z with resolution 120000 (at 400 m/z). The 10 most intense ions were subjected to CID fragmentation setting 35% of normalized collision energy for 10 ms, isolation width of 2 m/z, and activation q of 0.25. Part II: ninety (90) samples were analyzed with a QExactive Orbitrap through the EASY-spray nano ESI source coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The trap column (100 mm I.D. × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, having a particle size of 5 μm and 100 Å pore size, and the EASY-spray analytical column (75 μm I.D. x 75 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, having a particle size of 2 μm and 100 Å pore size. Peptides were trapped at 30 μl/min in 96% solvent A (0.1 % FA). Elution was achieved with the solvent B (0.1% FA/80% acetonitrile v/v) at 300 nl/min. The 92 min gradient used was as follows: 0–3 min 96% A; 3–70 min 4–25% B; 70–90 min 25–40% B; 90–92 min 90% B; 90–100 min 90% B; 101–120 min 96% A. The mass spectrometer was operated at 2 kV in the data dependent acquisition mode. A MS2 method was used with a FT survey scan from 400 to 1600 m/z (resolution 70,000; AGC target 1E6). The 10 most intense peaks were subjected to HCD fragmentation (resolution 17,500; AGC target 5E4, NCE 28%, max. injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion 35 s).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were processed and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the SEQUEST HT cluster search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA) against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database. MS/MS spectra obtained from the three gel portions of the same sample were loaded in PD as fractions of that sample. Database search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, serine/threonine phosphorylation, N-terminal pyroglutamic residue, N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications and the allowance for up to two missed tryptic cleavages. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptides were filtered for high confidence and a minimum length of 6 amino acids; settings of FDR were 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Proteins identified were then filtered for high FDR confidence and for a minimum number of 2 unique peptides, excluding keratins. Grouping was set specifying categorical factor related to the condition AIH, PBC and HC.

### Publication Abstract
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) and primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) are autoimmune liver diseases that target the liver and have a wide spectrum of presentation. A global overview of quantitative variations on the salivary proteome in presence of these two pathologies is investigated in this study. The acid-insoluble salivary fraction of AIH and PBC patients, and healthy controls (HCs), was analyzed using a gel-based bottom-up proteomic approach combined with a robust machine learning statistical analysis of the dataset. The abundance of Arginase, Junction plakoglobin, Desmoplakin, Hexokinase-3 and Desmocollin-1 decreased, while that of BPI fold-containing family A member 2 increased in AIHp compared to HCs; the abundance of Gelsolin, CD14, Tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 2, Clusterin, Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins A2/B1, Cofilin-1 and BPI fold-containing family B member 2 increased in PBCp compared to HCs. The abundance of Hornerin decreased in both AIHp and PBCp with respect to HCs and provided an area under the ROC curve of 0.939. Machine learning analysis confirmed the feasibility of the salivary proteome to discriminate groups of subjects based on AIH or PBC occurrence as previously suggested by our group. The topology-based functional enrichment analysis performed on these potential salivary biomarkers highlights an enrichment of terms mostly related to the immune system, but also with a strong involvement in liver fibrosis process and with antimicrobial activity.

### Keywords
Autoimmune liver diseases, Autoimmune hepatitis, Primary biliary cholangitis, Lc-ms/ms, Saliva, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Giulia Guadalupi

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Manconi
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari


