### Accession
PXD037959

### Title
Proteomic analysis of proteins related to defense responses in Arabidopsis plants transformed with the rolB oncogene

### Description
During Agrobacterium rhizogenes–plant interaction, the rolB gene is transferred into the plant genome and is stably inherited in the plant’s offspring. Among the numerous effects of rolB on plant metabolism, including the activation of secondary metabolism, its effect on plant defense systems has not been sufficiently studied. Here, we performed a proteomic analysis of rolB-expressing Arabidopsis plants with a particular focus on defense proteins. In rolB plants, a reduced amount of scaffold proteins RACK1A, RACK1B, and RACK1C, known as receptors for activated C-kinase 1, was found. Proteomic analysis showed that rolB could potentially suppress the plant immune system by suppressing the RNA-binding proteins GRP7, CP29B, and CP31B, similar to the action of type III bacterial effectors. At the same time, rolB plants induce massive biosynthesis of protective proteins VSP1, VSP2, and PR4, which are markers of the activated jasmonate pathway. Moreover, rolB plants activate all components of the PYK10 defense complex of the endoplasmic reticulum involved in the metabolism of glucosinolates. We hypothesized that various defense systems activated by rolB are aimed at protecting the host plant from competing phytopathogens in order to create an effective ecological niche for A. rhizogenes. A RolB → RACK1A signaling module has been proposed that can exert most of the rolB-mediated effects on plant physiology and biochemistry.

### Sample Protocol
2-D Gel electrophoresis and quantification of protein expression Proteins were isolated from 1 g fresh weight of A. thaliana plants using a phenol extraction methanol/ammonium acetate precipitation method as described (Bulgakov et al., 2018). Protein from each extraction type was quantified using Bradford assay.  For isoelectric focusing, dried protein pellets were dissolved in IPG buffer, containing 9.5 M urea with tiourea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 65 mM DTT, 2% Pharmalyte pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and 0.01% w/v bromophenol blue. Protein probe diluted in IPG buffer was loaded to 18-cm Immobiline DryStrip pH 3-10 NL (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations by passive rehydration for 12 h at 20°C. IEF was performed in a Protean IEF Cell (Bio-Rad) for 60,000 V-h as described (Bulgakov et al., 2018). For SDS-PAGE, 12% polyacrylamide gels with 4% stacking gels were run in a Protean II xi cell (Bio-Rad). The gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (ThermoFisher Scientific). The set of three control and three experimental gels were used in the analysis.  Protein Expression Gels were scanned using the PharosFX Plus System (Bio-Rad). PDQuest 8.0.1 Advanced software (Bio-Rad) was used for analysis of protein maps. The Spot Detection Wizard was used to select the parameters for spot detection, such as a faint spot and a large spot cluster. The results of automated spot detection were checked and manually corrected. On average, 1,700 protein spots were resolved on 2-D gels of Arabidopsis plant, 300 of them were identified by MALDI MS. Proteins whose quantity difference was reliable changed in rolB-transformed plants are represented in Tables 1 and 2. Finally, it was identified 77 upregulated and 64 downregulated proteins. RolB protein was also detected in total protein fractions of transformed plants (Supplementary Dataset S3).- A local regression model (Loess) was used for normalization of spot intensity. The protein expression was accessed using PDQuest 8.0.1 Advanced software and was presented as mean total intensity of a defined spot in a replicate gel group. Spot quantity is the sum of the intensities of pixels inside the boundary. Fold of protein expression change was accessed based on mean protein intensity. For quantitative differentiation, a 1.4-fold change or higher in the average spot intensity was regarded as significant. Statistical significance of differences was assessed using Student’s t test at a significance level of 0.05 in three replicates.

### Data Protocol
Experimental design and Statistical rationale Three biological experiments were carried out; out of which we present the results of the most representative experiment with the largest number of proteins visualized. The total number of samples analyzed by MALDI was 280. The number of technical replicates was 2-3 (up to 5 for important proteins). Proteomics data were confirmed by analysis of gene expression. Individual protein spots selected on the basis of image-analysis output were excised and digested in-gel with trypsin (Promega) as previously described (Bulgakov et al., 2018). For MALDI-TOF identification, 0.5-1 μl of the sample (50% solution of acetonitrile in water, 0.1% TFA) was placed on a ground steel MALDI target plate or AnchorChip or SmallAnchor (depending on the protein quantity), and 0.5-1 μl of the matrix (α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid) (Bruker Daltonics) was added. For LC-ESI-MS/MS, 10-μl protein samples dissolved in water containing 0.1% TFA were used.  MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry and Protein Identification All mass spectra were acquired with an Autoflex (Bruker Daltonics) MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer with a nitrogen laser operated in the positive reflector mode (standard method RP 700-3500 Da.par) under the control of FlexControl software (version 3.4; Bruker Daltonics). The analysis was performed in the automatic mode (AutoXecute – automatic Run). The spectra were externally calibrated using the CalibratePeptideStandards.FAMSMethod and a standard calibration mixture (Protein Calibration Standard I, Bruker Daltonics). The data files were transferred to Flexanalysis software version 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics) for automated peak extraction. Assignment of the first monoisotopic signals in the spectra was performed automatically using the signal detection algorithm SNAP (Bruker Daltonics). For MS and MS/MS analyses, we used the PMF.FAMSMethod and SNAP_full_process.FALIFTMethod, respectively. Each spectrum was obtained by averaging 1500-5000 laser shots (300 shots in a step) acquired at the minimum laser power. The data were analyzed using BioTools (version 3.2; Bruker Daltonics). A peptide mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were adopted for database searches. The m/z spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana NCBInr and SwissProt databases using the Mascot search engine. Threshold score was 40. Further data were analyzed using UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/) and other specialized databases and programs as indicated below.

### Publication Abstract
During <i>Agrobacterium rhizogenes</i>-plant interaction, the <i>rolB</i> gene is transferred into the plant genome and is stably inherited in the plant's offspring. Among the numerous effects of <i>rolB</i> on plant metabolism, including the activation of secondary metabolism, its effect on plant defense systems has not been sufficiently studied. In this work, we performed a proteomic analysis of <i>rolB</i>-expressing <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> plants with particular focus on defense proteins. We found a total of 77 overexpressed proteins and 64 underexpressed proteins in <i>rolB-</i>transformed plants using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and MALDI mass spectrometry. In the <i>rolB</i>-transformed plants, we found a reduced amount of scaffold proteins RACK1A, RACK1B, and RACK1C, which are known as receptors for activated C-kinase 1. The proteomic analysis showed that <i>rolB</i> could suppress the plant immune system by suppressing the RNA-binding proteins GRP7, CP29B, and CP31B, which action are similar to the action of type-III bacterial effectors. At the same time, <i>rolB</i> plants induce the massive biosynthesis of protective proteins VSP1 and VSP2, as well as pathogenesis-related protein PR-4, which are markers of the activated jasmonate pathway. The increased contents of glutathione-S-transferases F6, F2, F10, U19, and DHAR1 and the osmotin-like defense protein OSM34 were found. The defense-associated protein PCaP1, which is required for oligogalacturonide-induced priming and immunity, was upregulated. Moreover, <i>rolB</i>-transformed plants showed the activation of all components of the PYK10 defense complex that is involved in the metabolism of glucosinolates. We hypothesized that various defense systems activated by <i>rolB</i> protect the host plant from competing phytopathogens and created an effective ecological niche for <i>A. rhizogenes</i>. A RolB &#x2192; RACK1A signaling module was proposed that might exert most of the <i>rolB</i>-mediated effects on plant physiology. Our proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037959.

### Keywords
Pyk10 complex, Arabidopsis, Rolb plant oncogene, Rack1a, Proteomics, Plant defense

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology and Soil Science, Far East Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok-22, 690022, Russia
Lab. of Bioengineering, Federal Scientific Center of the East Asia Terrestrial Biodiversity, Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 159  Stoletiya  Street,  Vladivostok, 690022, Russia

### Submitter
Dmitriy Bulgakov

### Lab Head
Dr Victor P. Bulgakov
Lab. of Bioengineering, Federal Scientific Center of the East Asia Terrestrial Biodiversity, Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 159  Stoletiya  Street,  Vladivostok, 690022, Russia


