### Accession
PXD031159

### Title
Uncover New Reactivity of Genetically Encoded Alkyl Bromide Unnatural Amino Acids

### Description
Genetically encoded unnatural amino acids (Uaas) with electrophilic moieties are excellent tools to investigate protein-protein interactions (PPIs) both in vitro and in vivo. These Uaas, including a series of alkyl bromide-based Uaas, mainly target cysteine residues to form protein-protein cross-links. Although some reactivities towards lysine and tyrosine residues have been reported, a comprehensive understanding of their reactivity towards a broad range of nucleophilic amino acids is lacking. Here we used a recently developed OpenUaa search engine to perform an in-depth analysis of mass spec data generated for Thioredoxin and its direct binding proteins cross-linked with an alkyl bromide-based Uaa, BprY. The analysis showed that, besides cysteine residues, BprY also targeted a broad range of nucleophilic amino acids. We validated this broad reactivity of BprY with Affibody/Z protein complex. We then successfully applied BprY to map a binding interface between SUMO2 and SUMO-interacting motifs (SIMs). BprY was further applied to probe SUMO2 interaction partners. We identified 264 SUMO2 binders, including several validated SUMO2 binders and many new binders. Our data demonstrated that BprY can be effectively used to probe protein-protein interfaces even without cysteine residues, which will greatly expand the power of BprY in studying PPIs.

### Sample Protocol
MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (ThermoFisher) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 system. Mobile phase A and B were water and 80% acetonitrile, respectively, with 0.1% formic acid. Digested peptides were loaded directly onto analytical column (75 μm × 20 cm, 1.9 μm C18, 5 μm tip) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All peptide samples were separated using a linear gradient of 6–22% B for 38 min, 22–35% B for 17 min, 35–90% B in 2 min, 90% B for 1 min, 100% B for 2 min. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 350 to 1500 m/z at 60,000 FWHM resolution with a 1 × 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The instrument was set to run in top-speed mode with 1-s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, tandem MS was then performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 3 to 7 of greater than 1 × 105 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole at 1.6 m/z. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was applied with 27% collision energy and resulting fragments detected in the Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 15,000. The maximum injection time limited was 30 ms and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a 10-ppm mass tolerance around the precursor.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted by parsing from RAW file. Datasets of model proteins were searched against the corresponding proteins by OpenUaa. OpenUaa was also used to search data of two-step purified Trx sample and SUMO interaction protein sample against E. coli proteome and human proteome downloaded from the UniProt database and the reversed decoy proteins, separately. OpenUAA search parameters: 5% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, variable modification Cys 57.02146, and three maximum number of missed cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
Genetically encoded non-canonical amino acids (ncAAs) with electrophilic moieties are excellent tools to investigate protein-protein interactions (PPIs) both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. These ncAAs, including a series of alkyl bromide-based ncAAs, mainly target cysteine residues to form protein-protein cross-links. Although some reactivities towards lysine and tyrosine residues have been reported, a comprehensive understanding of their reactivity towards a broad range of nucleophilic amino acids is lacking. Here we used a recently developed OpenUaa search engine to perform an in-depth analysis of mass spec data generated for Thioredoxin and its direct binding proteins cross-linked with an alkyl bromide-based ncAA, BprY. The analysis showed that, besides cysteine residues, BprY also targeted a broad range of nucleophilic amino acids. We validated this broad reactivity of BprY with Affibody/Z protein complex. We then successfully applied BprY to map a binding interface between SUMO2 and SUMO-interacting motifs (SIMs). BprY was further applied to probe SUMO2 interaction partners. We identified 264 SUMO2 binders, including several validated SUMO2 binders and many new binders. Our data demonstrated that BprY can be effectively used to probe protein-protein interaction interfaces even without cysteine residues, which will greatly expand the power of BprY in studying PPIs.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Genetic code expansion, Unnatural amino acid, Protein-protein interactions, And sumo interactome

### Affiliations
Zhejiang university
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Xin Shu

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Shu
Zhejiang University


