### Accession
PXD018322

### Title
The Bloom Syndrome Complex Senses RPA-Coated Single-Stranded DNA to Restart Stalled Replication Forks

### Description
The Bloom syndrome helicase BLM interacts with topoisomerase IIIa (TOP3A), RMI1 and RMI2 to form the BTR complex, which dissolves double Holliday junctions to produce non-crossover products during homologous recombination (HR). BLM also promotes DNA-end resection and stalled replication fork restart. However, it is still unclear how the activities of the BTR complex are regulated in cells. Here, we identify multiple highly conserved short linear peptide motifs within the BTR complex that interact cooperatively with RPA. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RPA-binding is essential for stable recruitment of BLM to DNA damage sites and for stalled fork restart, but not for its roles in HR. Disruption of RPA-binding thus constitutes a novel separation-of-function mutation of the BTR complex, and suggest a model in which BTR contains the intrinsic ability to measure levels of RPA-ssDNA at replication forks, which controls its recruitment and activation in response to replication stress.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated peptides (GenScript) were bound to streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads M-280 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HeLa nuclear extracts (Ipracell) were diluted 1:1 with dilution buffer (300 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaF, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.2% Igepal CA-630, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and cleared by centrifugation. Dynabead-conjugated peptides were incubated with clarified extracts with end-to-end mixing at 4°C for 2 hr. Beads were washed with peptide pulldown buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM NaF, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% Igepal CA-630, 10% glycerol, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), before elution in 2X SDS sample buffer for mass spectrometry or SDS-PAGE. Peptides were biotinylated on the N-terminus, with the following sequences: motif 1 (SGSG-KKLEFSSSPDSLSTINDWDDMDDFDTS), motif 2 (SGSG-DYDTDFVPPSPEEII and SGSG-DYDTDFVPP-[pSer]-PEEII), motif 3 (SGSG-DIDNFDIDDFDDDDDWE), motif 4 (SGSG-ANSKLGIMAPPKPINRPFLKPSYAFS), motif 5 (SGSG-LGPSDEELLASLDENDELTAN), and motif 6 (SGSG-DGELDDFSLEEALLLEETVQKE). Mass spectrometric analyses of peptide pulldowns were performed as described previously (Leimbacher et al., 2019). Briefly, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from beads with 2x concentrated SDS buffer followed by two rounds of chloroform-methanol precipitation and in solution digestion with trypsin. Desalted peptides were injected into a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC and Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples were separated with 250nl/min flow on an EASY-Spray column (50cm) with a gradient of 2-35% Acetonitrile in 5% DMSO/0.1% Formic Acid. MS1 data were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 and an AGC target of 3E6. Selected precursors were fragmented with 28% normalized collision energy and fragment masses acquired (MS2) with a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 1E5. Selected precursors were excluded for 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS data was converted into mgf files by MS-Convert (ref https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2377) and analysed with Mascot 2.5 (matrixscience). We used the homo Sapiens Swissprot/Trembl database (retrieved 15.10.2014) for protein identification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment tolerance to 0.05 Da. Trypsin was selected as enzyme (1 missed cleavage) and carboamidomethyl (C)as fixed modification and Oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ)as variable modification. Peptide identifications with an ion score of under 20 were dismissed. Protein identification confidence was set to 1% FDR at identity or homology threshold

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bloom syndrome, Blm, Rpa, Homologous recombination, Replication stress, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University
1.MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK 2.CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew N. Blackford
1.MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK 2.CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK


