### Accession
PXD018302

### Title
VESTIGIAL-LIKE 1 IS A SHARED TARGETABLE CANCER-PLACENTA ANTIGEN  EXPRESSED BY PANCREATIC AND BASAL-LIKE BREAST CANCERS

### Description
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-based cancer immunotherapies have shown great promise for inducing clinical regression by targeting tumor-associated antigens (TAA). To expand the TAA landscape of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), we performed tandem mass spectrometry analysis of HLA class I-bound peptides from tumor specimens of 35 PDAC patients. This led to the identification of a shared HLA-A*0101 restricted peptide derived from co-transcriptional activator Vestigial-like 1 (VGLL1), a novel putative TAA demonstrating overexpression in multiple tumor types and low or absent transcript expression in essential normal tissues. VGLL1-specific CTLs isolated and expanded from the blood of a male PDAC patient showed the capacity to recognize and kill in an antigen-specific manner a majority of HLA-A*0101 allogeneic tumor cell lines derived not only from PDAC, but also bladder, ovarian, gastric, lung and basal-like breast cancers. Gene expression profiling revealed that VGLL1 is a member of a unique group of cancer-placenta antigens (CPA) that may constitute immunotherapeutic TAA targets for patients with multiple different cancer types.

### Sample Protocol
Patient-derived laparoscopic wedge biopsies, xenografts (PDX), or cell lines were lysed using Triton X-100 and cell lysates incubated overnight at 4oC with 50 g of pan-HLA-ABC specific mAb W6/32 for every 10 mg of protein. Protein A/G Ultralink resin beads were used to immunoprecipate HLA class I molecules and HLA-bound peptides were then eluted with 0.1M acetic acid. HLA-A,B,C isolation was confirmed by Western blot analysis, then HLA-positive elutes were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). HLA class I protein recovery was semi-quantitatively assessed by rating Western blot band intensity on a scale from 0 (not detectable) to 4 (highest intensity). Molecular weight filters were employed if tumor specimens were of sufficient size (>250 mg), but sample losses precluded this technique with smaller specimens. Eluted peptides were analyzed by high-sensitivity LC-MS/MS using a Nano-Cap LC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano) interfaced to a tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Fusion) using ESI.  Chromatography was performed using 0.1% formic acid in water as A solvent, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as B solvent.  Gradient initial conditions, 2% B for 5 minutes, gradient to 35% B over 40 minutes, 1 minute ramp to 80% B, hold for 5 min, return to 2% B for re-equilibration.  A 15 cm Column was packed with Phenomenex Kinetex 2.6 micron XB-C18, 100 angstrom particles.  MS conditions electrospray source, full MS1 range was 265 – 1500 m/z at 240,000 resolution AGC settings, target ions 5-e5, maximum time 100 ms, for doubly charged precursors the selection range was limited to 400 – 750 m/z, for triply charged precursors the selection range was limited to 270 – 500 m/z.  MS/MS was performed in the linear ion trap, AGC settings, target ions 4-e5, maximum time, 300 ms, isolation window 0.7 da, cycle time between master scans, 1.5 seconds, number of precursors, automatic, dynamic exclusion time 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
To analyze the acquired MS/MS spectra, the Mascot algorithm was utilized to search the spectra against the SwissProt complete human protein database (updated 9/2018), which provided potential matches to conventionally annotated peptides. In selected cases, targeted-MS/MS analysis was performed to confirm TAA peptide identity. For these analyses, retention-time windows for 13C/15N isotope-labeled synthetic peptide standards were pre-determined by MS analysis of the synthetic peptides, then targeted methods for searching TAA peptides were constructed using mass windows of 3 Da around each m/z. Peptide spectra are shown with y+ fragment ions color-coded blue, b+ fragment ions red, and non-matching fragments in grey. The raw immunopeptidome MS files have been uploaded to the online PRIDE database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/)

### Publication Abstract
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-based cancer immunotherapies have shown great promise for inducing clinical regressions by targeting tumor-associated antigens (TAA). To expand the TAA landscape of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), we performed tandem mass spectrometry analysis of HLA class I-bound peptides from 35 PDAC patient tumors. This identified a shared HLA-A*0101 restricted peptide derived from co-transcriptional activator Vestigial-like 1 (VGLL1) as a putative TAA demonstrating overexpression in multiple tumor types and low or absent expression in essential normal tissues. Here we show that VGLL1-specific CTLs expanded from the blood of a PDAC patient could recognize and kill in an antigen-specific manner a majority of HLA-A*0101 allogeneic tumor cell lines derived not only from PDAC, but also bladder, ovarian, gastric, lung, and basal-like breast cancers. Gene expression profiling reveals VGLL1 as a member of a unique group of cancer-placenta antigens (CPA) that may constitute immunotherapeutic targets for patients with multiple cancer types.

### Keywords
Human, Pdac, Mhc

### Affiliations
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancar Center
The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Melanoma Med Oncology,  Houston, TX 77045

### Submitter
Gregory Lizee

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Lizee
The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Melanoma Med Oncology,  Houston, TX 77045


