### Accession
PXD025745

### Title
The MICOS-MIB complex member PERM1 connects mitochondria with the sarcolemma via ankyrin B

### Description
Skeletal muscle subsarcolemmal mitochondria (SSM) and intermyofibrillar mitochondria subpopulations have distinct metabolic activity and sensitivity, though the mechanisms that localize SSM to peripheral areas of muscle fibers are poorly understood. A protein interaction study and complexome profiling identified PERM1 interacts with the MICOS-MIB complex. Ablation of Perm1 in mice reduced muscle force, decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and complex I activity, and reduced the numbers of SSM in skeletal muscle. We demonstrate PERM1 interacts with the intracellular adaptor protein ankyrin B (ANKB) that connects the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane. In addition, we discovered a C-terminal transmembrane helix that anchors PERM1 into the outer mitochondrial membrane. We conclude PERM1 functions in the MICOS-MIB complex and acts as an adapter to connect the mitochondria with the sarcolemma via ANKB.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations: To immunoprecipitate PERM1 in TREx-293 cells, cells stably expressing Perm1-FLAG or the control To5-STOP-FLAG vector were cultivated to 70-80% confluency, treated with 10 µg/mL doxycycline for 15 h, and lysed. 40 µL anti-FLAG (Miltenyi) beads were added. The mixtures were incubated for 60 min at 4 °C with rotation and separated using the magnetic µMACS system (Miltenyi) at 4 °C. The µColumns were equilibrated with lysis buffer, loaded with the lysate-bead-suspension, washed thrice with 200 µL lysis buffer, and washed thrice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Elution was performed at RT by applying 20 µL urea buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea) for 10 min and collecting the eluate with 50 µL urea buffer. Finally, samples were prepared for MS analysis by in-solution/on-bead digestion. To immunoprecipitate PERM1 in C2C12 cells, 6 × 105 cells were seeded on day 1. On day 2, the cells were transfected with Perm1-FLAG or the control vector TO5-FLAG-STOP using GeneJuice® Transfection Reagent (Novagen). Cells were harvested after 24h and immunoprecipitated as described for above.  To immunoprecipitate endogenous PERM1 from tissue, 40 mg samples TA muscles and hearts from wild-type mice were lysed. Two aliquots of 800 µg protein per sample were used: 40 µL Protein A beads and 0.9 µg PERM1 antibody was added to one aliquots; only 40 µL Protein A beads were added to the control sample. Immunoprecipitation steps were performed as described above.  To immunoprecipitate AnkB, cells stably expressing Perm1-FLAG were cultivated to 60-70% confluency prior to transfection with AnkyrinB-2XHA or control empty HA vector using the calcium phosphate transfection method. In brief, 8 µg of DNA were incubated with 37 µg of 2 M CaCl2 and 300 µg 2x HBS (50 mM HEPES, 280 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM NaH2PO4, pH 7.0) for 30 min before the mixture was added to the cultured cells and incubated for 24 h. After 9-10 h, the media was exchanged to media containing 10 µg/mL doxycycline. Immunoprecipitation was performed using the magnetic µMACS system (Miltenyi) as described above with anti-HA beads (Miltenyi). Immunoprecipitation of the ΔTM mutant of PERM1 was performed in HEK-293T cells using the calcium phosphate transfection method as described above.  In-gel digestion and sample purification: Proteomic samples were prepared using a modified version of the in-gel digestion protocol by {Shevchenko, 2006 #222}. Briefly, lysates were precipitated overnight in four volumes (v:v) of ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were extracted at 13,000 g for 10 min and dissolved in Bolt LDS sample buffer. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. The mixtures were heated at 70 °C for 10 min, IAA was added to a final concentration of 55 mM and incubated in the dark for 20 min. Proteins were separated using Bolt 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus gels, Coomassie-stained, and each lane was cut into six to ten slices. Each slice was chopped into 1 mm cubes, destained with 50% ACN and dehydrated with 100% ACN, digested with 3 ng/µL trypsin/LysC solution (90% trypsin/10% LysC) for 30 min at 4 °C, 50 mM ABC was added to the swollen gel pieces, incubated overnight at 37 °C and digestion was stopped by acidifying the samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides were extracted with increasing concentrations of ACN and organic compounds were evaporated using a SpeedVac concentrator Plus. Acidified samples were desalted using Stop and Go extraction tips {Rappsilber, 2007 #207}.  In-solution/on-bead digestion: Eluates from immunoprecipitation experiments were prepared for MS analysis by in-solution/on-bead digestion. Urea-containing samples were reduced by applying DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM for 1 h at RT, alkylated with a final concentration of 40 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at RT, digested with 1 µL LysC for 2-3 h at RT, diluted with 50 mM ABC to a urea concentration of 2 M, incubated with 1 µL 0.5 mg/mL trypsin overnight at RT, acidified to 1% FA and purified using StageTips.  MS-based proteome analysis: Proteome samples were analyzed using a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry set up in a Q-Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ (Thermo Fisher). Chromatographic peptide separation was achieved on PoroShell 120 packed 50 cm analytical columns coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system and a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). In-gel digested samples were analyzed over a 150 min gradient. Full MS spectra (300–1,750 m/z) were recorded at a resolution (R) of 70,000, maximum injection time (max. IT) of 20 ms and AGC target of 3e6. The ten most abundant ion peptides in each full MS scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at nominal collisional energy (NCE) of 25. MS2 spectra were recorded at R = 17,500, maximum IT of 60 ms, and AGC target of 5e5. Samples derived from immunoprecipitations and subsequent in-solution/on-bead digestion were measured over a 100-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and analysis Raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant analysis software and the implemented Andromeda software (1.5.3.8) {Cox, 2008 #139;Cox, 2011 #140}. Peptides and proteins were identified using the mouse UniProt database with common contaminants. All MaxQuant parameters were set to default values. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme; a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. For SILAC, peptide pairs were quantified by setting Lys6 as the heavy label. Enzyme specificity was set to LysC with an additional allowance of cleavage N-terminal to proline. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as a fixed modification. Except for the SILAC-labelled samples, the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantify the measured peptides and the “match between runs” option was enabled to quantify peptides with a missing MS2 spectrum. A minimum ratio count of 2 was used for SILAC quantification.  Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (1.5.5.3-1.6.5.0) software. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were excluded, and values were log2 transformed. Two-sided t-tests were used to identify differentially expressed proteins between genotypes (Perm1-/- or wild type) or conditions (immunoprecipitation or control). Identified peptides were annotated with the following Gene Ontology terms: Biological Process, Molecular Function, Cellular Compartment, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes terms. Graphical visualizations were achieved using Instant Clue software {Nolte, 2018 #192}.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle subsarcolemmal mitochondria (SSM) and intermyofibrillar mitochondria subpopulations have distinct metabolic activity and sensitivity, though the mechanisms that localize SSM to peripheral areas of muscle fibers are poorly understood. A protein interaction study and complexome profiling identifies PERM1 interacts with the MICOS-MIB complex. Ablation of Perm1 in mice reduces muscle force, decreases mitochondrial membrane potential and complex I activity, and reduces the numbers of SSM in skeletal muscle. We demonstrate PERM1 interacts with the intracellular adaptor protein ankyrin B (ANKB) that connects the cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane. Moreover, we identify a C-terminal transmembrane helix that anchors PERM1 into the outer mitochondrial membrane. We conclude PERM1 functions in the MICOS-MIB complex and acts as an adapter to connect the mitochondria with the sarcolemma via ANKB.

### Keywords
Mitochondria; skeletal muscle; perm1; proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany


