### Accession
PXD021539

### Title
Identification of drivers of breast cancer invasion by secretome analysis: insight into CTGF signaling

### Description
An altered consistency of tumor microenvironment facilitates the progression of the tumor towards metastasis. Here we combine data from secretome and proteome analysis using mass spectrometry with microarray data from mesenchymal transformed breast cancer cells (MCF-7-EMT) to elucidate the drivers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cell invasion. Suppression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) reduced invasion in 2D and 3D invasion assays and expression of transforming growth factor-beta-induced protein ig-h3 (TGFBI), Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and lysyl oxidase (LOX), while the adhesion of cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) in mesenchymal transformed breast cancer cells is increased. In contrast, an enhanced expression of CTGF leads to an increased 3D invasion, expression of fibronectin 1 (FN1), secreted protein acidic and cysteine rich (SPARC) and CD44 and a reduced cell ECM adhesion (fig. 1). Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist Triptorelin reduces CTGF expression in a Ras homolog family member A (RhoA)-dependent manner. Our results suggest that CTGF drives breast cancer cell invasion in vitro and therefore could be an attractive therapeutic target for drug development to prevent the spread of breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Breast cancer cells were seeded (0.75 x 105) in Bio-one ThinCert (Greiner Bio-one, Kremsmünster, Austria) and Osteosarcoma cells were seeded (1,3 x10e5) in 6 wells. After 24 hours cells were deprived of FBS and co-cultured for 96 hours. Cell medium was precipitated with acetone. Medium was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13300 rpm at 4°C and five times volume on pre-cooled (-20°C) was added to samples. Samples were vortexed and protein precipitation performed for 2 hours at -20°C. Protein was pelleted by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 13300 rpm at 4°C. Protein pellets were washed with ethanol (80%, pre-cooled at -20°C), centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13300 rpm at 4°C, and protein pellets were air dried.  Cell lysates were generated by cutting membranes from insert and recovering cells with Recovery solution (Corning, New York, NY, USA) for 1 hour at 4°C while shaking. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in 30 µL lysis buffer.  For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from comparable samples were pooled to a total amount of 100 µg, and separated into eight fractions using a reversed phase spin column (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific). All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Schweiz).   Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.42 µg/µl. For each analysis 2.1 µg of digested protein were enriched on a precolumn (0.18 mm ID x 20 mm, Symmetry C18, 5 µm, Waters, Milford/MA, U.S.A) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, HSS T3, 1.8 µm, Waters) using a 90 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v: v) at 300 nl min-1.  Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top25 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 350–1250 accumulated for 350 ms at a resolution of 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Three technical replicates per reversed phase fraction were analyzed to construct a spectral library.  For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 65 variable size windows 70 across the 400-1,050 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 350–1400 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 100 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 2.75 s. Two replicate injections were acquired for each biological sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. MS/MS spectra from combined qualitative analyses were searched against UniProtKB human reference proteome (revision 04-2018, 93.661 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to identify 217 proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 5% in the secretome, and 2,033 proteins at an FDR of 1% for whole proteome analysis. We consciously allowed for a larger FDR in the secretome analysis since identified candidate proteins were further validated during SWATH data extraction and by biochemical experimentation. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from MS/MS library at an FDR of 1% 71. Resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide and ﬁnally protein area values, which were used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signaling, Breast cancer, Secretome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics


