### Accession
PXD037755

### Title
Key changes in bovine milk immunoglobulin G during lactation: NeuAc sialylation is a hallmark of colostrum immunoglobulin G N-glycosylation Key changes in bovine milk immunoglobulin G during lactation: NeuAc sialylation is a hallmark of colostrum immunoglobulin G N-glycosylation

### Description
We monitored longitudinal changes in bovine milk IgG in samples from four cows at 9 time points in between 0.5-28 days following calving. We used peptide-centric LC-MS/MS on proteolytic digests of whole bovine milk, resulting in the combined identification of 212 individual bovine milk protein sequences, with IgG making up >50% of the protein content of every 0.5 d colostrum sample, which reduced to ≤3% in mature milk. In parallel, we analysed IgG captured from the bovine milk samples to characterise its N-glycosylation, using dedicated methods for bottom-up glycoproteomics employing product ion-triggered hybrid fragmentation. The bovine milk IgG N-glycosylation profile was revealed to be very heterogeneous, consisting of >40 glycoforms. Furthermore, these N-glycosylation profiles changed substantially over the period of lactation, but consistently across the four individual cows. We identified NeuAc sialylation as the key abundant characteristic of bovine colostrum IgG, significantly decreasing in the first days of lactation, and barely detectable in mature bovine milk IgG. We also report, for the first time to our knowledge, the identification of subtype IgG3 in bovine milk, alongside the better-documented IgG1 and IgG2. The detailed molecular characteristics we describe of the bovine milk IgG, and their dynamic changes during lactation, are important not only for the fundamental understanding of the calf’s immune development, but also for understanding bovine milk and its bioactive components in the context of human nutrition.

### Sample Protocol
IgG was affinity-captured from the bovine milk samples. The purified proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated with chloroacetamide, and subsequently digested with a mixture of proteomics-grade trypsin and LysC. The resulting peptides were cleaned by solid-phase extraction, and were analysed by bottom-up proteomics employing HCD, oxonium ion-triggered EThcD, and oxonium ion-triggered stepped HCD, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched with Byonic v 4.5.2 for the identification of glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
We monitored longitudinal changes in bovine milk IgG in samples from four cows at 9 time points in between 0.5 and 28&#xa0;days following calving. We used peptide-centric LC-MS/MS on proteolytic digests of whole bovine milk, resulting in the combined identification of 212 individual bovine milk protein sequences, with IgG making up &gt;50 percent of the protein content of every 0.5 d colostrum sample, which reduced to &#x2264;3 percent in mature milk. In parallel, we analyzed IgG captured from the bovine milk samples to characterize its N-glycosylation, using dedicated methods for bottom-up glycoproteomics employing product ion-triggered hybrid fragmentation; data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037755. The bovine milk IgG N-glycosylation profile was revealed to be very heterogeneous, consisting of &gt;40 glycoforms. Furthermore, these N-glycosylation profiles changed substantially over the period of lactation, but consistently across the four individual cows. We identified NeuAc sialylation as the key abundant characteristic of bovine colostrum IgG, significantly decreasing in the first days of lactation, and barely detectable in mature bovine milk IgG. We also report, for the first time to our knowledge, the identification of subtype IgG3 in bovine milk, alongside the better-documented IgG1 and IgG2. The detailed molecular characteristics we describe of the bovine milk IgG, and their dynamic changes during lactation, are important not only for the fundamental understanding of the calf's immune development, but also for understanding bovine milk and its bioactive components in the context of human nutrition.

### Keywords
Bovine milk immunoglobulins; bovine colostrum; glycoproteomics; neugc; passive immunity

### Affiliations
1Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Inge Gazi

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
1Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


