### Accession
PXD034046

### Title
Synthetic antibody-derived immunopeptide provides neuroprotection in glaucoma through molecular interaction with retinal protein Histone H3.1

### Description
Glaucoma is a group of optic neuropathies characterized by the progressive degeneration of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) as well as their axons leading to irreversible loss of sight. Medical management of the intraocular pressure (IOP) still represents the gold standard in glaucoma therapy, which only manages a risk factor and does not directly address the neurodegenerative component of this eye disease. Recently, our group showed that antibody derived immunopeptides (encoding complementarity-determining regions, CDRs) provide attractive glaucoma medication candidates and directly interfere its pathogenic mechanisms by different modes of action. In accordance with these findings, the present study showed the synthetic CDR2 peptide (INSDGSSTSYADSVK) significantly increased the RGCs viability in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner (p < 0.05 using a CDR2 concentration of 50 µg/mL). Employing state-of the-art immunoprecipitation experiments, we confirmed that synthetic CDR2 exhibited a high affinity towards the retinal target protein histone H3.1 (HIST1H3A) (p < 0.001 and log2 fold change > 3). Furthermore, virtual docking analyses predicted potential CDR2-specific binding regions of HIST1H3A, which might represent essential PTM sites for epigenetic regulations. Quantitative MS analysis revealed that 39 proteins were significantly changed between CDR2-treated and untreated control retinae (p < 0.05). An up-regulation of proteins involved in the energy production (e.g., ATP5F1B and MT-CO2) as well as the regulatory ubiquitin proteasome system (e.g., PSMC5) was induced by the synthetic CDR2 peptide. On the other hand, metabolic key enzymes (e.g., DDAH1 and MAOB) as well as ER stress-related proteins (e.g., SEC22B and VCP) were found with low abundancy in CDR2-treated retinae and were also partially confirmed by microarray technology. Based on these findings, it can be hypothesized that the specific protein-peptide interaction influences the regulatory epigenetic function of HIST1H3A promoting the neuroprotective mechanism on RGCs in vitro. It also might serve as basis for a synergistic immunotherapy of glaucoma in the future.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of CDR-specific protein interaction partners, the eluate fractions of both bead groups were subjected to further in-solution trypsin digestion and peptide purification as previously described. For the quantitative proteomic analysis of the untreated and CDR-treated retinal explants, the sample preparation protocol was slightly modified. At first, the respective untreated and CDR-treated retinal explants were cultured for 24 h at 37°C and 5% CO2 (n=3 for each group) and were subsequently snap frozen in liquid-nitrogen. Then, the frozen retinal tissues ± treatment were subjected to further homogenization and protein extraction protocol as ascribed in. In brief, 400 µL of T-PER™ buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and 1.4/2.8 mm ceramic balls were added to each sample and treated with the Precellys® 24 homogenizer (VWR, International GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany). Then, the protein-containing supernatant was exchanged into 200 µL of PBS using an Amicon 3 kDa centrifugal filter device (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). A protein measurement of each sample was performed using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit and the Multiscan Ascent photometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and 10 µg of each sample were evaporated in the SpeedVac at 30° C until dryness. The proteins were resolved in 30 µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 3 µL of 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 10 mM ABC were added followed by incubation for 30 min at 56 C. Next, 3 µL of 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 10 mM ABC were added and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. The reduced and alkylated proteins were digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) in 10 mM ABC 10% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37° C overnight and next day quenched with 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA). All samples were evaporated in the SpeedVac at 30° C until dryness and peptide purification was performed using SOLAµTM HRP SPE spin plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS raw data were analyzed with the bioinformatics software MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Protein identification was performed with reviewed SwissProt databases using the taxonomies Homo sapiens (date: 13/04/2021, number of sequences: 20,408) and Sus scrofa (date: 13/04/2021, number of sequences: 1,439). Due to limited access to proper public proteomic databases of the house swine (Sus scrofa), we included the species-related proteomic database of Homo sapiens to increase protein identifications. The following parameters were used for the database search: peptide ion mass tolerance of ± 30 ppm, ion fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, tryptic cleavage, maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, acetylation (N-terminal protein) and oxidation as variable modifications. The MaxQuant-specific feature “match between run” was enabled and all proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Glaucoma is a group of optic neuropathies characterized by the progressive degeneration of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) as well as their axons leading to irreversible loss of sight. Medical management of the intraocular pressure (IOP) still represents the gold standard in glaucoma therapy, which only manages a single risk factor and does not directly address the neurodegenerative component of this eye disease. Recently, our group showed that antibody-derived immunopeptides (encoding complementarity-determining regions, CDRs) provide attractive glaucoma medication candidates and directly interfere its pathogenic mechanisms by different modes of action. In accordance with these findings, the present study showed the synthetic complementary-determining region 2 (CDR2) peptide (INSDGSSTSYADSVK) significantly increased RGC viability <i>in vitro</i> in a concentration-dependent manner (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 using a CDR2 concentration of 50 &#x3bc;g/mL). Employing state-of the-art immunoprecipitation experiments, we confirmed that synthetic CDR2 exhibited a high affinity toward the retinal target protein histone H3.1 (HIST1H3A) (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001 and log2-fold change &gt; 3). Furthermore, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations along with virtual docking analyses predicted potential CDR2-specific binding regions of HIST1H3A, which might represent essential post-translational modification (PTM) sites for epigenetic regulations. Quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of retinas demonstrated 39 proteins significantly affected by CDR2 treatment (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). An up-regulation of proteins involved in the energy production (e.g., ATP5F1B and MT-CO2) as well as the regulatory ubiquitin proteasome system (e.g., PSMC5) was induced by the synthetic CDR2 peptide. On the other hand, CDR2 reduced metabolic key enzymes (e.g., DDAH1 and MAOB) as well as ER stress-related proteins (e.g., SEC22B and VCP) and these data were partially confirmed by microarray technology. Our outcome measurements indicate that specific protein-peptide interactions influence the regulatory epigenetic function of HIST1H3A promoting the neuroprotective mechanism on RGCs <i>in vitro</i>. In addition to IOP management, such synthetic peptides as CDR2 might serve as a synergistic immunotherapy for glaucoma in the future.

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Neuroprotection, Hist1h3a, Cdr2

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany
Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Care Centre Mainz

### Submitter
Carsten Schmelter

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dr. FH Grus
Department of Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany


