### Accession
PXD038941

### Title
Red Algae-Derived Mineral Intervention to Counter Pro-inflammatory Activity in Human Colon Organoids

### Description
Human colon organoids were maintained in culture medium alone or exposed to lipopolysaccharide with a combination of three pro-inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-a, interleukin-1b and interferon-g [LPS-cytokines]) to mimic the environment in the inflamed colon. Untreated organoids and those exposed to LPS-cytokines were concomitantly treated with a multi-mineral product that has previously been shown to improve barrier structure/function. The organoids were subjected to proteomic analysis to obtain a broad view of the protein changes induced by these interventions. In parallel, confocal fluorescence microscopy and trans-epithelial electrical resistance measurements were used to assess barrier structure/function. The LPS-cytokines altered expression of multiple proteins that influence innate immunity and promote inflammation. Most of these were unaffected by the multi-mineral intervention, though a subset of inflammation-related proteins including fibrinogen-b and -g chains, phospholipase A2 and SPARC was down-regulated in the presence of the multi-mineral intervention; another subset of proteins with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant or anti-microbial activity was up-regulated by multi-mineral treatment. When used alone, the multi-mineral intervention strongly up-regulated proteins that contribute to barrier formation and tissue strength. Concomitant treatment with LPS-cytokines did not inhibit barrier formation in response to the multi-mineral intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Colon organoids were isolated from Matrigel using 2mM EDTA for 15 minutes and then exposed to Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) - lysis and extraction buffer (Pierce, # 89901; ThermoFisher Scientific) for protein isolation, as described in our previous reports. Proteomic assessments were conducted by using mass spectrometry-based Tandem Mass Tagging system (TMT, ThermoFisher Scientific) in the Proteomics Resource Facility (PRF) housed in the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan. For this, four subjects were assessed separately using TMT six-plex kits for each subject. First experiment was conducted to assess proteomic signature with LPS-cytokines alone, without any other intervention. Subsequent three experiments were conducted with complete set of samples. Fifty micrograms of organoid protein from each condition was digested separately with trypsin and individual samples labeled with one of six isobaric mass tags according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After labeling, equal amounts of peptide from each condition were mixed together. In order to achieve in-depth characterization of the proteome, the labeled peptides were fractionated using 2D-LC (basic pH reverse-phase separation followed by acidic pH reverse phase) and analyzed on a high-resolution, tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, ThermoFisher Scientific) using conditions optimized at the PRF. MultiNotch MS3 analysis was employed to obtain accurate quantitation of the identified proteins/peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt human protein database (20353 sequences; downloaded on 06/20/2019) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤2% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of detection. Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 6 and <40% isolation interference). Differential protein expression between conditions, normalizing to control (0.25mM calcium) for each subject’s specimens separately was established. Next, the resulting data from the three datasets were combined. Proteins names were retrieved using Uniprot.org, and Reactome v82 (reactome.org) was used for pathway enrichment analysis. Only Proteins with a ≤2% FDR confidence of detection were included in the analyses. The initial analysis was based on an unbiased proteome-wide screen of all proteins modified by LPS-cytokines and Aquamin® intervention in relation to the control. Follow-up analysis involved a targeted approach towards inflammation, differentiation, barrier-related, cell-cell and cell adhesion proteins.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory condition, and continuous inflammatory stimulus may lead to barrier dysfunction. The goal of this study was to assess barrier proteomic expression by a red algae-derived multi-mineral intervention in the absence or presence of pro-inflammatory insult. <b>Methods:</b> Human colon organoids were maintained in a control culture medium alone or exposed to lipopolysaccharide with a combination of three pro-inflammatory cytokines [tumor necrosis factor-&#x3b1;, interleukin-1&#x3b2; and interferon-&#x3b3; (LPS-cytokines)] to mimic the environment in the inflamed colon. Untreated organoids and those exposed to LPS-cytokines were concomitantly treated for 14 days with a multi-mineral product (Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>) that has previously been shown to improve barrier structure/function. The colon organoids were subjected to proteomic analysis to obtain a broad view of the protein changes induced by the two interventions alone and in combination. In parallel, confocal fluorescence microscopy, tissue cohesion and transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) measurements were used to assess barrier structure/function. <b>Results:</b> The LPS-cytokine mix altered the expression of multiple proteins that influence innate immunity and promote inflammation. Several of these were significantly decreased with Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> alone but only a modest decrease in a subset of these proteins was detected by Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> in the presence of LPS-cytokines. Among these, a subset of inflammation-related proteins including fibrinogen-&#x3b2; and -&#x3b3; chains (FGB and FGG), phospholipase A2 (PLA2G2A) and SPARC was significantly downregulated in the presence of Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> (alone and in combination with LPS-cytokines); another subset of proteins with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant or anti-microbial activity was upregulated by Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> treatment. When provided alone, Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> strongly upregulated proteins that contribute to barrier formation and tissue strength. Concomitant treatment with LPS-cytokines did not inhibit barrier formation in response to Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>. Confocal microscopy also displayed increased expression of desmoglein-2 (DSG2) and cadherin-17 (CDH17) with Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>, either alone or in the presence of the pro-inflammatory stimulus. Increased cohesion and TEER with Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup> (alone or in the presence of LPS-cytokines) indicates improved barrier function. <b>Conclusion:</b> Taken together, these findings suggest that multi-mineral intervention (Aquamin<sup>&#xae;</sup>) may provide a novel approach to combating inflammation in the colon by improving barrier structure/function as well as by directly altering the expression of certain pro-inflammatory proteins.

### Keywords
Multi-mineral, Cytokines, Proteomics, Gut barrier, Inflammation, Colon organoids, Lps

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

### Submitter
Muhammad Aslam

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Nadeem Aslam
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109


