### Accession
PXD030901

### Title
Proteins are well-preserved in shells toasted at 300°C revealed by proteomics

### Description
The development of protein anti-degradation strategy is important for their storage at ambient conditions. Despite that it is known that biominerals, typical inorganic-organic composites, can preserve proteins at room temperature for a long time, it is unclear the extent of protein degradation under high temperatures. In this study, we examined protein remaining in the toasted abalone shell under high temperatures (200 and 300 °C) by biomineral proteomics method. Surprisingly, 24 proteins including carbonic anhydrase, hemocyanin, actin can still be identified from shells even after toasting under 300°C, not much decreased compared to that in the 200°C-treated and the native shell. However, the microstructure and composition (both mineral and organic matrix) of shells were altered significantly revealed by scanning electron microscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction. The well-preserved of proteins may be partially due to the sacrifice of mineral/organic interfaces and the formation of nanopores in the shell at high temperatures. Moreover, the extracted proteins from both groups were able to affect calcium carbonate in vitro. This study has potential implications in various fields such as protein storage at high temperatures and palaeoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Two cleaned toasted abalone shells were immersed in 5% sodium hydroxide for 24 h and were subsequently rinsed in DI water to avoid possible contamination from soft tissues adhering to the shell. The fragments were pulverized (~50 g) and were decalcified with 50 mL of 0.8 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, pH 8.0) for 48 h at 4 °C with continuous agitation. AEBSF (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China), an irreversible serine protease inhibitor, was added to prevent protein degradation. For the extraction of EDTA-soluble matrix, the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 30 min at 4 °C and was then desalted by dialysis and ultrafiltration (cutoff 3 K). For the extraction of EDTA-insoluble matrix, the above insoluble pellet was thoroughly rinsed with water and boiled with a denaturing solution (pH 8.0, 30 mM Tris-HCl, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10 mM dithiothreitol) for 10 min. The EDTA-insoluble matrix was desalted by dialysis against DI water and then was concentrated by Millipore tubes (cutoff 3 kDa). The samples were applied on 12% precast SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). The protein concentration was quantified by a BCA assay kit (Pierce). Proteins were stained with Coomassie Blue and the entire protein lane was excised in two pieces, which were completely destained by washing with 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3/acetonitrile (50/50) mixture for 30 min at 37 °C. Reduction was conducted with 50 μL of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 57 °C, followed by alkylation with 50 μL of 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The cut gels were dried in acetonitrile and then treated with 0.4 μg trypsin (Proteomics Grade, Sigma) in 10 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 12 h at 37 °C. The suspension was treated with 50 μL of 1% formic acid at 30 °C for 30 min under agitation. The digests were then lyophilized and suspended in 30 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 4% acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis. Five μL of the samples were injected into the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer with Dionex U-3000 Rapid Separation nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific) for analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired automatically using Analyst QS 1.1 software (Applied Biosystems) following an MS survey scan over m/z 350-1500 at a resolution of 60,000 for full scan and 2, 000 for MS/MS measurements. The LC-MS/MS data were searched against the protein database downloaded from Mollusca category in the Uniprot database using a Mascot 2.1 search engine with carbamidoethylated cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and tryptophan as variable modifications. No other post-translation modification has been performed. The peptide MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 0.5 Da. Finally, sequences with mascot scores of at least 5.0 and with at least two matched peptide fragments were considered valid. Conserved domains of proteins were predicted using SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shell matrix proteins; biomineralization; high temperature

### Affiliations
Hohai University, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
Chuang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chuang Liu
Hohai University, Nanjing, China


