### Accession
PXD027232

### Title
SIRT7-induced PHF5A de-crotonylation regulates ageing progress through alternative splicing-mediated downregulation of CDK2

### Description
Dysregulation of protein post-translational modification (PTM) can lead to a variety of pathological process, such as abnormal sperm development, malignant tumorigenesis, depression, and ageing process. SIRT7 is a NAD + dependent protein deacetylase. Besides known deacetylation, SIRT7 may also have the capacity to remove other acylation. However, the roles of SIRT7-induced other de-acylation in ageing is still largely unknown.  Here, we found that the expression of SIRT7 was significantly increased in senescent fibroblasts and aged tissues. Knockdown or overexpression of SIRT7 can inhibit or promote fibroblast senescence. Knockdown of SIRT7 led to increased pan- lysine crotonylation (Kcr) levels in senescent fibroblasts. Using modern mass spectrometry (MS) technology, we identified 5149 Kcr sites across 1541 protein in senescent fibroblasts, providing the largest crotonylome dataset to date in senescent cells. Specifically, among the identified protein, we found SIRT7 de-crotonylated PHF5A, an alternative splicing factor, at K25. De-crotonylation of PHF5A K25 contributed to decreased CDK2 expression by Retained Intron (RI) induced abnormal alternative splicing, thereby accelerating fibroblasts senescence, supporting a key role of PHF5A K25 de-crotonylation in ageing. Collectively, our data revealed the molecular mechanism of SIRT7-induced k25 decrotonylation of PHF5A regulating aging, and provide new ideas and molecular targets for drug intervention in cellular ageing and the treatment of aging-related diseases, indicating that protein crotonylation has important implication in the regulation of ageing progress.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. (2) TMT/iTRAQ Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. (3) HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. (4) Kcr peptide enrichment To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number 001, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bio-material-based PTM enrichment (for phosphorylation):  Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. (5) LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of protein posttranslational modification (PTM) can lead to a variety of pathological processes, such as abnormal sperm development, malignant tumorigenesis, depression, and aging process. SIRT7 is a NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent protein deacetylase. Besides known deacetylation, SIRT7 may also have the capacity to remove other acylation. However, the roles of SIRT7-induced other deacylation in aging are still largely unknown. Here, we found that the expression of SIRT7 was significantly increased in senescent fibroblasts and aged tissues. Knockdown or overexpression of SIRT7 can inhibit or promote fibroblast senescence. Knockdown of SIRT7 led to increased pan-lysine crotonylation (Kcr) levels in senescent fibroblasts. Using modern mass spectrometry (MS) technology, we identified 5,149 Kcr sites across 1,541 proteins in senescent fibroblasts, and providing the largest crotonylome dataset to date in senescent cells. Specifically, among the identified proteins, we found SIRT7 decrotonylated PHF5A, an alternative splicing (AS) factor, at K25. Decrotonylation of PHF5A K25 contributed to decreased CDK2 expression by retained intron (RI)-induced abnormal AS, thereby accelerating fibroblast senescence, and supporting a key role of PHF5A K25 decrotonylation in aging. Collectively, our data revealed the molecular mechanism of SIRT7-induced k25 decrotonylation of PHF5A regulating aging and provide new ideas and molecular targets for drug intervention in cellular aging and the treatment of aging-related diseases, and indicating that protein crotonylation has important implications in the regulation of aging progress.

### Keywords
Human, Crotonylation, Fibroblasts

### Affiliations
the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University
Department of Cardiology, the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zhuhai 519100, Guangdong, P.R. China

### Submitter
zhixiao wang

### Lab Head
Dr zhixiao wang
Department of Cardiology, the Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zhuhai 519100, Guangdong, P.R. China


