### Accession
PXD012858

### Title
Global proteome analysis of ATF4 targets during ER stress.

### Description
Cancer cells exploit many of the cellular adaptive responses to support their survival needs.  One such critical pathway in eukaryotic cells is the unfolded protein response (UPR) that is important in normal physiology as well as disease states, including cancer. Since UPR can serve as a lever between survival and death, regulated control of its activity is critical for tumor formation and growth although the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here we show that one of the main transcriptional effectors of UPR, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), is essential for prostate cancer (PCa) growth and survival.  To identify ATF4 target genes that mediate the ISR outcome and to get insight into its mechanism of action in PCa, we performed global proteomic expression profiling in parallel with transcriptomic expression profiling. These data show that ATF4 regulates important metabolic pathways in PCa cells.

### Sample Protocol
LNCaP cells were transfected with control siRNA or an ATF4-specific siRNA, and 4 days later treated with either 300nM Tg for 5h (MS-I) or 30nM Tg for 12h (MS-II). Protein identification was performed by LC-MS after tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the protein identification software Mascot_v2.4.0 (Matrix Sciences) and mass spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells exploit many of the cellular adaptive responses to support their survival needs. One such critical pathway in eukaryotic cells is the unfolded protein response (UPR) that is important in normal physiology as well as disease states, including cancer. Since UPR can serve as a lever between survival and death, regulated control of its activity is critical for tumor formation and growth although the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here we show that one of the main transcriptional effectors of UPR, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), is essential for prostate cancer (PCa) growth and survival. Using systemic unbiased gene expression and proteomic analyses, we identified a novel direct ATF4 target gene, family with sequence similarity 129 member A (FAM129A), which is critical in mediating ATF4 effects on prostate tumorigenesis. Interestingly, FAM129A regulated both PERK and eIF2&#x3b1; in a feedback loop that differentially channeled the UPR output. ATF4 and FAM129A protein expression is increased in patient PCa samples compared with benign prostate. Importantly, in vivo therapeutic silencing of ATF4-FAM129A axis profoundly inhibited tumor growth in a preclinical PCa model. These data support that one of the canonical UPR branches, through ATF4 and its target gene FAM129A, is required for PCa growth and thus may serve as a novel therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Lncap cells

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Oslo University, Department of Biosciences, Section for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Nora Pällmann

### Lab Head
Dr Fahri Saatcioglu
Oslo University, Department of Biosciences, Section for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oslo, Norway


