### Accession
PXD022895

### Title
Adaptations to high pressure of Nautilia sp. strain PV-1, a piezophilic Epsilonproteobacterium isolated from a deep-sea hydrothermal vent

### Description
Physiological and gene expression studies of deep-sea bacteria under pressure conditions similar to those experienced in their natural habitat are critical to understand growth kinetics and metabolic adaptations to in situ conditions.  The Epslilonproteobacterium, Nautilia sp. strain PV1, was isolated from hydrothermal fluids released from an active deep-sea hydrothermal vent at 9°N on the East Pacific Rise. Using a high pressure/high temperature continuous culture system we established that strain PV-1 has the shortest generation time of all known piezophilic microorganisms and we investigated its protein expression pattern in response to different hydrostatic pressures. Proteomic analyses of strain PV-1 grown at 200 Bars and 5 Bars showed that pressure adaptation is not restricted only to stress response or homeoviscous adaptation, but that it is more diversified and protein specific, with a fine and variegated regulation of enzymes involved even in the same metabolic pathway. As previously reported, proteins synthesis, motility, transport and energy metabolism are all affected by pressure, although to different extents. In strain PV-1, low pressure condition seems to activate the synthesis of phage-related proteins and an overexpression of enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics experiments were performed in two biological replicate and two technical replicate each at BiologicalMass Spectrometry Facility of the UMDNJ-Robe rt Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ , USA.   Protein samples were extracted with 50ul of 2X laemmeli buffer, sonicated, heat at 60°C for 10 min,  and centrifuged ( 25,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C). To the supernatant 100ul of 2X laemmili buffer was added, sonicated on ice at 60% amplitude using 2 s pulses in an Ultrasonic Processor (Misonix) for 20 pulses., freeze, thaw, then freeze again in -80 for overnight. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation as previously described. Supernatant was used to measure protein concentration with 660 SDS-PAGE and Protein content was assessed with the Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay Reagent https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/22660. Spectral-counting based label-free quantitative proteomics was performed to identify differentially expressed proteins. Each gel was cut in a band of approximately 2 mm width and 5–7 mm length. Bands were then washed and digested with trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were extracted, concentrated and desalted on a precolumn cartridge (300 μ​m i.d., 5 mm Dionex). A separating column (75 μ​m i.d., 150 mm, Nanoseparations) was used to eluate peptides. Peptides were analyzed with a LC-MSMS on Q-Exactive instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
The resulting tandem mass spectra were searched against the predicted peptide sequences encoded by PV-1 genome, using the open-source software X!TandemPipeline version 3.4.3 (Langella et al., 2017) using default parameter. Only proteins identified with at least two unique peptides and with a peptide coverage > 40% were used for the successive statistical analysis. DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) and Qspec version 1.2.2 ((Choi et al., 2015)(Choi et al., 2008) were used to identify differentially regulated proteins. As described by (Langley and Mayr, 2015) , these two software use different method to calculates differential expression: QSpec is based on a hierarchical Bayes estimation of generalised linear mixed effects model (Choi et al., 2008) , whereas DESeq2, implemented in R within the Bioconductor package , uses a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction (Love et al., 2014). Only proteins with a corrected Pvalue (Pj <0.1) for DESeq2 and a false discovery rate fdr < 0.01 for QSpec were considered statistically deferentially expressed between conditions .

### Publication Abstract
Physiological and gene expression studies of deep-sea bacteria under pressure conditions similar to those experienced in their natural habitat are critical for understanding growth kinetics and metabolic adaptations to in situ conditions. The Campylobacterium (aka Epsilonproteobacterium) Nautilia sp. strain PV-1 was isolated from hydrothermal fluids released from an active deep-sea hydrothermal vent at 9&#xb0; N on the East Pacific Rise. Strain PV-1 is a piezophilic, moderately thermophilic, chemolithoautotrophic anaerobe that conserves energy by coupling the oxidation of hydrogen to the reduction of nitrate or elemental sulfur. Using a high-pressure-high temperature continuous culture system, we established that strain PV-1 has the shortest generation time of all known piezophilic bacteria and we investigated its protein expression pattern in response to different hydrostatic pressure regimes. Proteogenomic analyses of strain PV-1 grown at 20 and 5&#xa0;MPa showed that pressure adaptation is not restricted to stress response or homeoviscous adaptation but extends to enzymes involved in central metabolic pathways. Protein synthesis, motility, transport, and energy metabolism are all affected by pressure, although to different extents. In strain PV-1, low-pressure conditions induce the synthesis of phage-related proteins and an overexpression of enzymes involved in carbon fixation.

### Keywords
Piezophile, Deep-sea hydrothermal vent, Thermophile, High-pressure, Epsilonproteobacteria, Chemosynthesis, Chemostat

### Affiliations
CNR italy
Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology (IRBIM) (CNR), Spianata San Raineri, 86, 98121 Messina, Italy

### Submitter
francesco smedile

### Lab Head
Dr francesco smedile
Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnology (IRBIM) (CNR), Spianata San Raineri, 86, 98121 Messina, Italy


