### Accession
PXD017813

### Title
Modern and Fossil Coral Skeletal Proteomes: Modern Insoluble GluC Sample

### Description
Here we report the first recovery, sequencing, and identification of fossil biomineral proteins from a Pleistocene invertebrate. Fossils of the Caribbean stony coral Orbicella annularis retain total hydrolyzable amino acids of a similar composition to extracts from modern O. annularis skeletons and  ~10% of the modern skeletal proteome was sequenced by LC-MS/MS over multiple trials in the best-preserved fossil coral specimen. The data are rich in acidic amino acids such as aspartate and glutamate typical of skeletal proteins, and one of the four sequenced fossil proteins, a highly acidic protein, has been previously characterized in modern coral skeletons. A combination of degradation, or amino acid racemization inhibition of trypsin digestion, appears to limit greater recovery. Nevertheless, our workflow determines optimal samples for effective sequencing of fossil coral proteins, allowing comparison of modern and fossil invertebrate protein sequences, and will likely lead to further improvements of the methods. Sequencing of endogenous organic molecules in fossil biominerals provides an ancient record of composition, potentially clarifying evolutionary changes and biotic responses to paleoenvironments.

### Sample Protocol
Colonies of fossil Orbicella annularis and Montastraea cavernosa skeletons were borrowed from the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles (NHMLA) Invertebrate Paleontology Department. All specimens were originally collected from Pleistocene deposits in the Key Largo Formation (FL) aged 125 to 138 ka [Osmond, 1965, Fruijier, 2000]. These and modern corals of several species, also NHMLA collections, and surface and ~10 cm depth bands of a privately owned O. annularis were analyzed for skeleton integrity. Slabbed coral fragments were soaked in equal parts 30% hydrogen peroxide and 3% sodium hypochlorite after Stoll [2003] with modifications and then ground to 125 um . Skeleton powder was cleaned three additional times dried at 40oC. All clean powder was only handled in age-specific glove bags (i.e. separate bags for fossil and modern), and modern samples were never handled at the same time as fossil samples for any biochemical analysis. Approximately 1 g cleaned powder from each coral was decalcified in 0.2 um-filtered 0.5 M glacial acetic acid. Acid insoluble matrix (AIM) pellets were rinsed twice in ice-cold 80% acetone whereas acid soluble matrix (ASM) was precipitated in ice-cold 100% acetone and then rinsed twice in ice-cold 80% acetone. Pellets were immediately submitted for protein sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Skeletal protein AIM and ASM samples were dissolved in 2% SDS buffer and digested using either a filter aided sample preparation (FASP; Mcav1) [Wisniewski, 2009] or a multi-enzyme digestion filter aided sample preparation protocol (MED-FASP; Mann2, Mann4, both modern O. annularis bands) modified from [Wisniewski, 2012].  Briefly, protein was dissolved in SDS buffer and placed in a 30 kDa Microcon Centrifigul Unit (Sigma Aldrich), SDS was displaced using an 8M urea solution and then the sample was diluted to 2M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega), digested peptides were moved through the filter into a micro-centrifuge tube (low retention; Fisher), any undigested what remained on the Microcon filter was then digested with GluC and peptides centrifuged into a second micro-centrifuge tube.  Each fraction was analyzed separately on a nano-liquid-chromatography system coupled to a benchtop orbitrap (QE-Plus; Thermo Fisher) equipped with (source) and operated in positive ion mode with data-dependent acquisition (ref). MS1 was performed at resolution of 70,000 (at 400 m/z) and MS2 at 17,500.   Peak lists were extracted from raw spectra and processed using Mascot (2.4) server against Montastraea cavernosa, M. faveolata, and Platygyra carnosus protein databases downloaded from comparative.reefgenomics.org [Bhattacharya, 2016], a O. faveolata protein database [Anderson, 2016], and the O. annularis genome protein database [Kamel et al., in review] .  Common contaminants and UniProt-Human databases were included in the analysis to test for contaminants.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) was used as a variable modification.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed.  Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu for precursor and product ions, respectively, and precursor charge was set to 2+ or 3+.    Initial decoy searches were performed in Mascot using a 1% false discovery rate to determine the appropriate significance value setting.  Next, we performed Mascot error-tolerant searches with this significance setting.  Only protein sequences above the cutoff score with at least two independent significant peptides detected, or one peptide detected significantly multiple times, were retained.  We blasted these sequences against the NCBI nr database in Blast2GO.  Further, we BLASTed returned proteins against the NCBI Homo sapiens database and manually checked hits with high sequence similarity for identity of LC-MS/MS detected peptides; if ‘coral’ and human peptides were identical, we manually removed the protein sequence from our list of coral skeletal proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cnidaria, Highly acidic proteins, Orbicella annularis, Scleractinia, Pleistocene

### Affiliations
University of California, Los Angeles
University of Haifa
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA

### Submitter
Jeana Drake

### Lab Head
Dr David Jacobs
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA


