### Accession
PXD007728

### Title
Stress response of a marine ammonia-oxidizing archaeon informs physiological status of environmental populations

### Description
High representation by ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) in marine systems is consistent with their high affinity for ammonia, efficient carbon fixation, and copper (Cu)-centric respiratory system.  However, little is known about their response to nutrient stress.  We therefore used global transcriptional and proteomic analyses to characterize the response of a model AOA, Nitrosopumilus maritimus SCM1, to ammonia starvation, Cu limitation, and Cu excess.  Most predicted protein-coding genes were transcribed in exponentially growing cells, and of ~74% detected in the proteome, ~6% were modified by N-terminal acetylation.  The general response to ammonia starvation and Cu-stress was down-regulation of genes for energy generation and biosynthesis.  Cells rapidly depleted transcripts for the A and B subunits of ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) in response to ammonia starvation, yet retained relatively high levels of transcripts for the C subunit.  Thus, similar to ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, selective retention of amoC transcripts during starvation appears important for subsequent recovery, and also suggests that AMO subunit transcript ratios could be used to assess the physiological status of marine populations.  Unexpectedly, cobalamin biosynthesis was upregulated in response to both ammonia starvation and Cu-stress, indicating the importance of this cofactor in retaining functional integrity during times of stress.

### Sample Protocol
Filters containing exponential phase N. maritimus cells were extracted using bead-beating to lyse cells.  Proteins in the lysate were resuspended in 0.06% RapiGest with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 5 mM EDTA, underwent reduction of disulfides, alkylation of free cysteine residues, and in-solution protease digestion using either trypsin or GluC.  Rapigest was hydrolyzed by the addition of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final v/v), heated for 30 minutes at 37C and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm (18,400 rcf) at 4C for 15 minutes to precipitate the water immiscible decomposition product, dodeca-2-one. Supernatant was removed and samples were dried. Digested samples were desalted using a MacroSpin C18 column following an established manufactureres protocol. Both trypsin digested and Glu-C digested samples were resuspended at a concentration of 0.52 ug/uL (for a total of 1 ug protein on-column, corresponding to approximately 1.3e8 cells) in 95% LCMS-grade water with 5% LCMS-grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid containing 50 fmol/uL of the Hi3 internal standard mixture (Waters). See SI of manuscript for more detailed information.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in triplicate injections by a Waters nanoACQUITY liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF Orbitrap high resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source.  All analyses were carried out in positive mode and a NSI spray voltage of 2.0 kV.  Data was collected using data dependent acquisition (DDA) using Xcalibur 4.0 data acquisition software (Thermo Fisher).  The MS1 scan range was 400–2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and automated gain control of 1×106.  Following each MS1 scan, data-dependent MS2 (dd-MS2) was set to perform on the top 10 ions in a data-dependent manner at 15,000 resolution with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV.  Additional selection criteria for dd-MS2 were as follows: maximum injection time of 50 ms with an automated gain control of 5×104, the isolation window was 1.5 Da and dynamic exclusion was set at 20 sec.Data processing was conducted using the software from the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v.4.8.1) (Nesvizhskii et al., 2007).  Briefly, raw data were converted to mzML and searched using COMET (Eng et al., 2013; Eng et al., 2015) against a FASTA protein database consisting of N. maritimus (Uniprot NITMS 1,795 proteins accessed August 2015; KEGG estimated protein genes 1,795), E.coli chaperone protein (Hi3 standard; P63284), and concatenated with a set of randomized sequences.  Additional COMET parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, one allowed non-tryptic or non-GluC termini, up to two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification (+57.021464 Da), and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and clipping of N-terminal methionine as variable modifications.  A second set of searches was conducted using these same parameters but with the addition of protein N-terminal acetylation (Nt-acetylation; +42.010565 Da) as a variable modification.  For the first set of COMET searches, the pep.xml files from each technical triplicate were then grouped and searched in PeptideProphet followed by iProphet (Shteynberg et al., 2011) and ProteinProphet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) within the TPP.  The set of randomized sequences were decoy peptides used for the purpose of calculating peptide spectrum matching (PSM) and protein false discovery rates (FDR), see Table S1.  The combined dataset from the fist COMET search for the trypsin-only digestion of the highest cell density injected on-column (1.3 × 108 cells), PeptideProphet probabilities greater than 95% resulted in 9,613 peptides and 79,746 PSM out of a total of 177,878 MS/MS spectra, with a corresponding FDR of <0.1% (PSM level 61/79,746).  The list of protein identifications was filtered using a 95% or greater protein probability as calculated from ProteinProphet corresponding to a FDR of 0.1%.  Table S1 also presents the data from the first set of COMET searches for the other cell densities injected on-column and results from the GluC digestion, and Figure S10 displays the combined data from trypsin-only digestion of N. maritimus at varying amounts of cells injected on-column.  No proteins above 95% probability were observed in control runs, except for the Hi3 internal standard.  Several proteins contained shared or degenerate peptides in the trypsin digestion, including Nmar_1259 and Nmar_1667 or both multicopper oxidase type 3 proteins Nmar_1663 and Nmar_1131.  Only Nmar_1667 and Nmar_1663, respectively, were included in the final proteome as they had a higher protein probability in combined datasets of trypsin and GluC-based proteomes (see Dataset S1).  For the second set of COMET searches using variable protein Nt-acetylation, the spectral counts following PeptideProphet and iProphet filtering were compared to spectral counts from trypsin or GluC searches without Nt-acetylation (Table S1).  When the difference in spectral counts was higher in the Nt-acetylation search, the peptides from proteins with possible Nt-acetylation were then manually validated (see Dataset S2).  Protein Nt-acetylation commonly has been shown to modify either the initiator methionine of the protein sequence or following methionine clipping.  Nt-acetylation can occur on the penultimate amino acid residues of alanine, serine, threonine or glycine.  Manual validation of Nt-terminal acetylation was confirmed if the protein had one of these sites acetylated and if the peptide containing the acetylation had both b- and y-ions identified in series in the MS/MS spectrum (see Dataset S2).

### Publication Abstract
High representation by ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) in marine systems is consistent with their high affinity for ammonia, efficient carbon fixation, and copper (Cu)-centric respiratory system. However, little is known about their response to nutrient stress. We therefore used global transcriptional and proteomic analyses to characterize the response of a model AOA, Nitrosopumilus maritimus SCM1, to ammonia starvation, Cu limitation and Cu excess. Most predicted protein-coding genes were transcribed in exponentially growing cells, and of ~74% detected in the proteome, ~6% were modified by N-terminal acetylation. The general response to ammonia starvation and Cu stress was downregulation of genes for energy generation and biosynthesis. Cells rapidly depleted transcripts for the A and B subunits of ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) in response to ammonia starvation, yet retained relatively high levels of transcripts for the C subunit. Thus, similar to ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, selective retention of amoC transcripts during starvation appears important for subsequent recovery, and also suggests that AMO subunit transcript ratios could be used to assess the physiological status of marine populations. Unexpectedly, cobalamin biosynthesis was upregulated in response to both ammonia starvation and Cu stress, indicating the importance of this cofactor in retaining functional integrity during times of stress.

### Keywords
Nitrosopumilus maritimus (strain scm1), Marine ammonia oxidizing archaea

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Rachel Lundeen

### Lab Head
Dr Anitra Ingalls
University of Washington


