### Accession
PXD035671

### Title
Protective Effects of Mitochondrial Fission Inhibition on Ox-LDL Induced VSMC Foaming via Metabolic Reprogramming

### Description
Atherosclerosis (AS) is one of the most common diseases in middle-age and elderly population. Lipid metabolism disorder induced foaming of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) is an important pathological process of AS. Mitochondria plays an important role in lipids metabolism. While it is not known whether regulating mitochondrial function can protect ox-LDL induced VSMC foaming via metabolic reprogramming. With ox-LDL induced mouse model of VSMC injury, the injury effect of ox-LDL and the protective effect of mdivi-1, the mitochondrial fission inhibitor on mitochondrial morphology and function of VSMC, and the formation of lipid droplet were observed. With metabonomics and proteomics techniques, the main lipid metabolites and regulation proteins were identified. The results showed that Ox-LDL induced a significant mitochondrial fission and fragmentation of VSMC, and mitochondrial function disorder along with lipid deposition and foaming. Mdivi-1 significantly antagonized the damage effect of ox-LDL on mitochondrial morphology and function of VSMC, and blocked the lipid deposition. Metabonomics analysis found 848 different metabolites between ox-LDL and mdivi-1 treatment group, in which the lipid metabolites were the main, and heptadecanoic acid, palmitoleic acid and myristic acid were the critical metabolites changed most. Proteomics results showed that there were 125 differential expressed proteins between ox-LDL and mdivi-1 treatment, acetyl -CoA carboxylase1 and fatty acid synthase were the main differential expressed proteins. This study suggest that Mitochondrial fission plays an important role in VSMC lipid deposition and foaming. Inhibition of mitochondrial fission may effectively fight against ox-LDL induced lipid deposition and foaming of VSMC via improving mitochondrial function and metabolic reprogramming. This finding provides a new insight for prevention and treatment of AS.

### Sample Protocol
1*10^7cell pellet were collection and Rapid quenching in liquid nitrogen for 30s, Long term storage at -80 degrees. For each sample, 2ug of total peptides were separated and analyzed with a nano-UPLC (EASY- nLC1200) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. Separation was performed using a reversed-phase column (100 𝜇m ID ×15 cm, Reprosil Pur 120 C18 AQ, 1.9 𝜇m, Dr. Maisch). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1% FA, 2% ACN (phase A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 90 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 2-5% for 2 min, 5-22% for 68 min, 22-45% for 16 min, 45-95% for 2 min, 95% for 2 min.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 (@200 m/z) and m/z range of 350-1600 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 15k with a fixed first mass of 110 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 3E6 with max IT 30 ms, and 1E5 for MS2 with max IT 96 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32%, and isolation window of 0.7 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 45 s, single charged peaks and peaks with charge exceeding 6 were excluded from the DDA procedure. Vendor’s raw MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer(PD) software (Version 2.4.0.305) and the built-in Sequest HT search engine . MS spectra lists were searched againstmtheir species-level UniProt FASTA databases (uniprot-Mus+musculus-10090-2020-10.fasta), with Carbamidomethyl [C] , TMT 6 plex(K) and TMT 6 plex (N-term)as a fixed modification and Oxi- dation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as proteases. A maximum of 2 missed cleavage(s) was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both PSM and peptide levels. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 10 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 0.02Da . Unique peptide and Razor peptide were used for protein quantification and total peptide amount for normalization. All the other parameters were reserved as default.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis (AS) is one of the most common diseases in middle-age and elderly population. Lipid metabolism disorder induced foaming of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) is an important pathological process of AS. Mitochondria plays an important role in lipids metabolism. While it is not known whether regulating mitochondrial function can protect ox-LDL induced VSMC foaming via metabolic reprogramming. With ox-LDL induced mouse model of VSMC injury, the injury effect of ox-LDL and the protective effect of mdivi-1, the mitochondrial fission inhibitor on mitochondrial morphology and function of VSMC, and the formation of lipid droplet were observed. With metabonomics and proteomics techniques, the main lipid metabolites and regulation proteins were identified. The results showed that Ox-LDL induced a significant mitochondrial fission and fragmentation of VSMC, and mitochondrial function disorder along with lipid deposition and foaming. Mdivi-1 significantly antagonized the damage effect of ox-LDL on mitochondrial morphology and function of VSMC, and blocked the lipid deposition. Metabonomics analysis found 848 different metabolites between ox-LDL and mdivi-1 treatment group, in which the lipid metabolites were the main, and heptadecanoic acid, palmitoleic acid and myristic acid were the critical metabolites changed most. Proteomics results showed that there were 125 differential expressed proteins between ox-LDL and mdivi-1 treatment, acetyl -CoA carboxylase1 and fatty acid synthase were the main differential expressed proteins. This study suggest that Mitochondrial fission plays an important role in VSMC lipid deposition and foaming. Inhibition of mitochondrial fission may effectively fight against ox-LDL induced lipid deposition and foaming of VSMC via improving mitochondrial function and metabolic reprogramming. This finding provides a new insight for prevention and treatment of AS.

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis；lipid deposition; foaming; mitochondrial fission; metabolic reprogramming

### Affiliations
no
State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Shock and Transfusion Department of Research Institute of Surgery, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University, People’s Republic of China, Chongqing 400042, P.R. China；

### Submitter
Chang-Wu Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Liangming Liu
State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Shock and Transfusion Department of Research Institute of Surgery, Daping Hospital, Army Medical University, People’s Republic of China, Chongqing 400042, P.R. China；


