### Accession
PXD022073

### Title
The Akirin2 regulome and interactome reveal gene/protein targets, candidate functional  complements and role in epigenetic regulation

### Description
The Akirin (AKR) family of transcription cofactors are involved in the regulation of different biological processes such as immunity, interdigital regression, muscle and neural development throughout the metazoan. This model regulatory proteins do not have catalytic or DNA-binding capability and exert its regulatory function primarily through interacting proteins such as transcription factors, chromatin remodelers, and RNA-associated proteins. The application of regulomics and interactomics to key transcriptional regulators such as AKR is important to better understand their role in cell biology and epigenetic regulation of gene expression. In this study, we focused on the human AKR2 regulome and interactome to advance the knowledge on the function of this highly conserved regulatory cofactor. Based on the key function of AKR2 in cell interactome, regulome and epigenetic gene regulation, herein we hypothesized that metazoan evolved to have AKR2 functional complements and different mechanisms for AKR2-mediated epigenetic regulation of gene expression. To address this hypothesis, experiments were conducted to identify AKR2 gene/protein targets, functional complements after akr2 knockdown in human cells and to provide evidence of different mechanisms that may be involved in AKR2-mediated chromatin remodeling. The results revealed multiple AKR2 gene/protein targets, identified immune response genes as candidate AKR2 functional complements and showed that AKR2 is not only a link with chromatin remodelers, but also directly interacts with histone H3, thus providing new information on the function of this protein

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from WT and akr2 KO HL60 cells using the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Assay with BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) as standard. Protein extracts (150 μg per sample, n = 3 biological replicates) from each WT and KO cells were trypsin digested using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon Ltd., Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) following manufacturer´s recommendations. The resulting peptides were finally desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), dried down and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometry analysis. The desalted protein digests were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 5% acetic acid in water and analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) using an ekspertTM nanoLC 415 system coupled on line with a 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Ab Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) through information-cyclic data independent acquisition (DIA) followed by sequential windowed data independent acquisition of the total high-resolution mass spectra (SWATH)-mass spectrometry (MS). Three micrograms of each protein digest from the 3 biological replicates of WT and akr2 KO HL60 cells were used for the generation of the reference spectral ion library as part of the SWATH-MS analysis. The peptides were concentrated in a 0.1 x 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075 x 250 mm C18 RP column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted in a 120 min gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B in solvent A followed by 15 min gradient from 30% to 60% solvent B in solvent A (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and directly injected into the mass spectrometer for analysis. For IDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (350-1400 m/z) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum, followed by up to 50 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 counts per second above a minimum threshold of 100 were isolated for fragmentation. One MS/MS spectrum was collected for 100 ms, before adding those precursor ions to the exclusion list for 15 sec (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst TF 1.6, Ab Sciex). Dynamic background subtraction was turned off. MS/MS analyses were recorded in high sensitivity mode with rolling collision energy on and a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH quantitative analysis, six independent samples (three replicates from WT and akr2 KO HL60 cells, 5 μg each) were subjected to the cyclic data independent acquisition (DIA) of mass spectra using the SWATH variable windows calculator (V 1.0, Ab Sciex) and the SWATH acquisition method editor (Ab Sciex), similar to established methods [32]. A set of 50 overlapping windows was constructed (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), covering the precursor mass range of 400-1250 m/z. For these experiments, a 50 ms survey scan (350-1400 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH–MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-1500 m/z for 70 ms at high sensitivity mode, resulting in a cycle time of 3.6 sec. Collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion-centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15.

### Data Protocol
To create a spectral library of all the detectable peptides in the samples, the IDA MS raw files were combined and subjected to database search in unison using ProteinPilot software v. 5.0.1 (Ab Sciex) with the Paragon algorithm. Spectra identification was performed by searching against the Uniprot human proteome database (https://www.uniprot.org) (75,074 entries in September 2020) with the following parameters: iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation, trypsin digestion, identification focus on biological modification and thorough ID as search effort. The detected protein threshold was set at 0.05. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein Pilot (Ab Sciex; https://sciex.com/products/software/proteinpilot-software), was used to assess the quality of identifications. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins reached a 1% global FDR. For SWATH processing, up to ten peptides with seven transitions per protein were automatically selected by the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in the PeakView 2.2 software (Ab Sciex; https://sciex.com/products/software/peakview-software) with the following parameters: 15 ppm ion library tolerance, 5 min XIC extraction window, 0.01 Da XIC width, and considering only peptides with at least 99% confidence and excluding those which were shared or contained modifications. However, to ensure reliable quantitation, only proteins that had 3 or more peptides available for quantitation were selected for XIC peak area extraction and exported for analysis in the MarkerView 1.3 software (Ab Sciex; https://sciex.com/products/software/markerview-software). Global normalization was performed according to the Total Area Sums (TAS) of all detected proteins in the samples. The Student’s t-test (p < 0.05) was used to perform two-sample comparisons between the averaged TASs of all the transitions derived from each protein across the three replicate runs for each sample under comparison in order to identify proteins that were significantly differentially represented between WT and akr2 KO HL60 cells. GO annotations were obtained using Blast2GO software (http://www.blast2go.org; accessed on September 20, 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The Akirin family of transcription cofactors are involved throughout the metazoan in the regulation of different biological processes (BPs) such as immunity, interdigital regression, muscle and neural development. Akirin do not have catalytic or DNA-binding capability and exert its regulatory function primarily through interacting proteins such as transcription factors, chromatin remodelers, and RNA-associated proteins. In the present study, we focused on the human Akirin2 regulome and interactome in neutrophil-like model human Caucasian promyelocytic leukemia HL60 cells. Our hypothesis is that metazoan evolved to have Akirin2 functional complements and different Akirin2-mediated mechanisms for the regulation of gene expression. To address this hypothesis, experiments were conducted using transcriptomics, proteomics and systems biology approaches in akirin2 knockdown and wildtype (WT) HL60 cells to characterize Akirin2 gene/protein targets, functional complements and to provide evidence of different mechanisms that may be involved in Akirin2-mediated regulation of gene expression. The results revealed Akirin2 gene/protein targets in multiple BPs with higher representation of immunity and identified immune response genes as candidate Akirin2 functional complements. In addition to linking chromatin remodelers with transcriptional activation, Akirin2 also interacts with histone H3.1 for regulation of gene expression.

### Keywords
Regulome, Akirin2, Knockdown, Interactome, Hl60

### Affiliations
University of Castilla- La Mancha
1. SaBio, Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos IREC-CSIC-UCLM-JCCM, Ronda de Toledo s/n, 13005, Ciudad Real, Spain. 2. Biochemistry Section, Faculty of Science and Chemical Technologies, and Regional Centre for Biomedical Research (CRIB), University of Castilla-La Mancha, 13071, Ciudad Real, Spain.

### Submitter
Margarita Villar

### Lab Head
Dr Margarita Villar
1. SaBio, Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos IREC-CSIC-UCLM-JCCM, Ronda de Toledo s/n, 13005, Ciudad Real, Spain. 2. Biochemistry Section, Faculty of Science and Chemical Technologies, and Regional Centre for Biomedical Research (CRIB), University of Castilla-La Mancha, 13071, Ciudad Real, Spain.


