### Accession
PXD025661

### Title
Interactome of alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase polimorphic forms

### Description
This dataset includes raw data on the interactome of two polymorphic forms of alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT), the major allele, AGT-Ma and the minor one AGT-Mi. Theproteins were expressed in HEK293 cells and the interactome was analysed using co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (IP-MS)

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation was performed using the Pierce™ Co-Immunoprecipitation Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo-Scientific). Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in the IP Lyses/Wash Buffer included in the kit, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (CompleteMini, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich). The whole cell extract was separated by centrifugation (12,900 x g, 10min, 4 °C) to obtain the soluble fraction. Two mg of soluble cell lysate from untransfected (negative control) or transfected cells (AGT-MA and AGT-Mi) were incubated with 10 mg of molyclonal anti-AGT primary antibody, immobilized on column according to the manufacturer’s instructions, overnight at 4° C. The samples were eluted  from the column using SDS buffer (2% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM DTT).  After immunoprecipitation, the protein eluates were precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone (1:4 v/v) and subjected to sample preparation for proteomics according to previously published procedures [PMID: 33383836].  Peptides derived from tryptic digestion (~1 µg) were separated on a reverse phase PicoFrit column (75 um ID, 8 Um tip, 250 mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR C18-AQ, 1.9 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size, New Objective, Inc., Woburn, MA, USA, cat. PF7508-250H363), using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Total run time for each sample was 120 min, peptides were separated using a 100 min gradient (4–40% acetonitrile +0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min). Eluting peptides were measured on-line with a Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode (Top20). Peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 KV, intact peptide ions were detected at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) and fragment ions at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200); AGC Target settings for MS were 3∙106 charges and for MS/MS 1∙105 charges. Peptides were selected for Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Th, peptides were fragmented at a normalized collision energy of 30. The intensity threshold was set at 2∙104 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 s. Raw files from MS analysis were processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 22 (Martinsried, Germany). The spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (release 2020_2, 20,375 sequences, including isoforms). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 7 and 20 ppm., respectively, while the minimum length of the peptide was set to 7. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both at the peptide and protein level. Enzyme for in silico digestion were set to trypsin and lysine C, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetylation of proteins (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) and oxidized methionine (Met, +15.994915 Da) were included as variable modifications. Proteins identified and quantified via LC-MS/MS were analysed using different bioinformatics tools to distinguish interactors from false positives and obtain a list of candidates constituting the core localnetwork of AGT proteoforms.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification of proteins were performed using spectral counts, while the Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) approach was used for scoring the significance of the interactions. Our negative controls were represented by wild-type HEK293 cells not expressing AGT (Ctrl, n=3) and HEK293 expressing the AGT-Ma or AGT-Mi isoforms subjected to the co-IP without the AGT antibody. Interactions scored by the SAINT algorithm were filtered using a fold change vs controls > 2 and a SAINT score (SP score)>0.7. Network visualization was performed using the Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
The conformational landscape of a protein is constantly expanded by genetic variations that have a minimal impact on the function(s) while causing subtle effects on protein structure. The wider the conformational space sampled by these variants, the higher the probabilities to adapt to changes in environmental conditions. However, the probability that a single mutation may result in a pathogenic phenotype also increases. Here we present a paradigmatic example of how protein evolution balances structural stability and dynamics to maximize protein adaptability and preserve protein fitness. We took advantage of known genetic variations of human alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT1), which is present as a common major allelic form (AGT-Ma) and a minor polymorphic form (AGT-Mi) expressed in 20% of Caucasian population. By integrating crystallographic studies and molecular dynamics simulations, we show that AGT-Ma is endowed with structurally unstable (frustrated) regions, which become disordered in AGT-Mi. An in-depth biochemical characterization of variants from an anticonsensus library, encompassing the frustrated regions, correlates this plasticity to a fitness window defined by AGT-Ma and AGT-Mi. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation analysis suggests that structural frustration in AGT1 could favor additional functions related to protein-protein interactions. These results expand our understanding of protein structural evolution by establishing that naturally occurring genetic variations tip the balance between stability and frustration to maximize the ensemble of conformations falling within a well-defined fitness window, thus expanding the adaptability potential of the protein.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293, Interactome, Alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Physiology and Biochemistry
Department of Medicine and Surgery, section of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Davide Chiasserini

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Cellini
Department of Medicine and Surgery, section of Biochemistry


