### Accession
PXD003543

### Title
Proteomic profile of oxaliplatin treated cell line reveals DNA damage induced nucleolar stress as main response.Proteomic profile of oxaliplatin treated cell line reveals DNA damage induced nucleolar stress as main response

### Description
Oxaliplatin is a widely used anti-cancer drug. It is part of treatment regimens for colorectal and pancreatic cancers, but it is tested in esophageal, biliary tract, gastric or hepatocellular cancers as well. Contrary to this wide application, there is only limited amount of information about oxaliplatin mechanism and response to treatment. We have performed whole-cell proteomic study to obtain cellular response induced by oxaliplatin. For this purpose we have treated CCRF-CEM cell line by 5xIC50 (29.3 μM) for half-time to caspase activation (240 min). The complex proteomic comparison was done on the treated vs. un-treated cells by high-resolution mass spectrometry. We have identified 4049 proteins in average from three biological replicates. From such pool just 76 proteins were significantly downregulated and 31 proteins upregulated in at least of two replicates. Both upregulated and dowregulated proteins are involved in DNA damage response, which is the most significant effect of platinum drugs. Downregulated proteins are split into three fractions. One fraction was centrosomal proteins or proteins involved in G2/M regulation. Second fraction was RNA processing proteins or proteins of processome of both ribosomal subunits. Downregulation of those proteins shows to ongoing nucleolar stress. Third fraction consisted of several ribosomal proteins. This should be sign of ribosomal stress. Nucleolar and ribosomal stress are stress responses manifesting by nucleolar shrinkage or and by inhibition of ribosomal biogenesis. Cellular response to oxaliplatin is thus DNA damage response, which triggers nucleolar and subsequent ribosomal stress.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and treatment with drugs All experiments in this study were done in three biological replicates. CCRF-CEM cells were grown in complete RPMI media lacking arginine and lysine and supplied with either 12C6 (light) or 13C6 (heavy) labeled arginine and lysine. They were cultured for five passages to ensure that “light” or “heavy” amino acids were completely incorporated. The completeness of labeling was verified by mass spectrometry (data not shown). Light cell lines were diluted to concentration of 106 cells per ml and treated with concentration of L-OHP 29.3 μM for 240 minutes. Following treatment, light and heavy cells were mixed in the same ratio. The mixed cell suspension was washed twice in ice-cold PBS with protease inhibitors and once with ice-cold PBS. Washed cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, 7 M Urea, 10 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100 and 0.5% SDS, 2U benzonase and transferred to 1.5 ml microfuge tubes. The cell-lysate was incubated on ice for 5 minutes, two extra units of benzonase were added and incubated for an additional five minutes. Lysates were cleared at 16000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes and supernatants were transferred into 1.5 ml eppendorf tubes and stored at -80°C.  Sample preparation for LC- MS/MS Cell-lysate was resolved by preparative SDS-PAGE (MiniPrep Cell, BioRad) and the gel was cut into 20 slices representing protein fractions separated by the MW. The gel slices were subsequently dehydrated by acetonitrile and proteins were reduced with 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at 90°C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour in the dark. Samples were then washed three times with water and acetonitrile successively, with last 50% acetonitrile wash. Samples were solubilized and trypsinized in trypsin buffer (6.25 ng/µl trypsin, 50 mM 4-ethylmorpholine, 10% v/v acetonitrile, pH 8.3) overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred into new eppendorf tubes and peptides were extracted from gel pieces successively in three steps by 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA, 0.1% TFA in water and with 50% acetonitrile. Extracts were pooled and dried in SpeedVac (Eppendorf). Dried samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of 80% ACN with 0.1% TFA and diluted with 145 µl of 0.1% TFA. Reconstituted samples were purified using a C-18 MacroTrap column (Michrom Bioresources, USA), dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 µl of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC/MS Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) instrument fitted with a Proxeon Easy-Spray ionization source, coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatograph. One microliter of sample was loaded on a PepMap 100 (75μm x2cm, 3μm, 100 Ȧ pore size) desalting column (Thermo) “in-line” with a PepMap RSLC (75μm x 15cm, 3μm, 100 Ȧ pore size) analytical column (Thermo) heated at 35°C. The peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by ramping the organic phase from 5% to 35% during a total run time of 150 minutes. The aqueous and organic mobile phases were, respectively, 0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The FTMS resolution was set to 120,000 and precursor ions were scanned across an m/z range of 300.0- 1950.0. The twenty most intense ions were selected in the linear ion-trap for fragmentation by collision (CID) in the orbitrap. Collision energy of 35eV was applied throughout.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Peak picking and peptide searching was done by MaxQuant v. 1.3.0.5 with SwissProt human database downloaded 4. 4. 2013. All fractions of one sample were searched together. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide and razor peptide count was set to 1 and peptide length to 6. Mass tolerance of parent ions was set to 20 ppm and tolerance of fragments was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide and protein FDR rate were set to 1%. Arginine and lysine were set as special amino acids with filtering of labeled amino acids. For quantification, razor peptides were selected with discarding unmodified counterparts of peptides, re-quantification and iBAQ were allowed. Search result was processed in Perseus 1.4.0.6, where decoy search results and contaminant items were removed and Significance B test has been performed using normalized ratios of replicates and their respective intensities. Proteins, which had significance score below 0.05 in at least two replicates, were selected for further studies. Pearson coefficients were calculated using log2 ratios of SILAC quantifications of single replicates divided by their average.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nucleolar stress, Oxaliplatin, Proteomics, Ribosomal stress

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University and University Hospital in Olomouc
Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine
Faculty of medicine, Palacky University

### Submitter
Tomáš Oždian

### Lab Head
Dr Marián Hajdúch
Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University and University Hospital in Olomouc


