### Accession
PXD025061

### Title
Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase p110 delta differentially restrains and directs naïve versus effector CD8+ T cell transcriptional programs

### Description
Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase p110 delta (PI3Kp110δ) is pivotal for CD8+ T cell immune responses. To inform how PI3Kp110δ regulates CD8+ T cells, the current study focuses on PI3Kp110δ controlled transcriptional programs and reveals how PI3Kp110δ selectively induces and represses expression of key genes that create a cytotoxic T cell (CTL). The data identify differences in PI3Kp110δ regulated transcriptional programs between naïve and cytotoxic T cells including differential control of cytolytic effector molecules, costimulatory receptors and the critical inhibitory receptors CTLA4 and SLAMF6. However, common to both naïve and effector cells is PI3Kp110δ control of the production of chemokines and cytokines that orchestrate communication between the adaptive and innate immune system. The study provides a comprehensive resource for understanding how PI3Kp110δ uses multiple mechanisms dependent on Protein Kinase B/AKT, FOXO1 dependent and independent mechanisms and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) to direct CD8+ T cell fate.

### Sample Protocol
Secretomics sample preparation For this experiment, 400 L of supernatant was used for each sample and peptides were generated using the S-Trap mini column method (Protifi). Briefly, samples were mixed on a shaker at 1,000 rpm at room temperature for 5 minutes after addition of 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) and then transferred to a ThermoMixer shaking at 500 rpm at 95C for 5 minutes before being mixed again at 1,000 rpm at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 1hr and protein concentration was determined using the EZQ method (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were acidified by addition of 1.2% phosphoric acid and then mixed by vortexing. S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol and 100 mM TEAB pH 7.1) was added at a 1:7 ratio of lysate to S-Trap binding buffer, loaded on S-Trap mini columns (Protifi) and then centrifuged at 6,500 rpm for 30 seconds. Bound protein was washed five times by addition of 400 L of S-Trap binding buffer and centrifugation at 6,500 rpm for 30 seconds. Digestion buffer (125 L) containing trypsin in a ratio protein 1: trypsin 20 was added into the top of the column and incubated at 47C for 2hr without shaking. Peptides were then eluted by addition and centrifugation of 80 L of digestion buffer, 80 L of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and 80 L of 50% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Eluted peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac (Genevac) and then reconstituted in 5% formic acid by shaking at 1,000 rpm at 30C for 1hr. Peptides were run on a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as single shot in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode (120 minutes). MS was performed by the Proteomics Facility, University of Dundee, UK.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins and peptides were identified using a hybrid database from databases in Uniprot release 2020 06 as described in Marchingo et al., eLife 2020. The following search parameters were used: protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate, and glutamine and asparagine deamidation were selected as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification; Trypsin selected as the proteolytic enzymes; up to two missed cleavages were permitted; protein and PSM False discovery rates was set to 0.01 and matching of peptides between runs was switched off. The data set was filtered to remove proteins categorised as “contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site”.                        Raw intensity for each replicate was normalised to the corresponding control and expressed as % intensity relative to TCR. Statistical analysis was performed with Prism 7 for Mac OS X using unpaired, unequal variance t-test with Welch’s correction.   Experimental design BR1 IL2: BR1 unstimulated BR2 IL2: BR2 unstimulated BR3 IL2: BR3 unstimulated BR1 TCR: BR1 +TCR 4hr BR2 TCR: BR2 +TCR 4hr BR3 TCR: BR3 +TCR 4hr BR1 TCR IC: BR1 +TCR 4hr+PI3Kdi  BR2 TCR IC: BR2 +TCR 4hr+PI3Kdi BR3 TCR IC: BR3 +TCR 4hr+PI3Kdi BR1 TCR MEKi: BR1 +TCR 4hr+MEKi BR2 TCR MEKi: BR2 +TCR 4hr+MEKi BR3 TCR MEKi: BR3 +TCR 4hr+MEKi BR1 TCR AKTi: BR1 +TCR 4hr+AKTi BR2 TCR AKTi: BR2 +TCR 4hr+AKTi BR3 TCR AKTi: BR3 +TCR 4hr+AKTi  BR1 TCR CYA: BR1 +TCR 4hr+Cyclosporin A BR2 TCR CYA: BR2 +TCR 4hr+Cyclosporin A BR3 TCR CYA: BR3 +TCR 4hr+Cyclosporin A BR1 TCR RAPA: BR1 +TCR 4hr+Rapamycin BR2 TCR RAPA: BR2 +TCR 4hr+Rapamycin BR3 TCR RAPA: BR3 +TCR 4hr+Rapamycin BR1 TCR VPS34: BR1 +TCR 4hr+VPS34 BR2 TCR VPS34: BR2 +TCR 4hr+VPS34 BR3 TCR VPS34: BR3 +TCR 4hr+VPS34 BR1 TCR PDKi: BR1 +TCR 4hr+PDKi BR2 TCR PDKi: BR2 +TCR 4hr+PDKi BR3 TCR PDKi: BR3 +TCR 4hr+PDKi BR1 TCR TOF: BR1 +TCR 4hr+Tofacitinib BR2 TCR TOF: BR2 +TCR 4hr+Tofacitinib BR3 TCR TOF: BR3 +TCR 4hr+Tofacitinib BR1 TCR PP2: BR1 +TCR 4hr+PP2 BR2 TCR PP2: BR2 +TCR 4hr+PP2 BR3 TCR PP2: BR3 +TCR 4hr+PP2  BR Biological Replicate

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pi3kp110δ, T cell, Tcr activation

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Doreen Ann Cantrell
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


