### Accession
PXD035320

### Title
Chaetomium thermophilum Naa50 and Naa15 TMT-labeled LC-MSMS

### Description
TMT-labeled LC-MSMS was performed to identify and quantify proteins from three different TAP-purification pull-outs from Chaetomium thermophilum. The aim was to identify interaction partners and to study, whether the two tagged proteins (Naa50 and Naa15) are likely to interact, as they do in other organisms. CtNaa50 is a special homolog of known Naa50 proteins and in this case, it does not interact with Naa15, but other identified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
ProteinA-(TEV)-Flag tags were fused to Naa15 and Naa50 and expressed in transformed Chaetomium thermophilum. Mycelium beads were lysed in a cryogenic mixer mill MM400 at 30 s-1 for five  minutes. The milled lysate was resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 0.1 % nonident P40) supplemented with a protease inhibitor mix. The lysate was cleared for 30 min at 50,000 g, 4 °C and filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane. The supernatant was applied onto 600 μL IgG Sepharose 6 FF resin (Cytiva) for 14 h. The resin was washed several times with buffer C500 (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 0.01 % nonident P40), and the proteins were eluted through TEV protease cleavage at 4 °C for 4 h. Control: WT Chaetomium thermophilum treated in the same way. 10 μg of eluates were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol. In total three biological replicates were prepared including recombinant C. thermophilum wild type, CtNaa15 and CtNaa50 pull-out proteins (n=3). Eluates were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific) in 10 μL 15 % formic acid and 30 μL of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 min at room temperature. SDS was removed by four subsequent washes with 200 μL of 70 % ethanol. Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with 0.4 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL HEPES/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Beads were separated, washed with 10 μL of an aqueous solution of 2 % DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 μL of H2O and reacted for 1 h at room temperature with 80 μg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific) label reagent dissolved in 4 μL of acetonitrile. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 μL of an aqueous 5 % hydroxylamine solution (Sigma). Peptides were mixed and purified by a reverse phase clean-up step (OASIS HLB 96-well μElution Plate, Waters) following their analysis by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). To this end, peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Dionex) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn C18 PepMap100, 5 mm, 300 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100. 75 × 50 cm C18, 3 mm, 100 Å) connected to a nanospray- Flex ion source. The peptides were loaded onto the trap column at 30 μL per min using solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and eluted using a gradient from 2 to 40 % Solvent B (0.1 % 826 formic acid in acetonitrile) over 2 h at 0.3 μL per min (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2.4 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 120,000 (maximum fill time of 50 ms or a maximum of 4e5 ions (AGC) and a RF lens setting of 30 %. Fragmentation was triggered for 3 s cycle time for peptide like features with charge states of 2–7 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition). Precursors were isolated using the quadrupole with a window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 38. Fragment mass spectra were acquired in profile mode and a resolution of 30,000 in profile mode. Maximum fill time was set to 64 ms or an AGC target of 1e5 ions). The dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) using a reverse UniProt FASTA Chaetomium thermophilum database including common contaminants. The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level. The raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files) were processed using the R programming language. Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. 748 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw TMT reporter ion intensities (signal_sum columns) were first cleaned for batch effects using limma and further normalized using vsn (variance stabilization normalization). Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package. A protein was annotated as a hit with a false discovery rate (fdr) smaller 0.05 and a fold-change of at least 100 %.

### Publication Abstract
Most eukaryotic proteins are N-terminally acetylated by a set of N&#x3b1; acetyltransferases (NATs). This ancient and ubiquitous modification plays a fundamental role in protein homeostasis, while mutations are linked to human diseases and phenotypic defects. In particular, Naa50 features species-specific differences, as it is inactive in yeast but active in higher eukaryotes. Together with NatA, it engages in NatE complex formation for cotranslational acetylation. Here, we report Naa50 homologs from the filamentous fungi <i>Chaetomium thermophilum</i> and <i>Neurospora crassa</i> with significant N- and C-terminal extensions to the conserved GNAT domain. Structural and biochemical analyses show that <i>Ct</i>Naa50 shares the GNAT structure and substrate specificity with other homologs. However, in contrast to previously analyzed Naa50 proteins, it does not form NatE. The elongated N-terminus increases Naa50 thermostability and binds to dynein light chain protein 1, while our data suggest that conserved positive patches in the C-terminus allow for ribosome binding independent of NatA. Our study provides new insights into the many facets of Naa50 and highlights the diversification of NATs during evolution.

### Keywords
Naa50 naa15 lc-msms tmt chaetomium thermophilum

### Affiliations
EMBL
Heidelberg University, Biochemistry Center (BZH), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Jonas Weidenhausen

### Lab Head
Dr Irmgard Sinning
Heidelberg University, Biochemistry Center (BZH), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


