### Accession
PXD034594

### Title
Profiling of mouse brain acetylome and proteome

### Description
Nε-Lysine acetylation is a reversible post-translational protein modification (PTM). In recent years, genetic analysis and animal model studies have shown that protein acetylation is closely related to the development of the nervous system and neurodegenerative diseases such as PD and AD. Here, we aim to profile the mouse brain acetylome by using FSAP, immunoaffinity precipitation of acetylpeptides and mass spectrometry method. We identified 1,591 acetylated proteins containing 4,182 acetylation modification sites in C57BL/6 mice brain. These proteins were involved in myelin sheath, mitochondrial inner membrane and neuron synapse. While KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that these proteins are associated with neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease and Huntington disease. Taken together, we provided a comprehensive profile and clues for understanding the role of acetylated proteins in neuropathology such as neurogenesis, degeneration and aging.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and acetylated peptides enrichment The whole brain proteins of 3 mice were pooled together with equal quality. Pooling the samples from different biological sources has been shown to reduce the biological variation[42]. Four milligrams of protein were transferred to ultrafiltration tube (Millipore, Ultracel-10K) were reduced and alkylated with a 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1.5 h at 37 °C and 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark, respectively. And sample digestion were followed previous methods, FASP[43]. Finally, peptides were freeze-dried, and part of prepared sample (1%) were used for proteome analysis and other used for affinity enrichment of acetylated peptides. Acetylated peptides were enrichment by Anti-acetyl-lysine antibody which immobilized on agarose beads (Pan PTM Antibody Conjugated Agarose Beads, Lysine Acetylation, PTM-104), at 4℃ for whole night. The supernatant was removed, and beads were washed following the kit’s instruction. Finally, acetylated peptides were eluted by 100 μl Elution buffer for three times, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. LC-MS/MS analyses No fractionated sample of non-enriched peptides and enriched peptides were directly analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS. Peptide mixture was separated on EasyNano LC1000 system (San Jose, Thermo Fisher) using a C18 column (3 um, 75 um X 15 cm) at a flowrate of 500 nl/min. A 75-minute linear gradient was set as follows: 1% B (0.1% FA in ACN) /99% A (0.1% FA in H2O) to 3% B in 2 minutes, 3% B to 8% B in 8 minutes, 8% B to 20% B in 45 minutes, 20% B to 30% B in 12 minutes, 30% B to 90% B in 1 minutes and stayed 7 minutes for 90% B. Peptides were acquired with data dependent acquisition mode using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Bremen, Thermo Fisher). For the data acquisition, a top speed scan mode of 3 seconds with MS1 scan range of m/z 350-1550 was used, and other parameters were set as below: MS1 and MS2 resolution was set to 120K and 30K; Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, for MS1 and MS2 was 1e6 and 5e4; isolation window was 1.6 m/z, higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32, dynamic exclusion time was 20s.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched against a Uniprot protein database of Mus musculus (acquired on 2017.4.26, 86430 entries) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1(San Jose, Thermo Fisher). The following parameters were used for data processing : enzyme of trypsin with maximum number of 3 missed cleavages; precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da; variable modification was set to Oxidation on methionine (M, 15.9949), deamidation on glutamine and asparagine (N/Q, 0.9840/0.9847) and Acetylation on lysine (K, 42.0106) and protein N-terminus; fixed modification was set to Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, 57.0215); An algorithm of Percolator was used to keep peptide FDR less than 1% and the q-value used for protein identification was less than 0.01. Modification probability was kept more than 0.75. Proteomic RAW MS data was processed using MaxQuant (developer version 1.5.8.3) and searched against the UniProt database using the integrated Andromeda search engin. The proteinGroups and acetyl (K) sites table was removed reverse decoy database entries, contaminant entries, acetyl (K) sites table was filtered entries with localization probability more than 90%.

### Publication Abstract
N&#x3b5;-lysine acetylation is a reversible posttranslational modification (PTM) involved in multiple physiological functions. Genetic and animal studies have documented the critical roles of protein acetylation in brain development, functions, and various neurological disorders. However, the underlying cellular and molecular mechanism are still partially understood. Here, we profiled and characterized the mouse brain acetylome and investigated the cellular distribution of acetylated brain proteins. We identified 1,818 acetylated proteins, including 5,196 acetylation modification sites, using a modified workflow comprising filter-aided sample preparation (FSAP), acetylated peptides enrichment, and MS analysis without pre- or post-fraction. Bioinformatics analysis indicated these acetylated mouse brain proteins were mainly located in the myelin sheath, mitochondrial inner membrane, and synapse, as well as their involvement in multiple neurological disorders. Manual annotation revealed that a set of brain-specific proteins were acetylation-modified. The acetylation of three brain-specific proteins was verified, including neurofilament light polypeptide (NEFL), 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP), and neuromodulin (GAP43). Further immunofluorescence staining illustrated that acetylated proteins were mainly distributed in the nuclei of cortex neurons and axons of hippocampal neurons, sparsely distributed in the nuclei of microglia and astrocytes, and the lack of distribution in both cytoplasm and nuclei of cerebrovascular endothelial cells. Together, this study provided a comprehensive mouse brain acetylome and illustrated the cellular-specific distribution of acetylated proteins in the mouse brain. These data will contribute to understanding and deciphering the molecular and cellular mechanisms of protein acetylation in brain development and neurological disorders. Besides, we proposed some problems that need to be solved in future brain acetylome research.

### Keywords
Brain; acetylome; mouse

### Affiliations
Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
 Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
Yuhua JI

### Lab Head
Dr Yuhua Ji
Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.


