### Accession
PXD019172

### Title
p38-MAPK recruits the proteolysis pathways in Caenorhabditis elegans during bacterial infection

### Description
TiO2 column chromatography, MALDI-ToF-MS, SUMOylation, Coimmunoprecipitation and LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
100 µg proteins from control and S. Typhi exposed lysates/column elutes were taken for in-solution digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 20 µl of dithiothreitol (20 mM final concentration) for 1 h at 56 ˚C and free thiol groups were alkylated using 20 mM IAA at room temperature for 1 h in dark. Following to that, the urea concentration (if urea buffer was used during sample preparation) was diluted below 0.5 M using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the proteins were digested overnight (14 - 16 h) using MS grade trypsin enzyme at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 25:1 at 37 ˚C. Finally, the digested peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Positive-ion mode of MALDI-MS analysis has been performed using AXIMA Performance MALDI-ToF-ToF mass spectrometer. Equal ratio of desalted samples were mixed with 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (2,5-DHB) (prepared with 0.1 % Triflouroacetic acid in 50 % acetonitrile) along with 1 % phosphoric acid as an additive to improve the phosphopeptide ion signals (Kjellström and Jensen, 2004). The m/z values (700 – 3500 m/z range) of the each sample from MALDI-MS spectra were subjected to MS-Fit-Protein Prospector analysis (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msfitstandard) (Prasath et al. 2019). The parameters set as follows: Taxonomy - Caenorhabditis elegans; Database - UniProt; Constant Modifications - Carbamidomethylation (C); Possible/variable modifications – Oxidation of Met, Acrylamide modified Cys, Phospho (STY); Peptide tolerance – 20 ppm. The resulting protein hits, along with the phosphorylation sites, were manually retrieved and tabulated. Meanwhile, experimental phosphorylation sites of the respective proteins were acquired from the UniProt database and tabulated. The MALDI-MS identified proteins were taken to “PHOSIDA” bioinformatics tool (http://141.61.102.18/phosida/index.aspx) to predict the possible phosphorylation sites (Gnad et al. 2007). The overlapping proteins between the datasets were identified using online venn diagram platform (Oliveros, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotic organisms, cell-signalling completely relies on Post Translational Modifications (PTMs) that can function as regulatory switches. Phosphorylation is a fundamental and frequently occurring PTM in almost all eukaryotes. Herein, we have studied the importance of protein phosphorylation using classical proteomic techniques in C. elegans upon bacterial infection. The differentially regulated proteins during bacterial infection were excised from SDS-PAGE (One-Dimensional) gel (TiO<sub>2</sub> column elutes) and subjected to MALDI-TOF-MS which ended up in identifying 220 proteins kinetically. KEGG pathway analysis of those proteins suggested that MAPK pathway was part of the innate immunity. Thus, we have characterized p38-MAPK (one of the crucial downstream MAPKs) using immunoblotting, subcellular fractionation, coimmunoprecipitation, LC-MS/MS, bioinformatics studies and qPCR. Meanwhile, KU25 strain (pmk-1 mutant) exhibited an earlier mortality during infection suggesting the crucial role of p38-MAPK during host-pathogen interaction. Interestingly, Reactome pathway analysis of p38 interactors (CoIP coupled to LC-MS/MS) revealed the involvement of various proteolytic pathway players (ubiquitination, SUMOylation and Neddylation) during bacterial infection. Further, the regulation of SUMOylation and Neddylation was identified and validated using immunoblotting and qPCR analyses, respectively. Concisely, our study indicated that bacterial infection triggers the MAPK cascade to elicit innate immunity which in turn recruits proteolytic pathways to counteract the invading pathogen.

### Keywords
Tio2 column chromatography, Coimmunoprecipitation and lc-ms/ms, Maldi-tof-ms, Sumoylation

### Affiliations
Professor Department of Biotechnology Science Campus Alagappa University Karaikudi - 630 003 Tamil Nadu  India
Alagappa University

### Submitter
Krishnaswamy Balamurugan

### Lab Head
Dr Krishnaswamy Balamurugan
Professor Department of Biotechnology Science Campus Alagappa University Karaikudi - 630 003 Tamil Nadu  India


