### Accession
PXD026105

### Title
Comparative analysis of stalked and acorn barnacle adhesive proteomesv

### Description
Barnacles interest the scientific community for multiple reasons: their unique evolutionary trajectory, vast diversity, and economic impact  as a harvested food source and also as one of the most prolific macroscopic hard biofouling organisms. A common, yet novel, trait among barnacles is adhesion, which has enabled a sessile adult existence and global colonization of the oceans. Barnacle adhesive is primarily composed of proteins, but knowledge of how the adhesive proteome varies across the tree of life is unknown due to a lack of genomic information. Here, we supplement previous mass spectrometry analyses of barnacle adhesive with recently sequenced genomes to compare the adhesive proteomes of Pollicipes pollicipes (Pedunculata) and Amphibalanus amphitrite (Sessilia). Although both species contain the same broad protein categories, we detail differences that exist between these species. The barnacle-unique cement proteins show the greatest difference between species, although these differences are diminished when amino acid composition and glycosylation potential are considered. By performing an in-depth comparison of the adhesive proteomes of these distantly related barnacle species, we show their similarities and provide a roadmap for future studies examining sequence specific differences to identify the proteins responsible for functional differences across the barnacle tree of life.

### Sample Protocol
Collection and sample processing of adhesive samples from A. amphitrite are previously described (Schultzhaus et al. 2019 Integrative Biology). The hydrated, thickened barnacle adhesive was collected from the base of individuals dislodged from silicone panels, and samples were treated with three solvents (hexafluoroisopropanol [HFIP], urea, or methanol) and extracted using pressure cycling technology (n=3 for each solvent). These samples were analyzed using a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) (34). Here, the samples are reanalyzed with a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from the raw files were assigned to the SNU_Aamp_1 proteome, GenBank GCA_009805615.1 using MaxQuant with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Barnacles interest the scientific community for multiple reasons: their unique evolutionary trajectory, vast diversity and economic impact-as a harvested food source and also as one of the most prolific macroscopic hard biofouling organisms. A common, yet novel, trait among barnacles is adhesion, which has enabled a sessile adult existence and global colonization of the oceans. Barnacle adhesive is primarily composed of proteins, but knowledge of how the adhesive proteome varies across the tree of life is unknown due to a lack of genomic information. Here, we supplement previous mass spectrometry analyses of barnacle adhesive with recently sequenced genomes to compare the adhesive proteomes of <i>Pollicipes pollicipes</i> (Pedunculata) and <i>Amphibalanus amphitrite</i> (Sessilia). Although both species contain the same broad protein categories, we detail differences that exist between these species. The barnacle-unique cement proteins show the greatest difference between species, although these differences are diminished when amino acid composition and glycosylation potential are considered. By performing an in-depth comparison of the adhesive proteomes of these distantly related barnacle species, we show their similarities and provide a roadmap for future studies examining sequence-specific differences to identify the proteins responsible for functional differences across the barnacle tree of life.

### Keywords
Amphibalanus amphitrite, Pollicipes pollicipes, Sessilia, Pedunculata, Mass spectrometry, Cement proteins

### Affiliations
NRL

### Submitter
Janna Schultzhaus

### Lab Head
Dr Judson Hervey
NRL


