### Accession
PXD029319

### Title
Putative methylomirabilis lanthanidiphila surface layer protein

### Description
Gambelli  et al., 2021, investigate methylomirabilis bacteria, which perform anaerobic methane oxidation coupled to nitrite reduction via an intra-aerobic pathway to produce carbon dioxide and dinitrogen gas. These bacteria possess an unusual polygonal cell shape with sharp ridges that run along the cell body. Previously, a putative surface protein layer (S-layer) was observed as the outermost cell layer of these bacteria which has been further investigated in this study. Corresponding author Laura van Niftrik, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Radboud University, Nijmegen, 6525 AJ, the Netherlands.

### Sample Protocol
A volume of 50µL of S-layer enrichment sample (approx. 0.1mg/mL protein content) was diluted 1:1 with 8M Urea in 10mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0. To this solution, 1µL of freshly prepared 50mM DTT solution was added and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. In the following, 1µL of a freshly prepared 50mM IAA solution was added and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes. The solution was diluted to below 1M Urea using 200mM bicarbonate buffer and one aliquot protein each were digested using sequencing grade Trypsin or Chymotrypsin, respectively (Promega) at 37°C over-night (protease/protein of approx. 1:50). Finally, the protein digests were desalted using an Oasis HLB 96 well plate (Waters) according to the manufacturer protocols. The purified peptide fraction was speed-vac tried and stored at -20°C until further processed. Shotgun proteomic analysis. The speed-vac tried peptide fraction was resuspended in H2O containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot corresponding to approx. 250 ng protein digest was analysed using an one dimensional shotgun proteomics approach.

### Data Protocol
Approximately 250 ng protein digest was analyzed by a one-dimensional shotgun proteomics approach using an EASY nano-LC coupled to a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. MS1 level scans were performed at 70 K resolution, where top10 DDA fragmentation spectra were acquired at 17.5 K resolution and by using a NCE of 28.Raw data were analysed using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) allowing 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02Da fragment mass error tolerance. Search conditions further included considering 4 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Data were matched against a Methylomirabilis lanthanidiphila protein database and filtered for 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Surface layer, Methylomirabilis lanthanidiphila, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


