### Accession
PXD024671

### Title
The structural heterogeneity of α-synuclein is governed by several distinct subpopulations with interconversion times slower than milliseconds

### Description
The intrinsically disordered protein, α-synuclein, implicated in synaptic vesicle homeostasis and neurotransmitter release, is also associated with several neurodegenerative diseases. The different roles of α-synuclein are characterized by distinct structural states (membrane-bound, dimer, tetramer, oligomer, and fibril), which are originated from its various monomeric conformations. The pathological states, determined by the ensemble of α-synuclein monomer conformations and dynamic pathways of interconversion between dominant states, remain elusive due to their transient nature. Here, we use inter-dye distance distributions from bulk time-resolved Förster resonance energy transfer as restraints in discrete molecular dynamics simulations to map the conformational space of the α-synuclein monomer. We further confirm the generated conformational ensemble in orthogonal experiments utilizing far-UV circular dichroism and cross-linking mass spectrometry. Single-molecule protein-induced fluorescence enhancement measurements show that within this conformational ensemble, some of the conformations of αsynuclein are surprisingly stable, exhibiting conformational transitions slower than milliseconds. Our comprehensive analysis of the conformational ensemble reveals essential structural properties and potential conformations that promote its various functions in membrane interaction or oligomer and fibril formation.

### Sample Protocol
Standard XL-MS preparion. Please see Methods in accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
In house analysis applications. Please see Methods in accompanying paper

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b1;-Synuclein plays an important role in synaptic functions by interacting with synaptic vesicle membrane, while its oligomers and fibrils are associated with several neurodegenerative diseases. The specific monomer structures that promote its membrane binding and self-association remain elusive due to its transient nature as an intrinsically disordered protein. Here, we use inter-dye distance distributions from bulk time-resolved F&#xf6;rster resonance energy transfer as restraints in discrete molecular dynamics simulations to map the conformational space of the &#x3b1;-synuclein monomer. We further confirm the generated conformational ensemble in orthogonal experiments utilizing far-UV circular dichroism and cross-linking mass spectrometry. Single-molecule protein-induced fluorescence enhancement measurements show that within this conformational ensemble, some of the conformations of &#x3b1;-synuclein are surprisingly stable, exhibiting conformational transitions slower than milliseconds. Our comprehensive analysis of the conformational ensemble reveals essential structural properties and potential conformations that promote its various functions in membrane interaction or oligomer and fibril formation.

### Keywords
Molecular dynamics., Trfret, Α-synuclein monomer, Cl-ms

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Biochemistry department in the Hebrew University

### Submitter
Moriya Slavin

### Lab Head
Dr Eitan Lerner
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel


