### Accession
PXD017959

### Title
Abiotic drivers of protein abundance variation among natural populations

### Description
Identifying when and where environmental change induces molecular responses in natural populations is an important goal in contemporary ecology as it can aid in identifying molecular signatures of populations experiencing stressful conditions and potentially inform if species are approaching the limits of their tolerance niches. Achieving this goal is hampered by our understanding of the influence of environmental variation on the molecular systems of most ecologically relevant species as the pathways underlying fitness-affecting plastic responses have primarily been studied in model organisms under controlled laboratory conditions. To start overcoming this limitation, we establish relationships between protein abundance patterns and the abiotic environment. Profiling the proteomes of 24 natural populations of the putatively cold-adapted species Crunoecia irrorata and subsequently relating these profiles to natural variations in their abiotic freshwater spring habitats shows that protein abundances and networks respond to variation according to the functional roles these proteins have. We provide evidence that geographic and environmental distances affect protein abundances and identifications and that baseline abundances can be determined and used as information rather than noise in comparative field studies. Taking this naturally induced variation into account is a prerequisite if we are to identify the effects environmental change has on natural populations.

### Sample Protocol
Eight Crunoecia irrorata larval individuals of similar sizes were collected from 27 (near-) natural freshwater springs, i.e. from 9 springs in three study regions across Germany: Rhoen Biosphere Reserve (R), Harz National Park (H) and the Black Forest (BF). Larval individuals from one spring were pooled into one sample since pooling has been shown to match mean abundances of the individuals making up the pool, thereby reducing the biological variance between pools compared with that between individualsAfter identification, larvae were washed with dH2O and transferred on-site into 5.0 ml Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany) containing 1 ml of RNAlater® (InvitrogenTM). Samples were stored at ~4 °C in a portable fridge (Dometic TropiCool TC 33) until storage at -20 °C was possible.  Prior to protein extraction, samples were thawed on ice and centrifuged at 5,000 rpm. RNA-later was decanted and larvae transferred from RNAlater® into 1,5 ml protein LoBind tubes containing 1 ml cold 10x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). After vortexing for 10 s, larvae were transferred into 1,5 ml protein LoBind tubes containing 400 µl cold lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate [SDC], 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 [adjusted with NaOH/HCL]). Samples were in-tube homogenized with a sterile glass pestle followed by 10 min incubation at 4°C and 3 x 1 ultrasonication (Bandelin Sonoplus HD270). Samples were spun at 5,000 rpm for 10 min at -4°C, and 200 µl supernatant was subsequently transferred to a new tube. To desalt absorbed RNAlater®, trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation was performed according to the protocol by Luis Sanchez47, resulting in a pellet that was dissolved in 200 µl lysis buffer. After 10x1 s sonication, samples were incubated for 10 min at 95°C at 300 rpm in a Thermomixer C (PCR 96 heating block, Eppendorf). At this point, protein concentrations were determined via a Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Thermo ScientificTM PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After letting samples cool down at room temperature, they were spun down at 5,000 rpm for 10 s. Four µl of 0.75 M chloroacetamide solution was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C for 10 min at 500 rpm and again spun down at 5,000 rpm for 10 s. After checking if the pH of each sample was between 8 and 9, 1 µl trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) was added to 50 µg extracted proteins per sample which then were digested overnight at 37°C and 300 rpm. Samples were acidified with 50 µl 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides purified using PreOmics cartridges (Martinsried) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were transferred to 2-ml Eppendorf tubes and concentrated to dryness by applying vacuum for 2 hr. Peptides were subsequently dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid before 1 x 10 s ultrasonication and shaking at 14,000 rpm at 25°C for 5 min. After spinning dissolved peptides down at 4,000 rpm for 10 min, peptide concentrations were determined based on absorbance values using a SPECTROstar Nano Absorbance Plate Reader (BMG Labtech). After calculating the final peptide concentrations for each sample, 0.75 µg dissolved peptides of each sample were transferred to individual 96-plate wells. Finally, 2 µl iRT peptides were added to the wells to control for LC-MS performance, and samples were stored at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using an RP-HPLC column (75 µm x 36 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 12% B over 5 min to 35% B over 65 min to 50% B over 20 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a cycle time of 3 s between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half maximum (at 200 m/z, MS1) and a scan range from 375 to 1,600 m/z followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at “Rapid” scan rate with isolation of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms (MS1) and 35 ms (MS2) with an AGC target of 1.0E6, respectively. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to peptide, and the intensity threshold was set to 5.0E3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra (Thermo raw files) were submitted to an Andromeda search in MaxQuant v1.6.10.43. The “match between runs” option was enabled (match time window: 0.7 min, alignment time window: 20 min). Instrument type was set to Orbitrap, precursor mass tolerance to 15 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to fully tryptic, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. MS/MS spectra were searched against a previously described database consisting of translated gene-prediction sequences of Trichoptera species, additionally including candidate protein-coding regions of Rhyacophila fasciata50; BioProject: PRJNA219600). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 267 sequences). For protein identification, unique and razor peptides were used. The peptide spectrum-match false discovery rate (FDR) and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on the target-decoy approach). Oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) as fixed modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. Minimum peptide length was set to 7.

### Publication Abstract
Deducing impacts of environmental change on species and the populations they form in nature is an important goal in contemporary ecology. Achieving this goal is hampered by our limited understanding of the influence of naturally occurring environmental variation on the molecular systems of ecologically relevant species, as the pathways underlying fitness-affecting plastic responses have primarily been studied in model organisms and under controlled laboratory conditions. Here, to test the hypothesis that proteome variation systematically relates to variation in abiotic conditions, we establish such relationships by profiling the proteomes of 24 natural populations of the spring-dwelling caddisfly Crunoecia irrorata. We identified protein networks whose abundances correlated with environmental (abiotic) gradients such as in situ pH, oxygen- and nitrate concentrations but also climatic data such as past thermal minima and temperature seasonality. Our analyses suggest that variations in abiotic conditions induce discrete proteome responses such as the differential abundance of proteins associated with cytoskeletal function, heat-shock proteins and proteins related to post-translational modification. Identifying these drivers of proteome divergence characterizes molecular "noise", and positions it as a background against which molecular signatures of species' adaptive responses to stressful conditions can be identified.

### Keywords
Eco-toxicology, Natural populations, Proteomics, Plasticity, Enviromental variation

### Affiliations
University of Basel
University of Basel, Department of Environmental Science, Spring Ecology Research Group, Klingelbergstrasse 27, 4056, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Joshua Ebner

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Niklas Ebner
University of Basel, Department of Environmental Science, Spring Ecology Research Group, Klingelbergstrasse 27, 4056, Basel, Switzerland


