### Accession
PXD017485

### Title
A GMC Oxidoreductase GmcA is required for symbiotic nitrogen fixation in Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. Viciae

### Description
GmcA is a FAD-containing enzyme belonging to the GMC (glucose-methanol-choline oxidase) family of oxidoreductases. A mutation in the R. leguminosarum gmcA gene was generated by homologous recombination. The mutation in gmcA did not affect the growth of R. leguminosarum, but it displayed decreased antioxidative capacity at H2O2 conditions higher than 5 mM. The gmcA mutant strain displayed no difference of glutathione reductase activity, but significantly lower level of the glutathione peroxidase activity than the wild type. Although the gmcA mutant can induce the formation of nodules, the symbiotic ability was severely impaired, which led to an abnormal nodulation phenotype coupled to a 30% reduction in the nitrogen fixation capacity. The observation on ultrastructure of 4-week pea nodules showed that the mutant bacteroids tended to start senescence earlier, and accumulate poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) granules. In addition, the gmcA mutant was severely impaired in rhizosphere colonization. Real-time quantitative PCR showed that the gmcA gene expression is significantly upregulated in all the detected stages of nodule development, and statistically significant decreases in the expression of the redoxin genes katG, katE and ohrB, were found in gmcA mutant bacteroids. LC-MS/MS analysis quantitative proteomics techniques were employed to compare differential gmcA mutant root bacteroids in response to  the wild type infection. Sixty differentially expressed proteins were identified including 33 up-regulated and 27 down-regulated proteins. By sorting the identified proteins according to metabolic function, fifteen proteins were transporter protein, twelve proteins were related to stress response and virulence, and nine proteins were related to transcription factor activity. Moreover, nine proteins related to amino acid metabolism were over-expressed.

### Sample Protocol
The 4-week-nodule samples were grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was then added to the cell powder, and the slurry was sonicated for 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected and the protein content was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockland, IL). The resulting proteins were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, and then alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Each protein sample was then diluted by 100 mM tetraethyl ammonium bromide (TEAB) to obtain a urea concentration of less than 2 and  1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second digestion of 4 h. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides then were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column and vacuum-dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according the manufacturer’s instructions of the TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, USA). Concisely, one unit of tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent was dissolved and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in dissolved in solvent A ( 0.1% formic acid in aqueous solution) and loaded directly onto a  reversed phase analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm length). The loaded material was eluted from this column in a linear gradient of 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile ) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, climbing to 80% in 3 min and holding at 80% for 3 min with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The MS proteomics data were deposited to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) by using a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the  ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV. For the full scan mode, the m/z scan range was from 350 to 1800. The intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected to run MS/MS analysis using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were measured using a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. The MS analysis alternated between MS and data-dependent tandem MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to accumulate 5×104 ions with the Fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Experiments were conducted in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed and prepared for database search using the MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox et al., 2008).  The resulting tandem mass spectra were searched against the Rhizobium leguminosarum genome database concatenated with reverse decoy database (Young et al., 2006). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, and the tolerance of the ions was set to  0.02 Da for fragment ion matches. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was specified, and the minimal peptide score for modified peptides was set to 40. Protein expression was analyzed statistically using Student’s t tests (p<0.05). Upregulated and downregulated proteins were defined as having fold changes (FC) > 1.2 and <0.83, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
GmcA is a FAD-containing enzyme belonging to the GMC (glucose-methanol-choline oxidase) family of oxidoreductases. A mutation in the <i>Rhizobium leguminosarum gmcA</i> gene was generated by homologous recombination. The mutation in <i>gmcA</i> did not affect the growth of <i>R. leguminosarum</i>, but it displayed decreased antioxidative capacity at H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> conditions higher than 5 mM. The <i>gmcA</i> mutant strain displayed no difference of glutathione reductase activity, but significantly lower level of the glutathione peroxidase activity than the wild type. Although the <i>gmcA</i> mutant was able to induce the formation of nodules, the symbiotic ability was severely impaired, which led to an abnormal nodulation phenotype coupled to a 30% reduction in the nitrogen fixation capacity. The observation on ultrastructure of 4-week pea nodules showed that the mutant bacteroids tended to start senescence earlier and accumulate poly-&#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) granules. In addition, the <i>gmcA</i> mutant was severely impaired in rhizosphere colonization. Real-time quantitative PCR showed that the <i>gmcA</i> gene expression was significantly up-regulated in all the detected stages of nodule development, and statistically significant decreases in the expression of the redoxin genes <i>katG, katE</i>, and <i>ohrB</i> were found in <i>gmcA</i> mutant bacteroids. LC-MS/MS analysis quantitative proteomics techniques were employed to compare differential <i>gmcA</i> mutant root bacteroids in response to the wild type infection. Sixty differentially expressed proteins were identified including 33 up-regulated and 27 down-regulated proteins. By sorting the identified proteins according to metabolic function, 15 proteins were transporter protein, 12 proteins were related to stress response and virulence, and 9 proteins were related to transcription factor activity. Moreover, nine proteins related to amino acid metabolism were over-expressed.

### Keywords
Rhizobium leguminosarum; the glucose-methanol-choline oxidoreductase gmca; symbiotic nitrogen fixation; antioxidant and symbiotic gene expression; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities

### Submitter
Guojun Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Guojun Cheng
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities


