### Accession
PXD029782

### Title
Proteomic identification of a gastric tumor ECM signature associated with cancer progression

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an undisputable role in tissue homeostasis and its deregulation leads to altered mechanical and biochemical cues that impact cancer development and progression. Herein, we undertook a novel approach to address the role of gastric ECM in tumorigenesis, which remained largely unexplored. By combining decellularization techniques with a high-throughput quantitative proteomics approach, we have performed an extensive characterization of human gastric mucosa, uncovering its composition and distribution among tumor, normal adjacent and normal distant mucosa.  Our results revealed a common ECM signature composed of 142 proteins and indicated that gastric carcinogenesis encompasses ECM remodeling through alterations in the abundance of 24 components, mainly basement membrane proteins. Indeed, we could only identify one de novo tumor-specific protein, the collagen alpha-1(X) chain (COL10A1).  Functional analysis of the data demonstrated that gastric ECM remodeling favor tumor progression by activating ECM receptors and cellular processes involved in angiogenesis and cell-extrinsic metabolic regulation. By analyzing mRNA expression in an independent GC cohort available at the TGCA, we validated the expression profile of 12 differentially expressed ECM proteins. Importantly, the expression of COL1A2, LOX and LTBP2 significantly correlated with high tumor stage, with LOX and LTBP2 further impacting patient overall survival. Our results contribute for a better understanding of GC biology and highlight the role of core ECM components in gastric carcinogenesis and their clinical relevance as biomarkers of disease prognosis.

### Sample Protocol
Normal and tumor decellularized fragments (ca. 30 mg/sample) were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis following an adapted protocol. Briefly, samples were homogenized on ice with a tissue ruptor in an urea solution with reducing agent DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with PNGaseF, Lys-C, and trypsin. Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany), as previously described. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.09 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and submitted as query in the UniProt database for the reviewed Homo sapiens Proteome 2020_02 with 20350 entries and the NIST human spectral library. A common protein contaminant list from MaxQuant was also considered. The MSPepSearch and Sequest HT search engines were used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions in both software. Maximum number of missed cleavage sites allowed was set to two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a constant modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss and Met-loss+acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05, decoy database search target FDR 1%, and validation based on q value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performed considering unique plus razor peptides with the following parameters: precursor abundance based on intensity, and normalization based on total peptide amount. For protein identification, at least two unique peptides and an FDR level of confidence of "high" (p ≤ 0.01) were required. Matrisome annotations were identified using MatrisomeDB (http://matrisomedb.pepchem.org/). Pairwise correlations of protein abundance for the same tissue across diﬀerent patients were quantified using the Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient. The Overlap Coefficient was used to calculate the similarity between the qualitative proﬁles obtained for each of the datasets. For the identification of differentially expressed matrisome proteins among tumor and normal paired samples, we first performed a multiple two-tailed student's t test corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Next, we have calculated average fold change (FC) values for each protein (protein expression in tumor samples normalized against protein expression in normal distant or normal adjacent tissues). For further analysis, we have selected proteins with a corrected p value < 0.05 and a FC ≥ 1.5 (log2 FC ≥ 0.585).

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an undisputable role in tissue homeostasis and its deregulation leads to altered mechanical and biochemical cues that impact cancer development and progression. Herein, we undertook a novel approach to address the role of gastric ECM in tumorigenesis, which remained largely unexplored. By combining decellularization techniques with a high-throughput quantitative proteomics approach, we have performed an extensive characterization of human gastric mucosa, uncovering its composition and distribution among tumor, normal adjacent and normal distant mucosa. Our results revealed a common ECM signature composed of 142 proteins and indicated that gastric carcinogenesis encompasses ECM remodeling through alterations in the abundance of 24 components, mainly basement membrane proteins. Indeed, we could only identify one <i>de novo</i> tumor-specific protein, the collagen alpha-1(X) chain (COL10A1). Functional analysis of the data demonstrated that gastric ECM remodeling favors tumor progression by activating ECM receptors and cellular processes involved in angiogenesis and cell-extrinsic metabolic regulation. By analyzing mRNA expression in an independent GC cohort available at the TGCA, we validated the expression profile of 12 differentially expressed ECM proteins. Importantly, the expression of COL1A2, LOX and LTBP2 significantly correlated with high tumor stage, with LOX and LTBP2 further impacting patient overall survival. These findings contribute for a better understanding of GC biology and highlight the role of core ECM components in gastric carcinogenesis and their clinical relevance as biomarkers of disease prognosis.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Extracellular matrix, Matrisome, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Ipatimup - Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Raquel Seruca
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Ipatimup - Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal


