### Accession
PXD023802

### Title
Heading towards a dead end: the role of DND1 in germ line differentiation of human iPSCs

### Description
The DND microRNA-mediated repression inhibitor 1 (DND1) is a conserved RNA binding protein (RBP) and plays an important role in survival and maintenance of primordial germ cells (PGCs) and the development of the male germline in zebrafish and mice. It was shown to be expressed in human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), PGCs, and spermatogonia, but little is known about its specific role in pluripotency and human germline development. Here we use CRISPR/Cas mediated knockout and PGC-like cell (PGCLC) differentiation in human iPSCs to analyse if DND1 (1) plays a role in maintaining pluripotency and (2) in specification of PGCLCs. We generated several clonal lines with biallelic loss of function mutations and analysed their potential to differentiate towards PGCLCs and their gene expression on RNA and protein level via bulk RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry. The generated knockout iPSCs showed no differences in pluripotency gene expression, proliferation nor trilineage differentiation potential, but yielded reduced numbers o PGCLCs compared to their parental iPSCs. RNAseq analysis in PGCLCs showed significantly reduced expression of genes associated with cellular developmental processes and cell differentiation in knockout cells, including known markers for PGCs (NANOS3, SOX17, PRDM1, EPCAM) and naïve pluripotency (TFCP2L, DNMT3L).

### Sample Protocol
FAC-sorted parent cells (2 x 106/replicate, 3 replicates per line) were prepared for bottom-up mass spectrometry analysis using an approach including in-solution digests and desalting, followed by high pH reversed phase chromatography fractionation using micro-columns (High pH RP Fractionation Kit, Pierce). Peptides in the resulting 8 fractions from the microcolumn high pH reversed phase chromatography were aggregated into 4 pools in a concatenated fashion, lyophilized and stored on Stage tips prior to MS analysis. Peptide samples in 0.1% formic acid were measured on a hybrid TIMS-quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF pro) coupled to a nanoElute UHPLC system via a Captive Spray ion source (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on the nanoElute within 90 min with a linear gradient from 3 to 35% buffer B on a self-packed C18 reverse phase capillary column with pulled emitter tip (nanoseparations; 360 µm OD x 75 µm ID × 250 mm; Reprosil pur C18-aq, 1.9µm, Dr. Maisch) using a constant flow of 300 nl/min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitril). At the end of the gradient the column was flushed with 90% B before re-equilibration at starting conditions. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded in positive mode from m/z 100 to 1700 Da, using the PASEF scan mode. Each duty cycle consisted of 1 TIMS-MS and an average of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames, each one containing multiple MS/MS spectra, which resulted in a total cycle time of 1.1 s. To exclude the majority of singly charged ions with low m/z for PASEF precursor selection, a polygon filtering was applied to the m/z over ion mobility area. For the 90 min runs target intensity was set to of 20.000 cts/s and an ion mobility range (1/K0) of 0.6–1.6 Vs/cm2 was used. Data were acquired with a 100 ms ramp time. The Bruker Hystar / oTOF Control software was used to control the whole LC-MS system and record the data (version 3.2, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen; Germany).

### Data Protocol
MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform (version 1.6.14.0; Cox and Mann, 2008)). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse human Uniprot database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version from 04/2019) including common lab contaminants. Default values of MaxQuant remained unchanged. Trypsin was selected as protease allowing up to two missed cleavages, and the peptide search was limited to a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set at variable modifications and carbamidomethylations of cysteine as fixed modification. For peptide and protein identifications a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required. The match between runs option was enabled setting a retention time matching window of 0.7 min and a 1/K0 matching window of 0.05 V∙s/cm2.  Relative label free quantification using the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was based on the measurements of 3 biological replicates for each sample.  Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.14.0; Tyanova et al., The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods 13, 731–740 (2016)).  First, reverse and contaminant hits as well as proteins that were identified by a single modified peptide only were eliminated from the list of identified protein groups. Proteins eventually included for further analysis had to be identified with at least 1 unique peptide. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and filtered so that at least 2 valid values were present in at least one of the experimental groups. Still missing values (NaN) were replaced by imputation (downshift 1.8, width 0.3), simulating signals of low abundant proteins within the distribution of measured values. PCA analysis was also performed within the Perseus. To identify in a supervised manner the sets of proteins that significantly distinguish the different parent cell lines, an ANOVA multiple samples test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 to correct for multiple hypothesis testing was performed. The heat map was generated on significantly changed proteins only following normalization by Z–scoring.

### Publication Abstract
The DND microRNA-mediated repression inhibitor 1 (DND1) is a conserved RNA binding protein (RBP) that plays important roles in survival and fate maintenance of primordial germ cells (PGCs) and in the development of the male germline in zebrafish and mice. Dead end was shown to be expressed in human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), PGCs and spermatogonia, but little is known about its specific role concerning pluripotency and human germline development. Here we use CRISPR/Cas mediated knockout and PGC-like cell (PGCLC) differentiation in human iPSCs to determine if DND1 (1) plays a role in maintaining pluripotency and (2) in specification of PGCLCs. We generated several clonal lines carrying biallelic loss of function mutations and analysed their differentiation potential towards PGCLCs and their gene expression on RNA and protein levels via RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry. The generated knockout iPSCs showed no differences in pluripotency gene expression, proliferation, or trilineage differentiation potential, but yielded reduced numbers of PGCLCs as compared with their parental iPSCs. RNAseq analysis of mutated PGCLCs revealed that the overall gene expression remains like non-mutated PGCLCs. However, reduced expression of genes associated with PGC differentiation and maintenance (e.g., NANOS3, PRDM1) was observed. Together, we show that DND1 iPSCs maintain their pluripotency but exhibit a reduced differentiation to PGCLCs. This versatile model will allow further analysis of the specific mechanisms by which DND1 influences PGC differentiation and maintenance.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Dnd1, Primordial germ cells, Differentiation, Human pluripotent stem cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48159 Münster Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Insitute for Molecular Biomedicine, Roentgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48159 Münster Germany


