### Accession
PXD023176

### Title
The dipeptide prolyl-hydroxyproline promotes cellular homeostasis and lamellipodia-driven motility via active ?1-integrin in adult tendon cells

### Description
Collagen-derived hydroxyproline-containing peptides show a variety of biological properties in cells. However, no comprehensive study has yet explored the functional links between Hyp-containing peptides and cellular behavior. Here, we show that the dipeptide prolyl-hydroxyproline (Pro–Hyp) exhibits the most significant effect of a number of di- and tri-peptides on mouse tendon cells. We have shown that the cellular uptake of Pro-Hyp is a carrier-mediated process. In addition, Pro-Hyp promotes differentiation/maturation of tendon cells with modulation of lineage-specific factors, has profound effects on cellular phenotypes such as cell proliferation with significantly upregulated ERK-phosphorylation and extracellular matrix production with increased type I collagen network organization, and induced significant chemotactic activity in vitro. Proteomics analysis has identified cellular assembly and organizations, and movement as predicted linked-network pathways in response to Pro-Hyp. Mechanistically, cells treated with Pro-Hyp demonstrate increased directional persistence and significantly increased directed motility and migration velocity, which are accompanied by elongated lamellipodial protrusions with increased active β1-integrin-containing focal contacts and reorganizations of thicker peripheral F-actin fibrils. Thus, our findings document the molecular basis of the functional benefits of Pro-Hyp dipeptide in cellular behavior. Such dynamic properties of collagen-derived Pro-Hyp dipeptide could lead the way to its application to translational medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Adult tenocytes were treated with or without 500 µg/mL of Pro-Hyp for certain time periodsin duplicate (A and B), then washed, scraped and pelleted in phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Subsequently, cells were resuspended in a volume of 0.5 M TEAB/0.1% SDS equivalent to cell pellet volume, and subjected to one freeze-thaw cycle, sonicated and centrifuged. 100 μg protein/sample were denatured, reduced and treated with methyl methanethiosulfonate according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Sciex), before being labelled with isobaric tags for absolute and relative quantification (iTRAQ), and pre-fractionated by cation exchange chromatography. Samples 3d+peptide A and 5d+peptide A failed to label and so these values are missing. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex), delivered into the instrument by automated in-line liquid chromatography using an Eksigent nanoLC 400 System mounted with a NanoAcquity 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm C18 trap and 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm analytical column (Waters, USA).  Spectra were acquired in positive ion mode with up to 25 MS/MS spectra acquired per 2.5 s cycle throughout the course of the 90 min LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification were performed using ProteinPilot 5 (Sciex) and the SwissProt database (May 2019, 17,013 mouse proteins). Proteins identified with more than 95 % confidence and within a global FDR of 1% (decoy reversed database) were included in the statistical analysis. Ratios for each iTRAQ label were obtained using the common pools as the denominator. Data from the three iTRAQ runs were merged using RStudio V.1.0.143. Ratios were converted to their natural log and data analysis was performed using Partek Genomic Suite software V.7.18.0518, (Partek, MO, US). Hierarchical cluster analysis and PCA were performed on data batch corrected for iTRAQ experiment.  Proteins that were differentially expressed between the sample types were revealed using a 2-way ANOVA on the uncorrected data, with iTRAQ experiment and tissue type as factors. In addition, functional pathway prediction activity and upstream regulator analysis was performed on the same list of proteins using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Qiagen).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen-derived peptide; proline-hydroxyproline; adult tendon cells; extracellular matrix; scleraxis; cell motility; extracellular signal-regulated kinase

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Rosalind Jenkins
Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


