### Accession
PXD020884

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals novel modes of function and inter-relationships among PIKKs in response to genotoxic stress

### Description
The DNA damage response (DDR) is a complex signaling network that relies on cascades of protein phosphorylation, which are initiated by three protein kinases of the family of PI3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs): ATM, ATR and DNA-PK.  ATM is missing or inactivated in the genome instability syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). The relative shares of these PIKKs in the response to genotoxic stress and the functional relationships among them are central questions in the genome stability field. We conducted a comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis in human wild-type and A-T cells treated with the double-strand break-inducing chemical, neocarzinostatin, and validated the results with the targeted proteomic technique, selected reaction monitoring. We also matched our results with 34 published screens for DDR factors, creating a valuable resource for identifying strong candidates for novel DDR players. We uncovered fine-tuned dynamics between the PIKKs following genotoxic stress, such as DNA-PK-dependent attenuation of ATM. In A-T cells, partial compensation for ATM absence was provided by ATR and DNA-PK, with distinct roles and kinetics. Our results highlight the intricate relationships between these PIKKs in regulating the DDR.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared in biological triplicates. Cells were collected at 20 or 240 min following NCS treatment, washed twice in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and spun down for 5 min at 1,000g. Cell pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea solution containing 0.1 M ABC, 0.1% RapiGest, and cocktail 2 and 3 phosphatase inhibitors. Disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10 mM at 37°C for 30 min. Free thiols were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The bicinchoninic acid protein assay was used to measure protein concentration. A volume corresponding to 0.7 mg total protein was subsequently diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 75:1. Peptides were desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and dried under vacuum. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 by a protocol modified from (Bodenmiller et al., 2007; Zhou et al., 2013). Briefly, the dried peptides were dissolved in an 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 2.5 % TFA, 1 M glycolic acid solution, and then transferred to a 200 µl tip pre-loaded with TiO2 and processed as described in (Zhou et al., 2013). The enriched phosphopeptides were eluted, desalted and re-suspended in a 2% ACN/0.1% FA buffer that contained diluted synthetic reference peptide mix and iRT retention time kit (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) (Escher et al., 2012). The samples were analyzed on a 5500 QTRAP hybrid triple quadrupole/ion trap mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic separation was performed by a nanoLC AS2 (SCIEX) coupled to a 15-cm (75 μm ID) fused silica emitter (MSwil, Zurich, Switzerland), self-packed with prontoSIL C18 AQ 3 μm resin (WICOM, Heppenheim, Germany). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, in a gradient of solvent A (98% water/2% ACN/0.1% FA) and solvent B (98% ACN/2% water/0.1% FA) from 2 to 35% in 65 minutes (65 min gradient, 2–35%). The instrument was operated in scheduled positive SRM mode at a unit resolution (0.7 m/z half‐maximum peak width) for both Q1 and Q3 analyzers. Unless further optimized, collision energies (CEs) were calculated according to the formulas: CE = 0.044 × m/z precursor + 5.5 and CE = 0.051 × m/z precursor + 0.55, for doubly and triply charged precursor ions, respectively.  Targeted assay generation Targeted assays were generated using synthetic phosphopeptides (Thermo Fisher) labeled with heavy isotopes at the C‐terminal Lys (+8 Da) or Arg (+10 Da). The successful synthesis of each peptide was first confirmed by identification of the peptide in shotgun proteomic analysis. Peptides were mixed in pools and analyzed on a 5500 QTRAP to generate full MS2 fragment ion chromatograms of the y-ion and b-ion series for the 2+ and 3+ precursors. For selected phosphopeptides, neutral loss (-98 Da) ions were also included in the transition list. Skyline (MacLean et al, 2010) and Panorama (Sharma et al, 2014) were used to generate a library from the acquired full MS2 fragment ion chromatograms. For each synthetic phosphopeptide, the 4-8 most intense fragment ions were selected for the targeted assays, taking into account phosphorylation site localization.

### Data Protocol
Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010) was used for targeted data analysis. SRM peak integration was manually confirmed. The reference synthetic standards were used to validate peptide identity by analogy of chromatographic and fragmentation properties (rdotp>0.9), and interfered transitions were removed for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response (DDR) is a complex signaling network that relies on cascades of protein phosphorylation, which are initiated by three protein kinases of the family of PI3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs): ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK. ATM is missing or inactivated in the genome instability syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). The relative shares of these PIKKs in the response to genotoxic stress and the functional relationships among them are central questions in the genome stability field. We conducted a comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis in human wild-type and A-T cells treated with the double-strand break-inducing chemical, neocarzinostatin, and validated the results with the targeted proteomic technique, selected reaction monitoring. We also matched our results with 34 published screens for DDR factors, creating a valuable resource for identifying strong candidates for novel DDR players. We uncovered fine-tuned dynamics between the PIKKs following genotoxic stress, such as DNA-PK-dependent attenuation of ATM. In A-T cells, partial compensation for ATM absence was provided by ATR and DNA-PK, with distinct roles and kinetics. The results highlight intricate relationships between these PIKKs in the DDR.

### Keywords
Ddr, Dna-pk, Dna damage, Atm, Atr

### Affiliations
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Tel Aviv University School of Medicine Tel Aviv 69987, Israel
TAU

### Submitter
Sapir Schlam

### Lab Head
Dr Yosef Shiloh
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Tel Aviv University School of Medicine Tel Aviv 69987, Israel


