### Accession
PXD041853

### Title
Inhibition of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay reduces the tumorigenicity of human fibrosarcoma cells

### Description
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a eukaryotic RNA degradation pathway that targets for degradation faulty mRNAs with premature termination codons as well as many physiological mRNAs encoding full-length proteins. Consequently, NMD functions in both, quality control and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, and it has been implicated in the modulation of cancer progression. To investigate the role of NMD in cancer, we knocked out SMG7 in the HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cell line. SMG7 is involved in deadenylation-coupled exonucleolytic mRNA decay, one of the two main degradation pathways in mammalian NMD. Genome-wide proteomic and transcriptomic analyses confirmed that NMD is severely compromised in these SMG7-knockout HT1080 cells. We compared the oncogenic properties between the parental, the SMG7-knockout, and a rescue cell line in which we re-introduced both isoforms of SMG7. In parallel, we tested the effect of a drug inhibiting the NMD factor SMG1 on the HT1080 cells to distinguish NMD-dependent effects from putative NMD-independent functions of SMG7. Using cell-based assays as well as a mouse xenograft tumor model, we show that the oncogenic properties of the parental HT1080 cells areseverely compromised when NMD is inhibited. Molecular pathway analysis revealed a strong reduction of the matrix metalloprotease 9 (MMP9) gene expression in NMD-suppressed cells. Since MMP9 expression promotes cancer cell migration and invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis, its downregulation in NMD-suppressed cells explains, at least partially, their reduced tumorigenicity. Collectively, our findings emphasize the therapeutic potential of NMD inhibition for the treatment ofcertain types of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis by SILAC and MS/MS.HT1080, SMG7KO_11 and SMG7KO_12 cells were grown for 8 cell doublings in SILAC labelling medium(85). Each cell line was labelled once with light- and once with heavy- amino acids. After harvesting,cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) supplemented with proteaseinhibitors. Next, the light- and heavy-labelled protein lysates of the cell lines to be compared were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, reduced, alkylated and precipitated with cold acetone. Finally, the purified proteinmixtures were resuspended in loading buffer (NuPAGETM LDS Sample Buffer, Thermo Fisher Scientific)and 40 μg of protein mix per lane were loaded on a NuPAGETM 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Thermo FisherScientific). After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and the gel lanes were cut into 22 slices. The gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (86). The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with one injection of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a μPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm × 5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach,Switzerland) and separated by back flush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 15 cm, C18) by applying a 40-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control(AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1%,charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.   85.V. Flury, U. Restuccia, A. Bachi, O. Mühlemann, Characterization of phosphorylation- and RNA-dependent UPF1 interactors by quantitative proteomics. J Proteome Res 13, 3038–53 (2014).  86.K. Gunasekera, D. Wüthrich, S. Braga-Lagache, M. Heller, T. Ochsenreiter, Proteome remodelling during development from blood to insect-form Trypanosoma brucei quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics 13, 556 (2012).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was searched with MaxQuant (87) software version 1.5.4.1 against the Human Swiss-Prot (88) database (release 2016_04). Heavy labels were given as arg (R10) and lys (K8) with a maximum of three labeled amino acid in a peptide; digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P, allowing for a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; first search peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance to 20 ppm; allowed variable modifications were Oxidation (M) and Acetyl(Protein N-term), with a maximum of 3 modifications allowed per peptide; Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Match between runs was enabled between identical gel bands and their direct neighbors with default parameters. Each pair of ratio and reversed ratio samples were analyzedto identify protein groups behaving inconsistently. This was done by plotting the log2 ratio versus the log2 inverse ratio and identification of regression outliers from absolute Studentized residuals (R MASSpackage (89)) > 5.209 (0.9999999th quantile of the corresponding Student distribution). Protein groups flagged as outliers were not further considered. The strength of the pair correlation was then estimated using the R duplicateCorrelation package (90), and as suggested, used as parameter in the empirical Bayes approach (moderated t-statistics (91)) used to evaluate differential expression between the two groups. Resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple testing by the Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate-controlled approach (92).      87.J. Cox, M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367–72 (2008).  88.UniProt Consortium, UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D506–D515 (2019).  89.W. N. Venables, B. D. Ripley, Modern Applied Statistics with S, Fourth (Springer, 2002).  90.G. K. Smyth, J. Michaud, H. S. Scott, Use of within-array replicate spots for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Bioinformatics 21, 2067–2075 (2005).  91.K. Kammers, R. N. Cole, C. Tiengwe, I. Ruczinski, Detecting significant changes in protein abundance. EuPA Open Proteom 7, 11–19 (2015).  92.Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 57, 289–300 (1995).

### Publication Abstract
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a eukaryotic RNA decay pathway with roles in cellular stress responses, differentiation, and viral defense. It functions in both quality control and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. NMD has also emerged as a modulator of cancer progression, although available evidence supports both a tumor suppressor and a pro-tumorigenic role, depending on the model. To further investigate the role of NMD in cancer, we knocked out the NMD factor SMG7 in the HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cell line, resulting in suppression of NMD function. We then compared the oncogenic properties of the parental cell line, the SMG7-knockout, and a rescue cell line in which we re-introduced both isoforms of SMG7. We also tested the effect of a drug inhibiting the NMD factor SMG1 to distinguish NMD-dependent effects from putative NMD-independent functions of SMG7. Using cell-based assays and a mouse xenograft tumor model, we showed that suppression of NMD function severely compromises the oncogenic phenotype. Molecular pathway analysis revealed that NMD suppression strongly reduces matrix metalloprotease 9 (MMP9) expression and that MMP9 re-expression partially rescues the oncogenic phenotype. Since MMP9 promotes cancer cell migration and invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis, its downregulation may contribute to the reduced tumorigenicity of NMD-suppressed cells. Collectively, our results highlight the potential value of NMD inhibition as a therapeutic approach.

### Keywords
Nmd, Tumor progression, Fibrosarcoma, Smg7, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Dept. of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility,
Departement for Biomedical Research,
University of Berne

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Mühlemann
Dept. of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, Switzerland


