### Accession
PXD030598

### Title
Data independent acquisition mass spectrometry in severe Rheumatic Heart Disease (RHD) identifies a proteomic signature showing ongoing inflammation and effectively classifying RHD cases.

### Description
Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) remains a major source of morbidity and mortality in developing countries. A deeper insight into the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying RHD could provide opportunities for drug repurposing, guide recommendations for secondary penicillin prophylaxis, and/or inform development of near-patient diagnostics. We performed quantitative proteomics using Sequential Windowed Acquisition of All Theoretical Fragment Ion Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) to screen protein expression in 215 African patients with severe RHD, and 230 controls. A machine learning (ML) approach was applied to feature selection among the 366 proteins quantifiable in at least 40% of samples, using the Boruta wrapper algorithm. The case-control differences and contribution to AUC of the ROC for each of the 56 proteins identified by the Boruta algorithm were calculated by Logistic Regression adjusted for age, sex and BMI. Adiponectin, complement component C7 and fibulin-1, a component of heart valve matrix, were each higher in cases when compared with controls. Ficolin-3, a protein with calcium-independent lectin activity that activates the complement pathway, was lower in cases than controls. The top six biomarkers from the Boruta analyses conferred an AUC of 0.90 indicating excellent discriminatory capacity between RHD cases and controls.

### Sample Protocol
Two-hundred and fifteen patientswith severe RHD, and 230 healthy controls, of various ethnicities recruited in peri-urban  settings across the African  continent,  were included in this  sub study.  5ml of blood were obtained through standard procedures by a trained on-site  nurse  and  transported for  processing to  the  Cardiovascular  Genetics  laboratory at  the University  of  Cape  Town.  Briefly,  blood  tubes  were  centrifuged  at  3000rpm  for  10  minutes and plasma aliquoted into vials for storage at -80°C.   Samples were quality-checked, assigned a unique ID and cases and controls were randomized and prepared  for  mass  spectrometry  by  tryptic  hydrolysis  after  immunoaffinity  depletion  of  the  12 major  proteins  found  in  plasma. To  counteract  batch  effects  following  machine  cleaning,  we repeatedly tested plasma from pooled samples or a commercial standard until the Total Ion Current (TIC) Chromatogram stabilised, before running patient samples. Digitized proteomic maps were generated  through  SWATH-MS  analysis  performed  on  a  6600  TripleTOF  mass  spectrometer (Sciex, Warrington, UK) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo, UK), with specific mass spectrometric conditions (including isolation window size and overlap and total cycle time).

### Data Protocol
Spectral libraries were generated by TransProteomic Pipeline (version 4.8.0). X!  Tandem 150 (version 2015.04.01.1) was used to interrogate the SWATH-MS files ge nerated from the samples. More specifically,the samples were pooled together to  create a final set of 12 fractions and processed, generating 12 files that were searched against the appropriate database with X!Tandem. These files were further processed with the TransProteomic Pipeline,containing xinteract, InterPropherParser and spectrast, to generate the spectral library. SWATH maps were generated by OpenMS (version 2.0.1) and MSproteomicstools (version 0.4.3). pyProphet (version 0.18.3) was used for the False Discovery Rate (FDR) calculations of the resulting transition groups. Feature alignment tools were used to align multiple pyProphet files with the corrected retention times and FDR scores. As the aligned SWATH maps contain transition-level information, MSstats() function from the R package Msstats (version 3.13.5) was used to infer protein-level quantification. Parameters chosen were “top3” option for parameter “featureSubset” and normalisation with Tukey-Median Polish (TMP). Coefficient of variance (CV) analysis between technical injection replicates was performed on the resulting MSstats-processed data, with samples allowed to go forward to downstream analysis if the median and 75% quantiles were 20% and 30% maximum, respectively. Proteins present in at least 40% of the samples were retained in the following biomarker analysis. The 12 purposely physically immunodepleted proteins were removed in silico prior to statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein signature, Swath-mas, Inflammation, Rheumatic heart disease

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town & Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa

### Submitter
jing yang

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Engel
Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town & Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa


