### Accession
PXD034222

### Title
Oenothera effect on senescent NDHF

### Description
Accumulation of senescent dermal fibroblasts drives skin aging, impairing the integrity of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the function of neighbouring cells. One of strategies to manipulate cell senescence include the reactivation of proliferation. Here, a data independent mass spectrometry based proteomic approach has been used to evaluate the effect of an hydrophilic Oenothera biennis cell culture extract (ObHEx) on senescent human dermal fibroblasts.  It has been shown that the extract was able to affect the levels of 18 proteins which cluster together and point to mitosis pathways. Indeed the treatment with ObHEx increase the expression of CDK1, replicative helicase complex (MCM2, MCM3, MCM4, MCM5, MCM6, MCM7), condensin I complex (NCAPD2, NCAPH, NCAPG, SMC4, SMC2) and other proteins related to kinetochore (KNTC1, NUF2, TRIP13). This strongly suggests that ObHEx could restore the proliferation of senescent fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular lysates protein quantification was performed using DC™ Protein Assay Kit (Biorad; #5000112). S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on  50 µg of cell lysates according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 20mM TCEP and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 15min at room temperature. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 2.5% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Five extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Then, cellular lysates were digested with 2.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried, resuspended in 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA and quantified by Nanodrop. 400 ng of each sample was injected on a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. HPLC separation (Solvent A : 0.1% formic acid in water; Solvent B : 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was carried out at 250 nL/min using a packed emitter column (C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm) (Ion Optics, Australia) using a gradient elution (2 to 13% solvent B during 41min; 13 to 20% during 23min; 20% to 30% during 5min;  30% to 85% for 5min and finally 85% for 5min to wash the column). Mass-spectrometric data were acquired using the diaPASEF (data independent analysis parallel accumulation serial fragmentation) acquisition method. The measurements were carried out over the m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th. The range of ion mobilities values from 0.6 to 1.6 V s/cm2(1/k0).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using DIA-NN software (version 1.8). A search against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (release 02-2021, 20408 entries) was performed using library free workflow. For this purpose, “FASTA digest for library free search/library generation” and “Deep learning spectra, RTs and IMs prediction” options were checked for precursor ion generation. Maximum of 2 trypsin missed cleavages was allowed and maximum variable modification was set to 5. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal methionine excision, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide length range was set to 7-30 amino acids, precursor charge range 2-4, precursor m/z range 300-1800 and fragment ion m/z range 200-1800.  To search parent mass and fragment ions, accuracy was inferred automatically by DIA-NN and was set around 13 ppm for each analysis . The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Match between runs was allowed. For the quantification strategy, Robust LC (high precision) was used as advised in the software documentation, whereas default settings were kept for the other algorithm parameters. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.15) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org  and R/R Studio (R version 4.1.2 (www.R-project.org) and RStudio version 2021.09.1 (www.rstudio.com)). All R statistical analysis was performed using the R stats package. The pg_report matrix output by DIA-NN was used and intensities were log2 transformed for statistical analysis. For statistical comparison, we set four groups, each containing up to 5 biological replicates. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. Student t-test was performed between SEN and CTRL FDR<0.05, S0=0.5 to confirm the presence of markers specific to senescence. Then, in order to investigate if the difference of the effect size between the absence or presence of the treatment is the same for cells where senescence was induced or not, the interaction between both factors (i.e. Induction and Treatment), was investigate using 2-way ANOVA in R. For this purpose, the following model formula was used inside the aov() function: x ~ Induction + Treatment + Induction:Treatment where x corresponds to a specific gene/protein, “Induction” factor represents the induction of not of senescence and “Treatment”, the absence or presence of the extract ObHex. Then p-value obtained for the interaction of both factors were adjusted for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg method in order to control the False Discrovery Rate (FDR) using the p.adjust() function with the “BH” method. Finally, TukeyHSD post hoc analysis was performed on protein showing a q-value < 0.05 in order to investigate in which comparison the effect size changes occured using TukeyHSD() function with a family-wise confidence level of 0.95.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of senescent dermal fibroblasts drives skin aging. The reactivation of proliferation is one strategy to modulate cell senescence. Recently, we reported the exact chemical composition of the hydrophilic extract of <i>Oenothera biennis</i> cell cultures (ObHEx) and we showed its skin anti-aging properties. The aim of this work is to assess its biological effect specifically on cell senescence. ObHEx action has been evaluated on normal human dermal fibroblasts subjected to stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS) through an ultra-deep proteomic analysis, leading to the most global senescence-associated proteome so far. Mass spectrometry data show that the treatment with ObHEx re-establishes levels of crucial mitotic proteins, strongly downregulated in senescent cells. To validate our proteomics findings, we proved that ObHEx can, in part, restore the activity of 'senescence-associated-&#xdf;-galactosidase', the most common hallmark of senescent cells. Furthermore, to assess if the upregulation of mitotic protein levels translates into a cell cycle re-entry, FACS experiments have been carried out, demonstrating a small but significative reactivation of senescent cell proliferation by ObHEx. In conclusion, the deep senescence-associated global proteome profiling published here provides a panel of hundreds of proteins deregulated by SIPS that can be used by the community to further understand senescence and the effect of new potential modulators. Moreover, proteomics analysis pointed to a specific promitotic effect of ObHEx on senescent cells. Thus, we suggest ObHEx as a powerful adjuvant against senescence associated with skin aging.

### Keywords
Hydrophilic extract of oenothera biennis cell cultures; senescence; proteomics; data independent mass spectrometry; fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
Head of the Necker Proteomics Plataform Paris France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Head of the Necker Proteomics Plataform Paris France


