### Accession
PXD045182

### Title
Proteomic data on the biodegradation of doxycycline by Chryseobacterium sp. WX1

### Description
In this study, we isolated a potent doxycycline-degrading bacterium, Chryseobacterium sp. WX1, from environmental samples. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying doxycycline degradation by strain WX1, we assessed and interpreted the proteomic profiles of Chryseobacterium sp. WX1  under conditions both with and without doxycycline exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Strain WX1 cells initially grown in LB medium were washed and inoculated in triplicate 100 mL DOX degradation media with or without DOX addition (50 mg/L). Cells were harvested at 24 h by centrifugation (10,000 rpm, 5 min) for subsequent protein extraction procedures. Protein lysate (8 M urea, 1% SDS) was added to inhibit the protease activity. Then the mixture was sonicated on ice for 2 min and incubated for 30 min. After centrifugation (12,000 g) at 4°C for 30 min, the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit（(Pierce,Thermo, USA). The proteins were subsequently subjected to reductive alkylation and digestion, resulting in the generation of peptides. These peptides were labeled using TMT (tandem mass tag) reagents (Thermofisher) and fractionated into fractions by the Vanquish Flex UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (2.1mm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters, USA).

### Data Protocol
Labeled peptides were then analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry performed on an Evosep One system (Evosep, Denmark) connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source. The raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 against the protein database of strain WX1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chryseobacterium

### Affiliations
Peking University
lab

### Submitter
Xiuli Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Shuguang Xie
lab


