### Accession
PXD046455

### Title
Proteomics data of Escherichia phage vB_EcoS-EE09 isolated from wastewater treatment plant effluent and its infected and non-infected host E. coli DSM613

### Description
This dataset was created to (i) compare the protein expression of E. coli DSM613 cells infected and uninfected with phage vB_EcoS-EE09 and (ii) detect structural proteins of phage vB_EcoS-EE09. Thus, this set provides proteomic data of three setups: 1. Uninfected E. coli DSM613 (file names [file ID]: 04_22A [F40]; 13_ecolicontrol_01 [F13]; 14_ecolicontrol_02 [F14]) 2. E. coli DSM613 infected with phage vB_EcoS-EE09 (file names [file ID]: 02_13A [F39]; 27_ecoliinfected_01 [F27]; 28_ecoliinfected_02 [F28]) 3. Cell-free phage lysate of phage vB_EcoS-EE09 (sample name: 01_EE09)

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultivated in triplicates in LB medium and harvested after 25 min of phage infection by centrifugation at 21,910 x g for 2 min. Controls were mock infected with SMG buffer. Cell-free lysate was concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 82,000 x g for 2 h.  Samples were disrupted by 5x freeze/thaw and treated with 80 ng BSA, 5% sodium deoxycholate,12 mM dithiothreitol, and 40 mM 2-iodoacetamide before digestion with 0.63 µg trypsin. Tryptic peptides were desalted using Pierce C-18 Tips before loaded onto nano-LC equiped with an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 with Sequest HT as the search engine allowing mass tolerances of ±3 ppm and ±0.1 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Fasta files containing all protein sequences from the genome of E. coli DSM613 (ATCC11303) and phage vB_EcoS-EE09 as well as common contaminants were used for peptide search. Maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Protein abundances were quantified using precursor ion intensity with the Minora node in Proteome Discoverer. Abundances were normalized between samples using total peptide amounts and p-values (adjusted by Benjamini-Hochberg correction) were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Phages influence microbial communities, can be applied in phage therapy, or may serve as bioindicators, e.g., in (waste)water management. We here characterized the Escherichia phage vB_EcoS-EE09 isolated from an urban wastewater treatment plant effluent. Phage vB_EcoS-EE09 belongs to the genus <i>Dhillonvirus</i>, class <i>Caudoviricetes</i>. It has an icosahedral capsid with a long non-contractile tail and a dsDNA genome with an approximate size of 44 kb and a 54.6% GC content. Phage vB_EcoS-EE09 infected 12 out of the 17 <i>E. coli</i> strains tested. We identified 16 structural phage proteins, including the major capsid protein, in cell-free lysates by protein mass spectrometry. Comparative proteomics of protein extracts of infected <i>E. coli</i> cells revealed that proteins involved in amino acid and protein metabolism were more abundant in infected compared to non-infected cells. Among the proteins involved in the stress response, 74% were less abundant in the infected cultures compared to the non-infected controls, with six proteins showing significant less abundance. Repressing the expression of these proteins may be a phage strategy to evade host defense mechanisms. Our results contribute to diversifying phage collections, identifying structural proteins to enable better reliability in annotating taxonomically related phage genomes, and understanding phage-host interactions at the protein level.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Dhillonvirus, Strctural proteome, Coliphage, Shotgun proteomics, Bacteriophage, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Environmental Biotechnology and Technische Universität Berlin, Geobiotechnology
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Simon Klaes

### Lab Head
Professor Lorenz Adrian
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Environmental Biotechnology and Technische Universität Berlin, Geobiotechnology


