### Accession
PXD022606

### Title
Ac-IP tag enables multiplexed proteome quantification in data-independent acquisition mode

### Description
We propose the isotopically labeled Ac-IP (acetyl-isoleucine-proline) tag for multiplexed quantification of peptides at the MS1 level in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Differentially labeled peptides have distinct precursor ions carrying the quantitative information but identical MS2 spectra. The isotopically labeled Ac-Ile part leaves as a neutral loss upon collision-induced dissociation (CID) while fragmentation of the peptide backbone generates information for peptide identification.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction/Alkylation and LysC Digestion.100 μg of BSA or yeast protein was dissolved in 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB. Then, 5 μL of 200 mM TCEP was added and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Afterwards, 5 μL of 375 mM freshly prepared 2-iodoacetamide was added and the mixture was incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Finally, 800 μL of acetone was added and the mixture was kept at -20 °C overnight for precipitation. The precipitated protein was centrifuged at 20800 g for 30 min. Subsequently, the supernatant was decanted and alkylated proteins were stored at -20 °C until digestion.100 μg alkylated BSA or yeast protein was dissolved in 200 μL of 100 mM TEAB and 2 μg LysC dissolved in 1 % formic acid was added. The pH was adjusted to 7.5-8 with 1 M TEAB and the digestion was kept overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was terminated by acidification using 10% TFA and the resulting LysC peptide mixtures of BSA and yeast proteins were freeze-dried and stored at -80 °C before conducting the labeling reactions.  Selective N-terminal dimethylation of peptides. 100 μg of peptide GTDWLANK, LysC peptides of BSA or LysC peptides of yeast proteins were dissolved in 100 μL of 1% (aq.) acetic acid. 10 μL of 4% formaldehyde in water was added to the peptide solution and the mixture was shaken for 2 min before adding 15 μL of 600 mM sodium cyanoborohydride dissolved in 1% (aq.) acetic acid. The reaction was shaken for 15 min at room temperature. Excess reagents were removed by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure and the collected N-terminally dimethylated peptides were freeze-dried and stored at -80 °C.  Triplex labeling of N-terminally dimethylated peptides. 5 μg of N-terminally dimethylated GTDWLANK, LysC peptides of BSA or LysC peptides of yeast proteins were dissolved in 50 μL of 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer of pH 8.5. Then, 4 μL of 50 mM Ac-IP-NHS, 13C1-Ac-IP-NHS and 13C2-Ac-IP-NHS in DMF were added to 3 peptide solutions, respectively. The reaction mixtures were shaken for 2 h at room temperature. To ensure complete labeling, 2 μL of the respective Ac-IP-NHS reagent was added again and incubated for 1 h more. Any esterification on the hydroxyl groups of Ser, Thr or Tyr and excess NHS ester were hydrolyzed in the presence of 5% hydroxylamine hydrate at 55 °C for 5 min and samples were then desalted by SPE using the STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) TIPS Desalting Procedure prior to LC-MS analysis. 600 μL of 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to remove excess Ac-IP-COOH before eluting peptides from the STAGE tips with 60% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% TFA (Supplementary Fig. S10).

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Quantification. To create the spectral library, LC-MS/MS raw files measured in DDA mode were analyzed with PEAKS X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) and searched against the UniProt reference database of yeast (UP000002311, 6049 entries, downloaded on Jan. 20, 2020) to which the BSA entry (P02769) was added manually. LysC was selected as enzyme, the digestion mode was set to specific and the maximal number of missed cleavage sites to 1. A tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions was applied. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteine and dimethylation (+28.03) on the N-terminus were set as fixed modifications and oxidation (+15.99) on methionine as variable modification. The neutral losses of triplex Ac-IP tags were manually added in the ‘PTMNeutralLossScorer.properties’ file as folllows: ‘Ac-IP on Lys@K_155.094629_TRUE, Ac-IP (13C+1) on Lys@K_156.097983_TRUE, Ac-IP (13C+2) on Lys@K_157.101338_TRUE’. For triplex labeling experiments, variable modifications on Lys were set as Ac-IP (+252.1474), 13C1-Ac-IP (+253.1508) and 13C2-Ac-IP (+254.1542). The identification results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% for peptides. The filtered results were exported as spectral library for DIA analysis using the default parameters of PEAKS X+.   For identification of peptides in DIA, the raw files measured in DIA mode were searched against the prepared spectral library and the UniProt reference database of yeast (UP000002311) complemented with BSA was selected as the PEAKS reference database. A tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions was applied. The DIA results were also filtered with an FDR of 0.5% for peptides.  The PEAKS output of the peptides matched to proteins (protein-peptides.csv) and the peptide-spectrum matches (DB search psm.csv) were exported from DIA identifications. All the following steps were performed using in-house built Python scripts. Only the unique peptides extracted from the protein-peptides.csv files were used for quantification. For every peptide spectrum match (PSM) that was derived from unique peptides in the DB search psm.csv files, the theoretical precursor masses were calculated and grouped by the scan number. The MS1 spectra of DIA raw data was converted into a Python readable mgf file with RawConverter. All MS1 spectra were extracted from the resulting mgf file and also grouped by the scan number. For a given PSM, based on the scan number of the PSM, the corresponding nearest MS1 spectrum was selected and from which the measured peak intensities of precursor masses were used to determine ratios for that given PSM. Examples of deconvolution and ratio calculation at the PSM level can be found in Supplementary Fig. S2. When more than one PSM related to a same peptide, the ratio derived from the PSM that has the highest score of ‘-10lgP’ was used to calculate the ratio for that peptide. Then, the top three peptides which have the highest ‘-10lgP’ were used to calculate the ratio for the corresponding protein. Examples of calculating ratios for peptides and proteins can be found in Supplementary Fig. S7.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) is an increasingly used approach for quantitative proteomics. However, most current isotope labeling strategies are not suitable for DIA as they lead to more complex MS2 spectra or severe ratio distortion. As a result, DIA suffers from a lower throughput than data-dependent acquisition (DDA) due to a lower level of multiplexing. Herein, we synthesized an isotopically labeled acetyl-isoleucine-proline (Ac-IP) tag for multiplexed quantification in DIA. Differentially labeled peptides have distinct precursor ions carrying the quantitative information but identical MS2 spectra since the isotopically labeled Ac-Ile part leaves as a neutral loss upon collision-induced dissociation, while fragmentation of the peptide backbone generates regular fragment ions for identification. The Ac-IP-labeled samples can be analyzed using general DIA liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry settings, and the data obtained can be processed with established approaches. Relative quantification requires deconvolution of the isotope envelope of the respective precursor ions. Suitability of the Ac-IP tag is demonstrated with a triplex-labeled yeast proteome spiked with bovine serum albumin that was mixed at 10:5:1 ratios, resulting in measured ratios of 9.7:5.3:1.1.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Isotope labeling, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Biochemistry and Interfaculty Mass Spectrometry Center, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands
University of Groningen

### Submitter
Xiaobo Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Bischoff
Department of Analytical Biochemistry and Interfaculty Mass Spectrometry Center, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands


