### Accession
PXD001163

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the Plasmodium male gamete reveals a key role for glycolysis in flagellar motility

### Description
Gametogenesis and fertilization play crucial roles in malaria transmission. While male gametes are thought to be amongst the simplest eukaryotic cells and are proven targets of transmission blocking immunity, little is known about their molecular organization. For example, the pathways of energy metabolism that power motility, a feature that facilitates gamete encounter and fertilization, is unknown. To gain more insight into male gamete, we performed the first proteomic analysis of purified Plasmodium berghei microgametes. We recovered 615 proteins, which include all male gamete proteins described thus far. Amongst the most abundant proteins were the 11 enzymes of the glycolytic pathway. We localized the hexose transporter to the gamete plasma membrane and show that microgamete motility can be suppressed effectively by inhibitors of this transporter, and of the glycolytic pathway. Taken together, these results suggest that glycolysis is the exclusive source of energy for microgamete motility. Considering that this proteome provides a unique platform for the understanding of the original features of the male gamete, we discuss not only the mitochondria-independent energy metabolism but also flagellar structure and intra-flagellar transport-independent assembly, another divergent feature of these cells.

### Sample Protocol
At day 4 post-infection, mice were injected i.p with 150 l sulfadiazine (4 mg/ml) to remove asexual parasites 12. After 24 hours, parasites were harvested and gametocytes were allowed to activate in exflagellation medium (RPMI 1640 (Sigma, UK) supplemented with 25 mM Hepes (Sigma, UK) and 100 M xanthurenic acid (Sigma, UK), pH 7.4) for 20 minutes. The parasites were pelleted at 500 g for 5 minutes and re-suspended in their own supernatant, the parasites were pelleted again and the supernatant (containing extracellular male and female gametes) was harvested and spun at 10 10,000 g for 7 minutes. The pelleted samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes, the supernatant (now containing male gametes that had swum from the pellet) was harvested and spun at 12, 000 g for 10 minutes at 4C and washed twice in PBS. Samples were immediately stored at -80C. Pellets were treated with a 5X solution of Invitrosol (Invitrogen, UK) and heated to 60C for 5 minutes, vortexed for 2 minutes and sonicated for 1 hour. The solution was diluted to 1X Invitrosol with 100 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.5). Samples were reduced and carboxyamidomethylated, followed by digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C for 6 hours. The solution was diluted to 4 M urea with 100 mM Tris buffer and further digested with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by MudPIT as described previously 1 with modifications. An Eksigent HPLC coupled directly to a Finnigan LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose CA) equipped with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source  was used and peptide mixtures were resolved by strong cation exchange liquid chromatography upstream of reverse-phase liquid chromatography.  Fully automated 11-step chromatography was carried out on each sample

### Data Protocol
From the resulting data, poor quality spectra were removed using an automated spectral quality assessment algorithm.  Raw files were converted to mxzml format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard). The 339,763 MS/MS spectra from three biological replicates (GametesRep1: 102,987 MS/MS spectra, GametesRep2: 110,826 MS/MS spectra, and GametesRep3: 125,950 MS/MS spectra) were searched by PepArML  meta search engine. Mascot 2.2, OMSSA 2.1.1, X!Tandem 2010.01.01.4  with K-score 2010.01.01  and S-score 2010.01.01.4 plugins, Inspect 20110313 and MyriMatch 1.5.8  search engines were used within PepArML with the following parameters: semi-specific trypsin digestion, one missed cleavage, precursor tolerance 10 ppm and fragment tolerance 0.5 Da and maximum 4 charge state, fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine. A custom built fasta database (51,833 sequences) with Plasmodium berghei (GeneDB, 2013), Human (SwissProt, 2013) and Mouse (SwissProt, 2013) sequences were used. Search results from all search engines were combined and a combination false discovery rate (FDR) was reported. Combination was performed using an unsupervised machine-learning strategy which estimates peptide identification FDR from reversed decoy searches. The search results were analysed for result interpretation in MASPECTRAS 2.0  with 1% spectra FDR and 1% peptide FDR, a minimum of two peptides for a protein, and at least 5 amino acids for a peptide.  The identified proteins from three different biological runs were pooled for result interpretation. Protein identifications passing thresholds from Human and Mouse were excluded and the remaining Plasmodium berghei protein identifications were clustered according to shared peptides; clustering was performed because many proteins were isoforms, splice variants or fragments of a representative protein in each protein cluster.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Male gametes, Gametogenesis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Imperial College London, UK
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine

### Submitter
Ceereena Ubaida Mohien

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur M. Talman
Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Imperial College London, UK


