### Accession
PXD000703

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Artemisia annua

### Description
There is growing interest to apply proteomics to other organisms than just the biomedically relevant and important species such as human, mouse or rat.  However, one of the main hurdles for successful application of proteomics to the organism of interest is still the availability of a well annotated and curated (genomic) database that can be used to search the (mainly MS-based) proteomic data for protein identification.  Thus, the field of proteogenomics is increasingly becoming important with the aim to support the annotation of genomic sequence data by exploiting the information that is obtained through proteomics from the identification and characterization of the actual gene products/expression. Here, we have studied the organism Artemisia annua, which is a Chinese medicinal plant endemic to northern parts of China.  A. annua is crucial to world health programs as it is currently the sole source for biosynthetically produced artemisinin, the anitmalarial pro-drug compound that has been the last line of defence against malaria for decades.

### Sample Protocol
Trichomes were isolated from artemisia leaves by mixing glass beads in the buffer.  Supernatant was filtered through series of sieves to enrich the trichomes.  Protein was isolated from trichomes, trichome depleted leaf whole leaf using TCA-Acetone method.  Protein concentration was measured using bradford assay.  Isolated protein was digested using trypsin enzyme (1:20 ratio).  Digested protein was run on the Dionex 3000RSLC nano system coupled with LTQ Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were processed using Mascot Distiller software version 2.4.3.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) to convert the raw LC-MS/MS data of each technical replicate for each sample type (trichome-enriched, trichome-depleted and whole leaf sample) into a Mascot Generic File (.mgf file).  Searches were then performed against protein databases using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science), which combined the database search results from all three technical replicates of each sample type.  Searches were performed using the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance, 10ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.8 Da; Peptide charge, +2, +3, +4; missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); percolator enabled, cut off 0.05 and variable modification, Oxidation (M).  Taxonomy of viridiplantae was specified when searching against the A. annua contig and UniprotKB databases.  The merged database search results from the trichome-enriched sample were compared against the merged database results from the trichome-depleted sample and the whole leaf sample by using their Mascot-derived emPAI values and calculating the proportional fold differences for each contig/protein by dividing the emPAI values of the trichome-enriched sample with those values of the trichome-depleted and whole leaf sample, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Artemisia annua, Proteomics, Label free quantitation, Empai

### Affiliations
Chemistry
Department of Chemistry, University of Reading, UK

### Submitter
Rainer  Cramer

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Cramer
Department of Chemistry, University of Reading, UK


