### Accession
PXD031797

### Title
Transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and post-translational mechanisms rewrite the tubulin code during cardiac hypertrophy and failure

### Description
mouse alpha- and beta- tubulin isoform characterization of hypertrophied hearts after 4 days of phenylephrine (PE) or isoproterenol (Iso) induction

### Sample Protocol
To quantify the relative changes of multiple proteins of interest in the total protein lysate, aliquoted diluted total protein lysate samples were thawed at 22°C. 1 part 4x loading buffer freshly supplemented with 10% v/v BME was mixed with 3 parts total protein lysate. The final samples were heated to 100°C for 8 minutes. The heated samples were cooled to 22°C, centrifuged briefly, vortexed thoroughly, and loaded 50uL/sample onto precast protein gels (Bio-Rad: 4561034). Protein gel electrophoresis was carried out under constant voltage of 110V for the Mini gels for 1.5 hours. The resolved protein gel was stained with Coomassie blue (Bio-Rad: 1610435) using the provided protocol. After the destaining of the gel, the 50kDa bands were carefully excised and stored in deionized water at 4°C until further processing.  The gel bands were destained with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (50:50). The bands were reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol/100mM Ammonium bicarbonate for over 60 minutes at 52°C; the bands were then alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide/100mM ammonium bicarbonate at 22°C for 1 hour in the dark. The proteins in the gel bands were digested with enzymes while incubating overnight at 37°C; different enzymes such as trypsin, Chymotrypsin, and Glu-C were used according to protein sequences. The supernatants were transferred and kept in fresh tubes. Additional peptides were extracted from the gel by adding 50% acetonitrile/1% TFA and incubated for 10 minutes on a shaker. The supernatants were combined and dried. The dried samples were reconstituted using 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 2.4) was used to process the raw spectra. Default search parameters were used, including precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, enzymes specific cleavage, and up to 2 mis-cleavage. Carbamidomethyl [C] was set as a fixed modification, while Oxidation [M] and Acetylation [N-terminal and K] were set as variable modifications. The target-decoy approach was used to filter the search results, in which the false discovery rate was less than 1% at the peptide and protein levels. For measuring the relative protein abundances, all the chromatographic data were aligned and normalized to peptide groups and protein abundances, missing values were imputed and scaled.

### Publication Abstract
A proliferated and post-translationally modified microtubule network underlies cellular growth in cardiac hypertrophy and contributes to contractile dysfunction in heart failure. Yet how the heart achieves this modified network is poorly understood. Determining how the "tubulin code"-the permutations of tubulin isoforms and post-translational modifications-is rewritten upon cardiac stress may provide new targets to modulate cardiac remodeling. Further, while tubulin can autoregulate its own expression, it is unknown if autoregulation is operant in the heart or tuned in response to stress. Here we use heart failure patient samples and murine models of cardiac remodeling to interrogate transcriptional, autoregulatory, and post-translational mechanisms that contribute to microtubule network remodeling at different stages of heart disease. We find that autoregulation is operant across tubulin isoforms in the heart and leads to an apparent disconnect in tubulin mRNA and protein levels in heart failure. We also find that within 4&#xa0;h of a hypertrophic stimulus and prior to cardiac growth, microtubule detyrosination is rapidly induced to help stabilize the network. This occurs concomitant with rapid transcriptional and autoregulatory activation of specific tubulin isoforms and microtubule motors. Upon continued hypertrophic stimulation, there is an increase in post-translationally modified microtubule tracks and anterograde motors to support cardiac growth, while total tubulin content increases through progressive transcriptional and autoregulatory induction of tubulin isoforms. Our work provides a new model for how the tubulin code is rapidly rewritten to establish a proliferated, stable microtubule network that drives cardiac remodeling, and provides the first evidence of tunable tubulin autoregulation during pathological progression.

### Keywords
Tubulin isoforms, Mouse, Cardiac hypertrophy

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Physiology, Pennsylvania Muscle Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

### Submitter
Benjamin Prosser

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin L. Prosser
Department of Physiology, Pennsylvania Muscle Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.


