### Accession
PXD030912

### Title
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation contributes to aflatoxin production in Aspergillus flavus

### Description
Aspergillus flavus contaminates crops during preharvest and post-harvest periods and produce carcinogenic mycotoxin aflatoxins posing severe threat to food safety and human health. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation is one of the most important reversible post-translational modifications and plays a vital regulatory role in various cellular processes. In order to explore the potential roles of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in aflatoxin biosynthesis, protein 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation analysis of A. flavus was performed, and a total of 7156 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation sites in 1473 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from A. flavus mycelia grown on solid YES medium, trypsin digestion and affinity enrichment were performed as previously described. The extracted protein solution was reduced and alkylated with 5 mM dithiothreitol and 11 mM iodoacetamide respectively. The sample was diluted with 100 mM NH4HCO3, digested with trypsin (trypsin: protein mass, 1:50) overnight, and then performed a second 4 h-digestion with 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. For affinity enrichment, the digested peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer and incubated with pre-washed agarose-conjugated antibody beads (PTM-804; PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight. After washing with NETN buffer and H2O, the bound peptides were eluted from beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were desalted using Ziptips C18 resin tips (Millipore) following the manufacturer’s instructions.   LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out as follows: the trypsin-digested peptides were dissolved in 0.1% solvent A (formic acid) and subjected to gradient separation on a reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient procedure consists an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Then peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS in Q Exactive Plus (Thermo). The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analyzed by Maxquant software (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot A. flavus database (20,105 sequences, April 2020). The parameters setting was according to previous method. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aspergillus flavus; lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; aflatoxin, Secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
Henan University of Technology
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Yangyong Lv
Henan University of Technology


