### Accession
PXD038838

### Title
EFNB1 level predicts therapeutic response in DLBCL cell lines LC-MSMS

### Description
The expression level of EFNB1 was closely correlated with drug response in DLBLC cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed with cooled PBS three times. The precipitates were quick freezing at -80 and shipped to biotech company for mass spectrometry analysis with dry ice. Each sample was collected three times as three biological replicates. The mass spectrometry analysis process was as follows. First, proteins were extracted and the concentrations of proteins were measured with BCA method. After trypsin enzymatic hydrolysis, the processed samples of replicates were combined and analyzed by LC-MS/MS to obtain raw files of the original mass spectrometry results.

### Data Protocol
After MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) analysis, match the data and obtain the identification results.

### Publication Abstract
The multi-omics data has greatly improved the molecular diagnosis of B-cell neoplasms, but there is still a lack of predictive biomarkers to guide precision therapy. Here, we analyzed publicly available data and found that B-cell neoplasm cell lines with different levels of EFNB1 had distinctive drug response patterns of inhibitors targeting SRC/PI3K/AKT. Overexpression of EFNB1 promoted phosphorylation of key proteins in drug response, such as SRC and STMN1, conferring sensitivity to SRC inhibitor and cytotoxic drugs. EFNB1 phosphorylation signaling network was significantly associated with the prognosis of GCB-DLBCL patients. Moreover, EFNB1 levels were correlated with cell of origin (COO) scores, suggesting that EFNB1 is a quantitative indicator of cell differentiation. Ultimately, we proposed a model for the stratification of human B-cell malignancies and the implementation of targeted therapies based on EFNB1 levels. Our findings highlight that EFNB1 level is a promising biomarker for predicting drug response, COO and prognosis.

### Keywords
Efnb1, Phosphorylation, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212013, China.

### Submitter
Xiaoxi Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoxi Li
Department of Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212013, China.


