### Accession
PXD009122

### Title
The BCKDH kinase and phosphatase integrate BCAA and lipid metabolism via regulation of ATP-citrate lyase

### Description
Strong associations exist between branched chain amino acids (BCAA) and dysregulated glucose and lipid metabolism, but the underlying mechanisms are not well understood.  Here we report that inhibition of the kinase (BDK) or overexpression of the phosphatase (PPM1K) that regulate branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH), the committed step of BCAA catabolism, lowers circulating BCAA, reduces hepatic steatosis and improves glucose tolerance in the absence of weight loss in Zucker fatty rats. Phosphoproteomics analysis identified ATP-citrate lyase (ACL) as an alternate substrate of BDK and PPM1K. Overexpression of BDK in liver of lean rats increased ACL phosphorylation and activated de novo lipogenesis. Moreover, BDK and PPM1K transcript levels were increased and repressed, respectively, in response to fructose feeding and expression of the ChREBP transcription factor. These studies identify BDK and PPM1K as a regulatory node that integrates BCAA, glucose, and lipid metabolism via reciprocal regulation of BCKDH and ACL.  Modulation of this node relieves key disease phenotypes in a genetic model of severe obesity and metabolic dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue lysis and protein digestion for proteomics:  Approximately 50 mg of pulverized liver tissue power from each rat (3 BT2- and 3 DMSO-treated animals; 3 PPM1K- and 3 GFP-overexpressing animals) was re-suspended in 400 µL of ice-cold 8M Urea Lysis Buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 40 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM Na4P2O7, 50 mM NaF, supplemented with protease inhibitor (1x cOmplete mini EDTAfree) and phosphatase inhibitor (1x PhosStop) tablets). Samples were lysed with a TissueLyzer for 30 seconds at 30 Hertz twice and the tissue was further disrupted by sonication with a probe sonicator in three 5 second bursts (power setting of 3), incubating on ice in-between each burst. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was retained. Protein concentration was determined by BCA, and equal amounts of protein (500 µg, adjusted to 2.5 mg/mL with Urea Lysis Buffer) from each sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, cooled to RT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and unreacted iodoacetamide quenched by the addition of DTT up to 15 mM. Each sample was digested with 5 µg LysC (100:1 w/w, protein to enzyme) at 37°C for 4 hours. Following dilution to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 5 mM CaCl2, the samples were digested with trypsin (50:1 w/w, protein:enzyme) overnight at 37°C. The samples were acidified to 0.5% TFA and centrifuged at 4000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to pellet insoluble material. The supernatant containing soluble peptides was desalted by solid phase extraction (SPE) with a Waters 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column and eluted once with 500 µL 25% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and twice with 500 µl 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. The 1.5 ml eluate was frozen and dried in a speed vac.     Peptide labeling and PTM enrichment: Each peptide sample was re-suspended in 100 µL of 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), mixed with a unique 6-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagent (0.8 mg re-suspended in 50 µL100% acetonitrile), using one TMT kit (reagents 126-131) for the BT2vDMSO comparison (n=3) and a separate TMT kit for the PPM1KvGFP comparison (n=3).  Samples were shaken for 4 hours at room temperature and subsequently quenched with 0.8 µL 50% hydroxylamine and shaken for 15 additional minutes at room temperature. For both experiments (BT2vDMSO, PPM1KvGFP), 2.5 uL of each of the six samples was mixed for QC analysis.  After subjecting the QC samples to the LC-MS/MS workflow described below, the data was searched as described below, but with TMT labeling as a variable modification on the peptide N-terminus to assess TMT labeling efficiency—which was determined to be 94.6% (BT2vDMSO) and 91.3% (PPM1KvGFP)—and total peptide ratios.   For each study, the remainder of all six samples were combined with slight adjustments for any deviation from 1:1:1:1:1:1 ratios, frozen, and dried in a speed vac. The TMT-labeled peptide mixtures for each experiment (BT2vDMSO, PPM1KvGFP) were re-suspended in 1 mL 0.5% TFA and subjected to SPE again with a Waters 100 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column as described above. For both experiments, the eluate was vortexed and split into one aliquot containing ~ 5% of the total peptide mixture (150 µg) and a second aliquot containing ~ 95% (2.85 mg). Both aliquots were frozen and dried in a speed vac. The 150 µg aliquot of the “input” material was saved at -80°C for quantification of unmodified peptides. The 2.85 mg aliquot was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment via immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) using Ni-NTA Magnetic Agarose Beads, as decribed previously (51) with slight modifications. Briefly, the beads were washed three times with water, incubated in 40 mM EDTA, pH 8.0 for 30 minutes while shaking, and subsequently washed with water three times. The beads were then incubated with 100 mM FeCl3 for 30 minutes while shaking, and were washed four times with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA. Samples were re-suspended in 1 ml 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA, added to the beads, and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature while shaking. Samples were subsequently washed three times with 1 ml 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and eluted for 1 minute by vortexing in 100 µl of 50% acetonitrile, 0.7% NH4OH. Eluted phosphopeptides were acidified immediately with 50 µl 4% formic acid, frozen and dried in a speed vac.

### Data Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS for TMT proteomics: All samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nano-Acquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fischer Scientific) via a nano-ESI source. Prior to injection, phospho samples were resuspended in 12 µL 0.1% FA supplemented with 10 mM citrate. Each phospho sample was analyzed by 1D LC-MS/MS with technical replicate analysis with 1 µL of sample injected (~2 hr runs) and by a single 2D LC-MS/MS (5 high pH reversed phase fractions, subjected to ~2 hr runs) with the remainder of the sample injected. For each experiment (BT2vDMSO, PPM1KvGFP), the input material described above (5% of the large-scale mixture, ~ 150 µg of TMT-labeled peptides) was subjected to high pH reversed phase pre-fractionation for 2D LCMS/MS twice, once using 5 fractions (subjected to ~45 min LC-MS/MS runs each) and once using 9 fractions (subjected to ~3 hr runs each). For each injection, the sample was first trapped on a Symmetry C18 20 mm × 180 µm trap column (5 μl/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile), after which the analytical separation was performed over a 90 minute gradient (flow rate of 400 nanoliters/minute) of 3 to 30% acetonitrile using a 1.7 µm Acquity BEH130 C18 75 µm × 250 mm column (Waters Corp.), with a column temperature of 55ºC. MS1 was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x106 ions and a maximum IT of 60 ms. MS2 spectra were collected by DDA of the top 20 most abundant precursor ions with a charge greater than 1 per MS1 scan, with dynamic exclusion enabled for a window of 30 seconds. Precursor ions were filtered with a 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized CE of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a maximum IT of 60 ms.    Data processing for TMT proteomics: Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome discoverer v2.1 (PD2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using both the Sequest HT and MS Amanda search engines. Data were searched against the UniProt rat complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 29,885 sequences on the date of download (12/29/2015). Default search parameters included oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMTplex (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K). Phospho runs added phosphorylation (79.966 Da on S,T,Y) as a variable modification. Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2 and enzyme specificity was trypsin (full). Considering each data type (phospho, input) separately, PSMs from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% FDR using the Percolator node of PD2.1. For phospho data, site localization probabilities were determined for all modifications using the ptmRS algorithm. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 95% site localization threshold for phosphorylation. Peptides from all samples (phosho, input) were grouped to proteins together using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.1. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs having co-isolation interference below 0.25 (25% of the ion current in the isolation window) and average reporter S/N>10 for all reporter ions were summed together at the peptide group and protein level, but keeping quantification for each data type (phosho, input) and experiment (BT2vvehicle, PPM1KvGFP) separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations.    Statistics for TMT proteomics: Protein and peptide groups tabs in the PD2.1 results were exported as tab delimited .txt. files, opened in Microsoft EXCEL, and analyzed. First, peptide group reporter intensities for each peptide group in the input material were summed together for each TMT channel, each channel’s sum was divided by the average of all channels’ sums, resulting in channel-specific loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input into the six sample comparison. Reporter intensities for peptide groups from the phospho fractions and for proteins from the input fraction were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each respective TMT channel. Analyzing the phospho and protein datasets separately, all loading control-normalized TMT reporter intensities were converted to log2 space, and the average value from the six samples was subtracted from each sample-specific measurement to normalize the relative measurements to the mean. For the BT2 vs. vehicle and the PPM1K vs. GFP comparisons (n=3), condition average, standard deviation, p-value, and adjustped p-value were calculated. For protein-level quantification, only Master Proteins identified at 1% FDR were used for quantitative comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) are strongly associated with dysregulated glucose and lipid metabolism, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. We report that inhibition of the kinase (BDK) or overexpression of the phosphatase (PPM1K) that regulates branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH), the committed step of BCAA catabolism, lowers circulating BCAA, reduces hepatic steatosis, and improves glucose tolerance in the absence of weight loss in Zucker fatty rats. Phosphoproteomics analysis identified ATP-citrate lyase (ACL) as an alternate substrate of BDK and PPM1K. Hepatic overexpression of BDK increased ACL phosphorylation and activated de novo lipogenesis. BDK&#xa0;and PPM1K transcript levels were increased and repressed, respectively, in response to fructose feeding or expression of the ChREBP-&#x3b2; transcription factor. These studies identify BDK and PPM1K as a ChREBP-regulated node that integrates BCAA and lipid metabolism. Moreover, manipulation of the BDK:PPM1K ratio relieves key metabolic disease phenotypes in a genetic model of severe obesity.

### Keywords
Bdk, Acl, Ppm1k, Protein phosphorylation, Bcaa

### Affiliations
Director, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center  Professor Departments of Medicine (Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition) and Pharmacology & Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher B. Newgard
Director, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center  Professor Departments of Medicine (Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition) and Pharmacology & Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


