### Accession
PXD014625

### Title
Pro-inflammatory activity following demyelinating injury is required for phagocytic function and oligodendrocyte formation

### Description
Remyelination can occur naturally in demyelinating lesions, but often fails in human demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS). The function of the innate immune system is essential for the regenerative response, but how exactly microglia and macrophages clear myelin debris after injury and tailor a specific regenerative response is unclear. Here, we asked whether pro-inflammatory microglial/macrophage activation is required for this process. We established a novel toxin-based spinal cord model of de- and remyelination in zebrafish and showed that pro-inflammatory nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) dependent activation occurs in phagocytes rapidly after myelin injury. We found that the pro-inflammatory response depends on myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (MyD88), the canonical adaptor for inflammatory signaling pathways downstream of toll-like receptors (TLRs). MyD88-deficient mice and zebrafish were impaired not only in the degradation of myelin debris, but also in initiating the generation of new oligodendrocytes for myelin repair. We identified reduced generation of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in lesions of MyD88-deficient animals, a pro-inflammatory molecule that was able to induce the generation of new oligodendrocytes. Our study shows that pro-inflammatory phagocytic signaling is an evolutionary conserved mechanism necessary for degrading myelin debris, essential for inflammation resolution, and for initiating the secretion of pro-inflammatory myelin repair molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Microglia isolated by MACS from WT and Myd88-/- mouse pups were seeded at a density of 1×106 cells per 60-mm dish in DMEM/FCS/L929 medium. After 2 DIV, microglia were washed with warm DMEM/pyruvate medium and treated with 20 µg/mL myelin debris (or HEPES control) in 2 mL of TIC medium for 4 h. After treatment, the cells were washed with DMEM/pyruvate medium, and incubated with 4 mL of DMEM containing 0.2% BSA for 16 h. The cells in each dish were washed with 2 mL of cold PBS on ice, and lysed with 200 µL of cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, 9803) containing 1 mM PMSF for 5 min on ice. The cells were detached using cell scrapers, collected and stored at -80 °C. The mass spectrometry label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed for the cell lysate of cultured microglia (triplicates or quadruplicates of each condition).  A protein amount of 15 µg of each cell lysate was subjected to proteolytic digestion with 0.3 µg LysC (Promega) and 0.15 µg trypsin (Promega) using the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol with 30 kDa Vivacon spin filters (Sartorius). Proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction with C18 tips. The purified peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed on an Easy nLC 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A data-dependent acquisition method was used. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z range: 300-1400, AGC target: 3E+6). The 15 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 15,000, isolation width: 1.6 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data was analysed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.1.0. The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical fasta database of Mus musculus from UniProt (download: January 17th, 16954 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Remyelination requires innate immune system function, but how exactly microglia and macrophages clear myelin debris after injury and tailor a specific regenerative response is unclear. Here, we asked whether pro-inflammatory microglial/macrophage activation is required for this process. We established a novel toxin-based spinal cord model of de- and remyelination in zebrafish and showed that pro-inflammatory NF-&#x3ba;B-dependent activation in phagocytes occurs rapidly after myelin injury. We found that the pro-inflammatory response depends on myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (MyD88). MyD88-deficient mice and zebrafish were not only impaired in the degradation of myelin debris, but also in initiating the generation of new oligodendrocytes for myelin repair. We identified reduced generation of TNF-&#x3b1; in lesions of MyD88-deficient animals, a pro-inflammatory molecule that was able to induce the generation of new premyelinating oligodendrocytes. Our study shows that pro-inflammatory phagocytic signaling is required for myelin debris degradation, for inflammation resolution, and for initiating the generation of new oligodendrocytes.

### Keywords
Mouse, Myelin, Myd88, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Neuroproteomics DZNE Munich Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lichtenthaler
Neuroproteomics DZNE Munich Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


