### Accession
PXD024904

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid proteome maps detect pathogen-specific host response patterns in meningitis

### Description
Meningitis is a life-threatening condition characterized by the inflammation of the leptomeningeal membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord. The term meningitis is an umbrella term and includes several different etiologies. Acute bacterial meningitis (ABM) is one of the leading causes of death due to infectious diseases worldwide and is associated with rapid disease progression, high mortality rates and increased risk of long-term neurological sequelae in survivors. As meningitis is caused by numerous different pathogens, the host-response is typically highly variable and it is currently unknown if different pathogens can introduce specific proteome changes in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).  By using LC-MS/MS we have generated assay libraries of 8 unique bacterial strains that commonly cause meningitis. These libraries can be used to mine CSF of meningitis samples to detect bacterial peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown on blood agar plates, washed and heat-killed. Cells were lysed with bead-beater, in solution trypsin digested and cleaned up with C18 solid phase extraction.

### Data Protocol
1. Peptide fragment ms2 spectras from dda-files were obtained and clustered using MaRaCluster ( https://github.com/statisticalbiotechnology/maracluster)   2. The consensus ms2 spectrum files from MaRaCluster were searched against the .fasta file using following search engines: msgfplus_v2019_07_03, msamanda_2_0_0_17442, comet_2019_01_rev_5, xtandem_alanine, omssa_2_1_9  3. The merged dda search results from step were 2 were validated using percolator_3_4_0 (https://github.com/percolator/percolator).  4. The validated data from the different search engines were merged by using combine FDR approach and filtered at an FDR value of 1% through Ursgal package (https://github.com/ursgal/ursgal).   4. The resulting peptide-matching table were translated into Generic transition list format (GTL) for building the libraries.  5. Assays and decoys were added to the libraries using OpenSwathAssayGenerator and OpenSwathDecoyGenerator both v 2_4_0.

### Publication Abstract
Meningitis is a potentially life-threatening infection characterized by the inflammation of the leptomeningeal membranes. Many different viral and bacterial pathogens can cause meningitis, with differences in mortality rates, risk of developing neurological sequelae, and treatment options. Here, we constructed a compendium of digital cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteome maps to define pathogen-specific host response patterns in meningitis. The results revealed a drastic and pathogen-type specific influx of tissue-, cell-, and plasma proteins in the CSF, where, in particular, a large increase of neutrophil-derived proteins in the CSF correlated with acute bacterial meningitis. Additionally, both acute bacterial and viral meningitis result in marked reduction of brain-enriched proteins. Generation of a multiprotein LASSO regression model resulted in an 18-protein panel of cell- and tissue-associated proteins capable of classifying acute bacterial meningitis and viral meningitis. The same protein panel also enabled classification of tick-borne encephalitis, a subgroup of viral meningitis, with high sensitivity and specificity. The work provides insights into pathogen-specific host response patterns in CSF from different disease etiologies to support future classification of pathogen type based on host response patterns in meningitis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Bacteria, Assay library

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Science (IKVL), Lund Division of Infection Medicine Lund University Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Anahita Bakochi

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Department of Clinical Science (IKVL), Lund Division of Infection Medicine Lund University Sweden


