### Accession
PXD000729

### Title
TAF10 interacts with GATA1 transcription factor and controls mouse erythropoiesis

### Description
The stoichiometries of TFIID and SAGA (TAF10-containing complexes) have been quantified in mouse and human erythroid cells. TAF10 immunoprecipitations (IPs) have been carried out in erythroid cells at different stages of differentiation and development followed by quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). Interactions of TFIID and SAGA with several transcription factors and specifically with GATA-1 have been identified. GATA-1 immunoprecipitation (IP) in MEL cells also identified the reverse interactions with subunits of the TFIID and SAGA after MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
1D SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 2-mm slices using an automatic gel slicer and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digestion with trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed on an 1100 series capillary LC system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 1.5 cm × 100 µm, packed in-house) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed on ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 50 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1 % formic acid; B = 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) in 70 min and at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min using a splitter. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by CID.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were automatically created from raw data files using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3; MatrixScience). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot database (release 2013_11.fasta, taxonomy: Mus musculus, Homo Sapiens). The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The Mascot score cut-off value for a positive protein hit was set to 40.

### Publication Abstract
The ordered assembly of a functional preinitiation complex (PIC), composed of general transcription factors (GTFs), is a prerequisite for the transcription of protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II. TFIID, comprised of the TATA binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs), is the GTF that is thought to recognize the promoter sequences allowing site-specific PIC assembly. Transcriptional cofactors, such as SAGA, are also necessary for tightly regulated transcription initiation. The contribution of the two TAF10-containing complexes (TFIID, SAGA) to erythropoiesis remains elusive. By ablating TAF10 specifically in erythroid cells in vivo, we observed a differentiation block accompanied by deregulated GATA1 target genes, including Gata1 itself, suggesting functional cross talk between GATA1 and TAF10. Additionally, we analyzed by mass spectrometry the composition of TFIID and SAGA complexes in mouse and human cells and found that their global integrity is maintained, with minor changes, during erythroid cell differentiation and development. In agreement with our functional data, we show that TAF10 interacts directly with GATA1 and that TAF10 is enriched on the GATA1 locus in human fetal erythroid cells. Thus, our findings demonstrate a cross talk between canonical TFIID and SAGA complexes and cell-specific transcription activators during development and differentiation.

### Keywords
Taf10, Gata-1

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
ERASMUSMC

### Submitter
Petros Papadopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Grosveld
ERASMUSMC


