### Accession
PXD032947

### Title
Neuropeptidome of Tenebrio molitor

### Description
The aim of the present study is to summarize the identification of neuropeptides, neuropeptide-like and protein hormones in T. molitor

### Sample Protocol
Before injecting into the nanoLC system all samples were desalted using self-packed Stage Tip SDB-RPS columns (IVA Analysentechnik e. K., Meerbusch, Germany) spin columns as described previously 55. Peptides were first separated on an EASY nanoLC1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using in-house packed RPC18-columns 50 cm (fused Silica tube with ID 50 μm ± 3 μm, OD 150 μm ± 6 μm; Reprosil 1.9 μm, pore diameter 60 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and a binary buffer system (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA). The UPLC was coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using PEAKS Studio 10 (BSI, ON, Canada)56. Samples not subjected to enzymatic digestion were matched against an internal database containing the transcriptome-derived precursor sequences of T. molitor and Z. atratus, as well as the six frames translation of the complete transcriptomes. For analyses with PEAKS, the same set of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) was used and peptides were searched against the same internal databases with a parent error mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. None enzyme mode was selected. Variable post-translational modifications included in the searches were: oxidation at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus, amidation of C-terminal glycine, pyroglutamate from glutamine, pyroglutamate from glutamic acid, and disulfide bridges. The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by the decoy database search implement in PEAKS 10 and set below 1%. To provide the accurate monoisotopic mass of a peptide, Q Exactive Orbitrap RAW data were corrected prior to the analysis (precursor mass correction only). Fragment spectra with a peptide score (−10 lgP) equivalent to a P-value of about 1%, were manually reviewed. Peptide spectrum matches with a FDR of 0.1 % (approximately -10logP values higher than 30) were subsequently manually checked. Samples that were enzymatically treated with LysC and Trypsin were analysed using the same parameters but with enzyme mode was set to Trypsin and carboxymethylation as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Coleoptera, Peptidomic, Transcriptomic, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Cologne
University of Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Lapo Ragionieri

### Lab Head
Dr Lapo Ragionieri
University of Cologne, Germany


