### Accession
PXD024010

### Title
Single Nucleotide Resolution RNA-Protein Cross-Linking/MS: Simple Extension of the CLIR-MS Workflow

### Description
RNA-protein interactions mediate a vast number of intracellular processes. CLIR-MS (cross-linking of isotope labeled RNA and tandem mass spectrometry) is a mass spectrometric technique that allows the identification of RNA-protein interaction sites at single nucleotide/amino acid resolution in a single experiment. The use of isotopically labeled RNA segments for UV light induced cross-linking generates characteristic isotope patterns that constrain the sequence database searches, thus increasing resolution. Whereas the use of segmentally isotopically labeled RNA is effective, it is technically involved and not applicable in some settings, e.g. in cell or tissue samples. A straightforward approach that maintains the advantages of isotopic labeling but obviates the need for segmental RNA labeling would therefore advance the field.   Here we introduce an extension of the CLIR-MS workflow that uses unlabeled RNA during the cross-linking reaction and subsequently adds an isotopic label during sample preparation for MS analysis. The approach uses commercially available reagents and can be performed without specialized equipment in any lab. After RNase and protease digests of a cross-linked complex, an RNA-peptide adduct consists of a single peptide and a short nucleic acid adduct. We label the nucleic acid part of these adducts using the enzyme T4 polynucleotide kinase (T4-PNK) and a 1:1 mixture of heavy (18O4-gamma-ATP) and light ATP. In this simple, one-step reaction three of the four heavy oxygen atoms are transferred from the gamma-phosphate to the 5'-end of the RNA adduct. The isotopic difference of light and heavy cross-linked peptides (6.01 Da) can be detected using tandem mass spectrometry after enrichment of the cross-linked peptides. We applied this approach to the RNA recognition motif (RRM) of the protein FOX1 in complex with its cognate binding substrate, FOX-binding element RNA (FBE-RNA). Using a variation of the approach, we were able to label a single phosphate within an RNA and unambiguously determine the cross-linking site of the FOX1-RRM to the FBE at single residue resolution on RNA- and protein level. Specifically introducing isotopic labels improves identification of cross-linked species and enables relative quantification based on isotope dilution.

### Sample Protocol
The FOX1-RRM and RNA were mixed in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.9), 10 mM NaCl, at equimolar concentrations (10 ÂµM). For cross-linking the sample was dispensed in a 96-well plate in 50 µL aliquots and cross-linking was performed on ice at a distance of 2 cm to the UV-lamps in a Spectrolinker XL-1500 UV Crosslinker (Spectronics Corporation) at an energy of 3.2 J/cm2 and 254 nm wavelength. The same distance to UV-lamps was maintained by using a 3D-printed ice bucket holding a 96-well plate. The cross-linked sample (100 µg FOX1-RRM) was precipitated using 1/10 volume of 3 M sodium acetate (pH 5.2) and 3 volumes of ice-cold ethanol, stored at -20°C for at least 2 h and centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min at 16,000 g. After washing the pellet with 80% ethanol, the sample was dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 4 M urea. After resuspension, the sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. 5 U RNase T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 5 µg RNase A (Roche) were added per mg cross-linked complex and incubated at 52°C for 2 h. Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a 24:1 substrate to enzyme ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. Trypsin was inactivated at 70°C for 10 min. Another 4 U RNase T1 and 4 µg RNase A were added per mg cross-linked complex and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. Solid-phase extraction using Waters C18 SepPak columns (50 mg) was performed and the samples were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge.  The dried sample was dissolved in 86 µL water, 10 µL 10x T4-PNK buffer (NEB), 1 µL 100 mM ATP and 1 µL 100 mM 18O4-gamma-ATP. Labeling was performed with 20 U T4-PNK (NEB) for 1 hour at 37°C. Another solid-phase extraction step was performed as above. The dried sample was dissolved in 60 µL of loading buffer (50% acetonitrile, 300 mg/mL lactic acid, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) and incubated for 30 min with 3 mg equilibrated TiO2-beads (Titansphere PhosTiO 10 µm, GL Sciences). The beads were washed sequentially with 60 µL loading buffer and washing buffer (50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) each and cross-linked peptides were eluted twice with 50 µL elution buffer (50 mM (NH4)2HPO4  pH 10.5) and the solution was immediately acidified by adding TFA. Cross-linked peptides were further purified by C18 StageTip solid phase extraction. Two layers of C18-membranes (3M Empore) were washed sequentially with (1) 100% acetonitrile (ACN), (2) 80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (FA), (3) two times 5% ACN with 0.1% FA. After applying the sample, the tips were washed three times using 5% ACN with 0.1% FA and finally eluted three times using 50% ACN with 0.1% FA. The eluate was collected in pre-washed LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) and samples were evaporated to dryness. Samples were resuspended in 20 µL of water/acetonitrile/formic acid (95:5:0.1, v/v/v), and 5 µL were used for analysis in technical duplicates. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Easy nLC 1200 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanoflex electrospray source. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC column (250 mm — 75 µm, 2 µm particle size, ThermoFisher Scientific) using a gradient of 6-32% mobile phase B within 60 min, where A = water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98:2:0.15, v/v/v) and B = acetonitrile/water/formic acid (80:20:0.15, v/v/v); the flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Precursor ion spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120 000 in 3 s cycles (top speed mode). During each cycle, precursor ions were selected for fragmentation using stepped higher energy collision-induced dissociation (stepped HCD, normalized collision energy, 23 +/- 5%) and detection of the fragment ions in the linear ion trap in rapid scan mode or in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30 000. Additional fragmentation settings were: Isolation width, 1.2 m/z; dynamic exclusion (30 s after one sequencing event) was activated, selected charge states = 2-7.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  For data analysis, files were converted from the native Thermo raw format into centroided mzXML using msconvert (ProteoWizard version 3.0.9393)19 and searched against the target protein sequence and reversed proteins sequences using xQuest (version 2.1.5). To adapt xQuest to the search of different types of nucleotide adducts on arbitrary amino acid residues, all amino acid residues were specified as possible modification sites. Based on the target RNA sequence UGCAUGU, 15 different nucleotide adducts up to a length of four nucleotides, combined with different neutral losses, were considered. In total 75 different mass modifications between ~300 and 1400 Da were included in the search (Suppl. Table 1). Mass shifts (isotopeshift/cp_isotopediff) of 6.012735 Da and 4.00849 Da were defined in the xquest.def and xmm.def configuration files for post-digest labeling and single-phosphate labeling, respectively. A mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 60 s was used to match heavy and light spectra.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS1 mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS2 mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for common-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for xlink-type fragment ions. The scoring scheme of xQuest as presented in Walzthoeni et al. 2012 was used and only identifications with a score > 20 were considered for later analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein rna cross-linking clir-ms uv xl

### Affiliations
Department of Biology
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Michael Götze

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland


