### Accession
PXD038966

### Title
Proteomics analysis on SETD2 loss induced ccRCC formation

### Description
Patients with polycystic kidney disease (PKD) encounter a high risk of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), a malignant tumor with dysregulated lipid metabolism. SET domain–containing 2 (SETD2) has been identified as an important tumor suppressor gene in ccRCC. However, the role of SETD2 in tumorigenesis during the transition from PKD to ccRCC remains largely unexplored. Herein, we performed metabolomics, lipidomics, transcriptomics and proteomics with SETD2 loss induced PKD-ccRCC transition mouse model. To characterize biological responses triggered by SETD2 deletion during PKD-ccRCC transition at the protein level, we conducted global proteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cysts from nine KM mice and neoplastic masses from five KMS mice were collected for LC-MS/MS proteomics. Tissues were homogenized in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor and 100 mM PMSF. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) and the peptide solutions were further desalted on a MonoSpin C18 column (GL Sciences). For the proteome library, 80 ug peptides were fractionated using a high pH C18 reverse-phase spin column, the fractionated samples were dried and resuspended for LC-MS/MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
Sample analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded to an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 2 µL/min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and eluted with a 120 min gradient on an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient elution program was as follows: 0-1 min, 1% to 8% solvent B (acetonitrile-water (8:2, v/v) with 0.1% formic acid); 1-98 min, 8% to 28% solvent B; 98-112 min, 28% to 36% solvent B; 112-116 min, 36%-100% solvent B; 116-120 min, 100% solvent B. MS raw files were searched against the Mus musculus database (UniProt, 2022.01.11), then analyzed in DIA-NN with default parameters. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was used in both protein and peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Set domain–containing 2 (setd2), Polycystic kidney disease (pkd), Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccrcc)

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Rao hanyu

### Lab Head
Dr Xianting Ding
Shanghai Jiao Tong University


