### Accession
PXD022064

### Title
Defense Response to Caterpillar Feeding Stress in Wild Pinus tabuliformis Unveiled by Quantitative Integrated Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analyses

### Description
To study the alteration pattern and defensive response mechanism triggered by herbivorous feeding stimuli under natural conditions, we built a biological model of the interrelationship between the Chinese pine (Pinus tabuliformis Carr.) and the Chinese pine caterpillar (Dendrolimus tabulaeformis Tsai et Liu) within their native habitat. We integrated proteomic and phosphoproteomic data, normalized the results, and combined them with bioinformatics to evaluate and analyze variations in phosphoproteomics in pine needles' response to the caterpillar's feeding stimulus. We systematically identified differentially significant phosphorylated proteins implicated in the pine's defense mechanism against caterpillar stress. Furthermore, we predicted upstream kinases of phosphorylation sites and their activities. Similarly, through an analysis of the Motif patterns of phosphorylated proteins, Mfuzz clustering of phosphorylation sites, kinase regulatory networks and functional modules of phosphorylated protein interaction networks in response to stress within pine, we can investigate the mechanisms behind resistance formation and regulation of caterpillar feeding incentives in pine. The identification results of partially phosphorylated proteins were additionally confirmed through PRM technology. Furthermore, genes upstream of differentially expressed proteins were validated through RT-qPCR detection.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics experiments method  Protein Extraction  Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 ℃, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC Fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Search parameter settings: Database is the Transcriptome Pinus tabulaeformis Carr. (27,366 sequences) . Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  Bioinformatics Methods  Functional Enrichment  Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis. For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.  Enrichment-based Clustering  We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis.  Phosphoproteome Database Search  Same as proteome database search.  Bioinformatics Methods    Functional Enrichment Same as proteome database search.  Enrichment-based Clustering Same as proteome database search.  Motif Analysis Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site， but phosphorylation with modify-13-mers that 6 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, and other parameters with default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chinese pine; pine caterpillar; induced resistance; proteomics

### Affiliations
+8615933935320
Hebei agricultural university

### Submitter
Tianhua Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Sun tianhua
Hebei agricultural university


