### Accession
PXD024628

### Title
Control and Ikbkap-knockout MEFs LC-MSMS

### Description
Mouse Ikbkap gene encodes IKAP/Elp1- one of the core subunits of Elongator- and has been implicated in translational regulation. However, a role for IKAP in genome maintenance remains unclear. In this study, we analyze proteins from control and Ikbkap depletion mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) using MS. Using MS-based proteomics, we show that several proteins involved in cancer and DNA damage response were found to be differentially expressed upon Ikbkap depletion.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) were harvested from embryonic day (E) 13.5 IkbkapF/F embryos. Cells were immortalized via retroviral infections with pBabeSV40LT. Ikbkap gene was subsequently removed by infecting the immortalized Ikbkapflox MEFs with virus expressing Cre recombinase to generate knockout (KO) cells. Two days after infection, cells were irradiated with a single acute dose of 4 Gy γ-irradiation and let the cells recover for one day. Both control and KO MEFs were lysed in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphates inhibitors and were precipitated with acetone. Following the quantification of the protein concentration by BCA Protein assay, extracted protein was reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were then digested with trypsin and subsequently desalted by C18cartridges. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid quadrupole-ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a UHPLC (UltiMate 3000, both Thermo Scientific, MA). The separation of peptides on the analytical columns was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 120 minutes from 2%-40% in 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A survey scan 350–1750 m/z was acquired in the Orbitrap (Resolution = 120,000 at 200 m/z, with the AGC target of 500000 ions). High-energy collision activated dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS (resolution of 15,000) was used to fragment multiply charged ions within a 1.4 Da isolation window at normalized collision energy of 32. AGC target 50,000 was set for MS/MS analysis with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 180s.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectral data were searched against the mouse database from the UniProt website (http://www.uniprot.org) using MASCOT 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) package (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm, and fragment MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. and 1% FDR was accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mefs, Lc-msms, Ikbkap

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University

### Submitter
FU-JUNG LIN

### Lab Head
Dr Fu-Jung Lin
National Taiwan University


