### Accession
PXD029885

### Title
Exploring glycosylation of mucins with O-glycodomain reporters expressed in glycoengineered HEK293 cells

### Description
Mucins and glycoproteins with mucin-like regions contain densely O-glycosylated domains often found in tandem repeat (TR) sequences. These O-glycodomains have traditionally been difficult to characterize because of resistance to proteolytic digestion, and knowledge of positions of O-glycans is particularly limited for these regions. Mucin O-glycodomains are believed to contain important binding cues for endogenous lectin receptors and the microbiota, and it is important to develop strategies to characterize and produce these abundant molecules. Here, we took advantage of our recently developed glycoengineered cell-based platform for display and production of mucin TR reporters with custom designed O-glycosylation to characterize O-glycodomains derived from mucins and mucin-like glycoproteins. We combined intact mass and bottom-up site-specific analysis for mapping O-glycosites in MUC2, MUC20, MUC21, PSGL-1, and Syndecan-3. We found that all the potential Ser/Thr positions in these O-glycodomains were O-glycosylated when expressed in HEK293 SimpleCells (Tn-glycoform). Interestingly, while all the sites in TRs derived from secreted mucins were almost fully occupied, positions in TRs from a subset of transmembrane mucins were less efficiently processed. We further used the mucin TR reporters to characterize cleavage sites of the StcE and BT4244 glycoproteases, revealing a more restricted substrate specificities than reported. Finally, we used these for bottom-up analysis of isolated ovine submaxillary mucin (OSM) and identified the gene. The study provides insight into O-glycosylation of mucins and mucin-like domains and the strategies developed open up for wider analysis of native mucins.

### Sample Protocol
Purified mucin TR reporters were digested with Lys-C (Roche) (1:35 enzyme/substrate ratio) for 18h at 37˚C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0). Reactions were heat inactivated at 98˚C for 10 min and O-glycodomains were isolated by C4 HPLC (AerisTM C4, 3.6 µm, 200 Å, 250 x 2.1 mm, Phenomenex) using 0-100% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The fractions containing O-glycodomain TR reporters were detected by VVA lectin ELISA. Collected fractions were freeze dried twice and approximately 1 μg was resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% FA and subjected to intact MS analysis. For core 3 MUC1, after C4 HPLC purification, samples were desialylated with 40 mU C. Perfringens neuraminidase (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37˚C for 5 hrs in 50 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.0) and subsequently purified by C18 HPLC (AerisTM 3.6 µm WIDEPORE XB-C18, 200 Å, 250 x 2.1 mm, Phenomenex) using 0-100% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Fractions containing TR O-glycodomains were collected and freeze dried twice and approximately 1 µg resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% FA and subjected to intact MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Intact MS analysis  Intact MS analysis of mucin TRs was performed by EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an on Orbitrap Fusion/Lumos instrument (Thermo Scientific Scientific) using "high" mass range setting in m/z range 700-4,000. Instrument was operated in "Low Pressure" Mode to provide optimal detection of intact protein masses. MS parameters settings: spray voltage 2.2 kV, source fragmentation energy 35 V. All ions were detected in Orbitrap at the resolution of 7500 (at m/z 200). The number of microscans was set to 20. The nLC was operated in a single analytical column set up using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75 mm inner diameter) packed in-house with C4 phase (Dr. Maisch, 3.0-mm particle size, 16-20 cm column length) or C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-mm particle size, 16-20 column length). Each sample was injected onto the column and eluted in gradients from 5 to 30% B in 25 min, from 30 to 100% B in 20 min and 100% B for 15min at 300 nL/min (Solvent A, 100% H2O; Solvent B, 80% acetonitrile; both having 0.1% (v/v) formic acid).   Bottom-up MS analysis  LC MS/MS site-specific O-glycopeptide analysis of mucin TRs was performed on EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC ( Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via New Objectives ion source to an OrbiTrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the nLC was operated in a single analytical column set up using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75 mm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-mm particle size, 19-21 cm column length). Each sample was injected onto the column and eluted in gradients from 3 to 32% B for glycopeptides, and 10 to 40% for released and labeled glycans in 45 min at 200 nL/min (Solvent A, 100% H2O; Solvent B, 100% acetonitrile; both containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–2,000) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at the nominal resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and ETD-MS2 at the nominal resolution setting of 60,000 of the five most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events. Targeted MS/MS analysis was performed by setting up a targeted MSn (tMSn) Scan Properties pane.    Data analysis  For intact MS and site-specific bottom-up analysis raw spectra were deconvoluted to zero-charge by BioPharma Finder Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose) using default method with additional changes. Sliding windows method was used for chromatography and source spectra with target average spectrum width 0.1 min. Xtract deconvolution algorithm was used for bottom-up data and ReSpect deconvolution algorithm was used for intact MS data. Glycoproteoforms were annotated from zero-charge deconvoluted intact MS data by in-house written SysBioWare software (92) using average masses of Hexose, N-acetylhexosamine, and the known backbone mass of mucin TR reporter increment (MUC1, MUC2, MUC7, etc). For the site-specific glycopeptide identification, the corresponding HCD MS/MSM and ETD MS/MS were analyzed by Proteome discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Mucins and glycoproteins with mucin-like regions contain densely O-glycosylated domains often found in tandem repeat (TR) sequences. These O-glycodomains have traditionally been difficult to characterize because of their resistance to proteolytic digestion, and knowledge of the precise positions of O-glycans is particularly limited for these regions. Here, we took advantage of a recently developed glycoengineered cell-based platform for the display and production of mucin TR reporters with custom-designed O-glycosylation to characterize O-glycodomains derived from mucins and mucin-like glycoproteins. We combined intact mass and bottom-up site-specific analysis for mapping O-glycosites in the mucins, MUC2, MUC20, MUC21, protein P-selectin-glycoprotein ligand 1, and proteoglycan syndecan-3. We found that all the potential Ser/Thr positions in these O-glycodomains were O-glycosylated when expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 SimpleCells (Tn-glycoform). Interestingly, we found that all potential Ser/Thr O-glycosites in TRs derived from secreted mucins and most glycosites from transmembrane mucins were almost fully occupied, whereas TRs from a subset of transmembrane mucins were less efficiently processed. We further used the mucin TR reporters to characterize cleavage sites of glycoproteases StcE (secreted protease of C1 esterase inhibitor from EHEC) and BT4244, revealing more restricted substrate specificities than previously reported. Finally, we conducted a bottom-up analysis of isolated ovine submaxillary mucin, which supported our findings that mucin TRs in general are efficiently O-glycosylated at all potential glycosites. This study provides insight into O-glycosylation of mucins and mucin-like domains, and the strategies developed open the field for wider analysis of native mucins.

### Keywords
Cell-based glycan array, Mucins, Glycosyltransferases, Glycoengineering, Glycomucinases, O-glycodomains, Glycosylation, Intact mass

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics


