### Accession
PXD014733

### Title
Lysosomal proteomics by affinity purification-mass spectrometry

### Description
The aims of this project is to establish a comprehensive proteomic map of the lysosomes using isolated lysosomes via affinity purification. Affinity-purified mitochondria was used as a control to demonstrate the organelle specificity. In this study, we identified several lipid transporters that are associated with the lysosome and further characterized their roles in sterol-dependent mTORC1 regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent HEK293T cells stably expressing Tmem192-mRFP-3xHA or 3xHA-GFP-OMP25 in a 15-cm culture dish were scraped in chilled PBS and collected by centrifugation at 300 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Cells were re-suspended, lysed using a 23G syringe in KPBS buffer (136 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.25), and spun at 700 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The post nuclear supernatant (PNS) was then incubated with 50 μL of anti-HA magnetic beads, washed in KPBS buffer, for 5 minutes at 4 °C. Lysosome-bound beads were then washed three times in KPBS buffer and sent to mass spectrometry facility for further processing.  (3 biologically independent sampes per group)

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur Software version 4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  was used to process all data acquired. Protein identifications were obtained by the reviewed entries of a human UniProt database (20198 entries, release 2016_01). Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were determined with the default settings with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidized methionine and N-acetyl amino acids were searched as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Data were exported to Scaffold 4.0 for visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Cholesterol activates the master growth regulator, mTORC1 kinase, by promoting its recruitment to the surface of lysosomes by the Rag guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases). The mechanisms that regulate lysosomal cholesterol content to enable mTORC1 signalling are unknown. Here, we show that oxysterol binding protein (OSBP) and its anchors at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), VAPA and VAPB, deliver cholesterol across ER-lysosome contacts to activate mTORC1. In cells lacking OSBP, but not other VAP-interacting cholesterol carriers, the recruitment of mTORC1 by the Rag GTPases is inhibited owing to impaired transport of cholesterol to lysosomes. By contrast, OSBP-mediated cholesterol trafficking drives constitutive mTORC1 activation in a disease model caused by the loss of the lysosomal cholesterol transporter, Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1). Chemical and genetic inactivation of OSBP suppresses aberrant mTORC1 signalling and restores autophagic function in cellular models of Niemann-Pick type C (NPC). Thus, ER-lysosome contacts are signalling hubs that enable cholesterol sensing by mTORC1, and targeting the sterol-transfer activity of these signalling hubs could be beneficial in patients with NPC.

### Keywords
Mtorc1, Organelle, Lysosome immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Structural Biology Molecular and Cell Biology Department University of California at Berkeley  Li Ka Shing Center, room 300A Berkeley, CA 94720 rzoncu@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley

### Submitter
Chun-Yan Lim

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Zoncu
Assistant Professor of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Structural Biology Molecular and Cell Biology Department University of California at Berkeley  Li Ka Shing Center, room 300A Berkeley, CA 94720 rzoncu@berkeley.edu


