### Accession
PXD008763

### Title
The unusual properties of the photosynthetic cytochrome c550 from the red algal lineage evidence additional biological roles

### Description
Cytochrome c550 is an extrinsic component in the luminal side of photosystem II in cyanobacteria, as well as in eukaryotic algae from the red photosynthetic lineage including, among others, diatoms. By using strong and specific protease inhibitors we have confirmed that cytochrome c550 from the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum is expressed as a truncated form lacking the last hydrophobic residues at the C-terminal.. Phaeodactylum tricornutum cytochrome c550 seems to be modified at a post-translational level as the gene is appropriately transcribed. In addition, co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry experiments have allowed the identification of novel interactions of Phaeodactylum tricornutum cytochrome c550 with proteins related to the CO2 concentrating mechanism and assimilation located in the chloroplast pyrenoid. Furthermore, immunoelectron microscopy analysis indicates that although cytochrome c550 is mainly located in the thylakoid domain of the chloroplast, it can also be found in the pyrenoid. The results are interpreted in terms of a specific protein modification associated to a higher PSII turnover or to new alternative functions of the heme protein, maybe related to carbon fixation.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion in solution of immunoprecipited samples, as well as peptide analysis by liquid chromatography and MS, were performed basically as previously described (Vowinckel et al. 2013) on a Tandem Quadrupole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer (AB Sciex TripleTOF5600) coupled to a Nanospray III Ion Source (AB Sciex) and nano-HPLC (Eksigent Ekspert nanoLC 425). Peptide separation was first carried out on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å,  100 µm id x 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then eluted onto the analytical column (New Objective PicoFrit column, 75 µm id x 250 mm, emitter included and packed with Reprosil-PUR 3 µm). Data acquisition was achieved as previously described (Vowinckel et al. 2013). The ion accumulation time was set to 250 ms (MS) and to 65 ms (MS/MS), resulting in a total duty cycle of 2.89 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquired in DDA mode were analyzed and processed basically as described in Vowinckel et al. (2013), by using the Paragon algorithm (Protein Pilot software, AB Sciex, v. 5.0.1) and the reference proteome of P. tricornutum in the UniProt database of protein sequences. AB Sciex contaminants and rabbit proteins from the UniProt database were discarded. Only peptides with a confidence score > 0.05 were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytochrome c6; ccm, Ribulose-1, Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry; ms, Cytochrome c550; cc6, ß-dodecyl-maltoside; ca, Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase; lc-ms/ms, Photosystem ii; rubisco, Photosystem i; psii, Co2-concentrating mechanism; dss, Liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry; maldi-tof ms, Carbonic anhydrase; cc550, ß-dm, Mass spectrometry; psi, 5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, Disuccinimidyl suberate; fba

### Affiliations
CSIC-US, IBVF
CSIC-US

### Submitter
Jose Antonio Navarro

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Antonio Navarro Carruesco
CSIC-US, IBVF


