### Accession
PXD035346

### Title
Branch point evolution controls species-specific alternative splicing and regulates long term potentiation

### Description
Regulation and functionality of species-specific alternative splicing has remained enigmatic for many years. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIβ (CaMKIIβ) is expressed in several splice variants and plays a key role in learning and memory. Here, we identify and characterize several primate-specific CAMK2B splice isoforms, which show altered kinetic properties and changes in substrate specificity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that primate-specific Camk2β alternative splicing is achieved through branch point weakening during evolution. We show that reducing branch point and splice site strength during evolution globally renders constitutive exons alternative, thus providing a paradigm for cis-directed species-specific alternative splicing regulation. Using CRISPR/Cas9 we introduced the weaker human branch point into the mouse genome, resulting in human-like CAMK2B splicing in the brain of mutant mice. We observe a strong impairment of long-term potentiation in CA3-CA1 synapses of mutant mice, thus connecting branch point-controlled, species-specific alternative splicing with a fundamental function in learning and memory.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was purified by methanol/chloroform precipitation approach. Resuspended protein pellets was resuspended in denaturation buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM TCEP adjusted to pH 7-8, 8 M urea). The tryptic digested peptides after desalting were used for thiophosphate enrichment. C18 and Styrene Divinyl Benzene (SDB) StageTips clean-up were performed prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
spectraMS raw data were analysed using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.5.0) against the UniProt mouse reference proteome (downloaded in November 2021, mouse, 25,367 entries). Subsequent analysis was done in python (version 3.8.5, Anaconda distribution) using the packages pandas, numpy, matplotlib, seaborn, upsetplot, scipty, sklearn. Contaminants and reverse peptide hits were removed and the analysis restricted to phosphorylated peptides with a localization probability ≥ 0.75. The overlap between the two datasets was calculated using the unique phosphosite (protein/gene name + identity of phosphorylated residue) as an index. The intensity values of both datasets were normalized before merging, using the min-max normalization: x_(norm.)=(x-min⁡(x))/(max⁡(x)-min⁡(x))  . Min(x) and max(x) were set to the respective minimal or maximal value of the individual datasets. When pooling replicates, an average intensity value was calculated. If only one replicate featured an intensity value for the respective target, this value was kept. Correlation matrices were calculated using a Pearson correlation coefficient. For Boolean data, the Jaccard similarity index was used.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation and functionality of species-specific alternative splicing has remained enigmatic to the present date. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II&#x3b2; (CaMKII&#x3b2;) is expressed in several splice variants and plays a key role in learning and memory. Here, we identify and characterize several primate-specific <i>CAMK2B</i> splice isoforms, which show altered kinetic properties and changes in substrate specificity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that primate-specific <i>CAMK2B</i> alternative splicing is achieved through branch point weakening during evolution. We show that reducing branch point and splice site strengths during evolution globally renders constitutive exons alternative, thus providing novel mechanistic insight into <i>cis</i>-directed species-specific alternative splicing regulation. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we introduce a weaker, human branch point sequence into the mouse genome, resulting in strongly altered <i>Camk2b</i> splicing in the brains of mutant mice. We observe a strong impairment of long-term potentiation in CA3-CA1 synapses of mutant mice, thus connecting branch point-controlled <i>CAMK2B</i> alternative splicing with a fundamental function in learning and memory.

### Keywords
Mouse, Thiophosphorylation

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences

### Submitter
Yanlong Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.


