### Accession
PXD004940

### Title
Performance of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid in single-shot analyses of human samples

### Description
One of the major additions in mass spectrometry technology has been the irruption of the Orbitrap mass analyzer, which has boosted the proteomics analyses of biological complex samples since its introduction. Here we assessed the performance of the new generation Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer in the identification and quantitation of peptides and phosphopeptides in single-shot analyses of human whole cell lysates using robust data-dependent acquisition methods. Our study explored the capabilities of the instrument for (phospho-)peptide identification and quantitation using different gradient lengths, different sample amounts, and different combinations of peptide fragmentation and mass analysers acquisition methods. Moreover, the acquisition of the same complex sample with different acquisition methods resulted in the generation of a dataset to be used as a reference for further analyses, and a starting point for future optimizations in particular applications.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa protein extracts were sequentially digested in-solution with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin. Briefly, samples were initially reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 25 ºC, 30 min), and they were diluted to 2 M urea for overnight digestion with Lys-C at 37 ºC. Samples were then diluted 2-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 ºC. Tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 column, evaporated to dryness.  250 µg of dried HeLa protein digest were dissolved with 10 µl of 3 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA), and further diluted with 90 µl of TiO2 loading buffer (80% ACN, 6%TFA). Phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2-beads as previously described [16]. Briefly 10 mg of “Titansphere TiO2 5 μm” (GL Sciences Inc. Japan) were washed with 1 ml of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and resuspended in 1 ml of loading buffer. 50 µl of the slurry were transferred and immobilized in a pipette-column and washed with 50 µl of loading buffer. The sample was loaded in the pipette-column and it was washed with 50 µL of washing buffer (0.1 % TFA, 80 % ACN). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads with 25 µL of 25 % ACN (v/v) containing 25 % NH4OH (m/v), acidified with 10 µL of 10 % TFA and vacuum-concentrated to dryness. Samples were finally diluted to 10 µl with H2O + 0.1% formic acid prior and 4 µl were loaded into the chromatographic column for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.4, Matrix Science) were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The data were searched against the Swiss-Prot human database (version Nov 2015). At the MS1 level, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 mmu for the Orbitrap MS/MS detection methods and to 0.5 Da for the linear ion trap MS/MS detection methods. Oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation in serine, threonine and tyrosine was also set as variable modification in the analysis of the phospho-enriched samples. In all cases, false discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was limited to a maximum of 0.01 by using a decoy database and the Percolator algorithm [17]. Phosphorylation site localization was calculated using the phosphoRS algorithm \cite{Taus2011a}. Quantitation data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC).

### Publication Abstract
One of the major additions in MS technology has been the irruption of the Orbitrap mass analyzer, which has boosted the proteomics analyses of biological complex samples since its introduction. Here, we took advantage of the capabilities of the new Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer to assess the performance of different data-dependent acquisition methods for the identification and quantitation of peptides and phosphopeptides in single-shot analysis of human whole cell lysates. Our study explored the capabilities of tri-hibrid mass spectrometers for (phospho-) peptide identification and quantitation using different gradient lengths, sample amounts, and combinations of different peptide fragmentation types and mass analyzers. Moreover, the acquisition of the same complex sample with different acquisition methods resulted in the generation of a dataset to be used as a reference for further analyses, and a starting point for future optimizations in particular applications.

### Keywords
Protein quantitation, Protein identification, Phosphorylation, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
1. Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, 08003 Barcelona, Spain 2. Proteomics Unit, Universitat de Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
1. Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, 08003 Barcelona, Spain 2. Proteomics Unit, Universitat de Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


