### Accession
PXD036793

### Title
Proteomic Analysis for Cul5 E3 Ligase Complex as a Key Negative Feedback Regulator of TCR/Il2 Signaling and Anti-Tumor Activity in Cd8+ T Cells

### Description
To investigate the mechanism by which Cul5 regulates CD8+ T cell cytokine-dependent differentiation and TCR-dependent activation, we performed quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) by data-independent acquisition (DIA)-MS of total proteins in the Cul5 KO and NC primary CD8+ T cells in the following conditions: 1) Cytokine dependent expansion and differentiation (T0); 2) 8 hours cytokine withdraw prior to TCR stimulation (T8); and 3) 16 hours TCR stimulation post 8-hour cytokine withdraw (T16). Principal component analysis (PCA) and correlation analysis revealed that replicates in each condition clustered together while different conditions separated from each other, suggesting significant proteomic changes among different conditions of the same T cells as well as between Cul5 KO and NC T cells in each condition. Together with similar total protein quantities among all detected samples, DIA-MS analyses were of high quality. Additionally, the strong reductions of Cul5 abundances in the Cul5 KO cells from all three conditions compared to the NC cells confirms high KO efficiency. Of note, the proteomic analysis showed that the Cul5 protein level was significantly increased upon TCR stimulation post cytokine starvation in the NC cells, suggesting a potential negative feedback regulatory role of Cul5 in CD8+ T cell activation. Consistent with this idea, we observed more markedly upregulation of Cul5 expression upon of TCR stimulation of na•ve primary CD8+ cells.  To identify Cul5 interacting proteins in CD8+ T cells, we overexpressed Cul5 with a C terminal HA-tag (Cul5-HA) in mouse primary CD8+ T cells by retroviral transduction.  The cells were subjected to TCR stimulation for 12 hr, and Cul5-HA was immunoprecipitated by anti-HA, followed by DIA-MS analysis (co-IP-MS). Compared to the negative control samples (cells transduced with the empty vector), 65 proteins were enriched (p value <0.05 and fold change >1.5) in the anti-HA IP samples. Altogether, we report that Cul5 KO alters CD8+ T cell proteome  and the Cul5 interactome.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics, 1x106 cytokine expanded CD8+ T cells with or without Cul5 KO were either immediately harvested as T0 or continuously cultured in medium without cytokines for 8 hours. Then cytokine deprived CD8+ T cells were harvested either immediately as T8 or after 16 hours stimulation with 1µg/ml plate-coated anti-CD3 and 1µg/ml soluble anti-CD28 as T16. Harvested cells were washed in cold PBS for 3 times, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80 °C freezer. Cell pellets were lysed by the lysis buffer 10 M urea containing the cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, #11697498001). For lysis completely, the cell tubes were ultrasonically lysed by sonication at 4   for two cycle (1 min per cycle) using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), and then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 1 h to remove the insoluble material at the bottom of the tubes. The reduction and alkylation were conducted with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 56 °C and then 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 45 min at room temperature. The samples were diluted by 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at ratio of 1:20 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The digested peptides purification was performed on C18 column (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC) and 1 µg of the peptide was injected for mass spectrometry analysis.   For co-IP in triplicate, 1x107 CD8+ T cells per replicate transduced with MIGR-IRES-GFP control vector or MIGR-Cul5-HA-IRES-GFP Cul5-HA overexpression vector were stimulated in 1ug/ml anti-CD3 coated plate plus 1ug/ml soluble anti-CD28 for 12 hours. 10µM MG-132 was added for the last 8 hours before harvesting cells. Harvested cells were washed in cold PBS for 3 times and immediately resuspended in IP lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, Cat.87787) with proteinase/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail on ice for 10 minutes. After a high-speed centrifuge, supernatant was transferred into a new tube, followed by overnight incubation with anti-HA antibody (Biolegend, Cat.901515). Protein G dynabeads (Thermo Scientific, Cat.10003D) were then added with rotation at room temperature for 1 hour. Dynabeads containing bound protein complex were sequentially washed with cold IP lysis buffer without proteinase/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 4x, and wash buffer without detergent 2x on magnetic stand. Protein complex was eluted twice by elution buffer containing 0.5M ammonium hydroxide and 0.5mM EDTA. Combined elutes were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80 °C freezer. The elution was dried with SpeedVac, and then resolved with 50 mL 6 M urea for reduction and alkylation. Other proteomic sample preparation steps were identical with the above cell sample protocol.

### Data Protocol
The samples were measured by data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry method as described previously. The Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) and EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). A 120-min gradient was used for the data acquisition at the flow rate at 300 nL/min with the temperature controlled at 60 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Each DIA-MS cycle consisted of one MS1 scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable isolated windows with 1 m/z overlapping between windows. The MS1 scan range was 350 – 1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution was 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2E6 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 with the MS2 scan range 200 – 1800 m/z and the normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 1.5E6 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode. DIA-MS data analysis was performed using Spectronaut v15 with “directDIA” by searching against the mouse SwissProt protein database. The oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoffs (Qvalue) were controlled below 1% by Spectronaut and the resulting quantitative data matrix were exported from Spectronaut. All the other settings in Spectronaut were kept as Default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd8 t cells, Crispr, Proteomics, Cul5

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT 06516, USA.

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT 06516, USA.


