### Accession
PXD038009

### Title
Proteomic characteriaztion of the high light response of Calredoxin mutants (C. reinhardtii)

### Description
Calredoxin (CRX) is a calcium (Ca2+)-dependent thioredoxin (TRX) in the chloroplast of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. To further elucidate the function of CRX, we performed in-depth quantitative proteomics taking advantage of a crx insertional mutant (IMcrx), two CRISPR/Cas9 KO mutants, CRX rescues and wild type strains. These analyses revealed that the chloroplast NADPH-dependent TRX reductase (NTRC) is co-regulated with CRX. Electron transfer measurements revealed that CRX inhibits NADPH-dependent reduction of oxidized chloroplast 2-Cys peroxiredoxin (PRX1) via NTRC and that the function of the NADPH-NTRC complex is under strict control of CRX. Our data also demonstrated via non-reducing SDS-PAGE assays and redox proteomics that PRX1, Transketolase (TRK1), ATPC and Proton Gradient Related like 1 (PGRL1) are more oxidized under high light (HL) conditions in the absence of CRX. The redox tuning of PRX1 and control of the NADPH-NTRC complex via CRX interconnects redox control with active photosynthetic electron transport and metabolism as well as Ca2+ signaling. In this way, an economic use of NADPH for PRX1 reduction is assured. The finding, that in the absence of CRX, light-driven CO2 fixation is severely inhibited under HL conditions underpins the importance of CRX for redox tuning as well as for efficient photosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome: Cells were grown at 40 µmol photonsꞏm-2ꞏs-1 (16 h light/8 h dark) for three days in TP LL and were then adjusted to 4 μg/ml chlorophyll in fresh TP after approx. 4 h in the light cycle prior to either harvesting of the LL samples or shifting to HL (500 μEm-2s-1) for 24 h. Depending on sample concentration, 10 to 20 ml sample were taken at 0 or 24 h HL by centrifuging at 2500 x g for 5 min at room temperature. Pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Thawed pellets were then resuspended in a 1:5 (150- 300 μl) pellet: lysis buffer ratio (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 2% SDS, 10 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na-orthovanadate, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM benzamidine), heated at 65°C for 20 min with mixing at 1000 rpm, sonicated for 5 min in a sonication bath and centrifuged at 14 000 x g for 10 min. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 μg of protein were loaded into FASP filters (Amicon Ultra 30K, 0.5 ml, Merck) and tryptically digested over night following the FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) protocol as described in Wisniewski et al. (2009) with the following modifications: dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA) were replaced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP) and chloroacetamide (CAA), respectively. allowing reduction and alkylation of cysteines in a single step.  Prior to MS analysis, aliquots corresponding to 5 μg of digested peptides were desalted on C18 STAGE tips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003), dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80°C until further use. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/4% acetonitrile (ACN). Sample analysis was carried out on an LC-MS system consisting of an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Approximately 1 µg of peptides were loaded on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using loading buffer (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/4% acetonitrile (ACN) in MS grade water) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Peptides were separated on a C18 column (PepMap 100, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flowrate of 250 nl/min. The eluents were 0.1% formic acid (FA) in MS grade water (A) and 0.1% FA/80% ACN in MS grade water (B). The following gradient was applied: 5-24% B over 120 min, 24-36% B over 40 min, 36-99% B over 10 min, 99% B for 20 min. MS data were collected by data-dependent acquisition (DDA), dynamically choosing the 12 most abundant ions from the precursor scans (scan range m/z 350–1,400, resolution 70,000, AGC target value 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms) for fragmentation (MS/MS) by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (27% normalized collision energy, isolation window 1.5 m/z, resolution 17,500). AGC target value for MS/MS was 5e4 at 80 ms maximum injection time and an intensity threshold of 6.9e3. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 60 s. Singly charged ions, ions with charge state 5 and above as well as ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation. Internal lock mass calibration was enabled on m/z 445.120025. Oxidation of PRX1: Recombinant PRX1 was blocked in its respective redox state by TCA precipitation at a final concentration of 10%. After incubation at -20°C for at least 2 h and centrifugation (16 000 xg, 15 min, 4°C), precipitates were washed with 1% TCA in acetone, centrifuged again and then washed with 100% acetone. Washing steps were performed on ice throughout. After another centrifugation step, acetone was removed and the pellet was let dry for approx. 20 min at RT. Pellets were resuspended in 50 mM N-ethyl-maleimide (NEM) in 8 M Urea, 2% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA for 2 h at RT to block reduced cysteines. After another TCA precipitation step (10% final concentration, 2 h -20°C, centrifugation), pellets were washed with 100% acetone twice and resuspended in non-reducing loading dye for SDS-PAGE. Gel bands containing PRX1 were cut out of the gel and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion according to established protocols, and including the reduction and alkylation of non-NEM-labelled cysteines (Shevchenko et al., 2006). After desalting of resulting peptides using C18 STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007)

### Data Protocol
Whole proteome: MS raw files were converted to mzML format employing ThermoRawFileParser (version 1.3.3, (Hulstaert et al., 2019). Data was analyzed with MSFragger 3.3 (Kong et al., 2017), Philosopher 4.0 (da Veiga Leprevost et al., 2020), and IonQuant 1.7.5 (Yu et al., 2020), all implemented in Fragpipe (version 16.0). The Fragpipe profile “LFQ-MBR” was used with default settings for protein identification and label-free quantification. Spectra were searched against a Chlamydomonas reinhardtii protein sequence database consisting of nuclear-encoded (www.phytozome.org, assembly version 5.0, annotation version 5.6), chloroplast-encoded (NCBI BK000554.2), and mitochondria-encoded (NCBI NC_001638.1) proteins. Common contaminants (cRAP, www.thegpm.org/crap/) were also included. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were considered as variable modifications.  LFQ data (combined_protein.tsv) was loaded into Perseus 1.6.15.0 (Tyanova and Cox, 2018) for processing and statistical analysis. After log2-transformation, proteins with less than three valid intensity values in at least one strain were filtered out. Then, intensity data from strains with identical genetic background were grouped and proteins not meeting a threshold of 75% of valid values in at least one group were discarded. CRX was exempted from filtering. Remaining missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 2.5).  Subsequently, multiple sample testing (ANOVA) was performed with a permutation-controlled FDR of 0.01, followed by Tukey’s honestly significant difference test (FDR 0.05). After z-scoring of protein intensities, hierarchical clustering (average linkage, Euclidean distance, 30 clusters) of significantly differentially expressed proteins was carried out. Oxidation of PRX1: LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on the system described above. Samples were loaded on the trap column for 5 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using 2.5% loading buffer. Then peptides were separated with the following gradient: 2.5-40 % B over 55 min, 40-99 % B over 5 min, 99 % B for 20 min. MS data acquisition settings were as described for the whole proteome analysis with the following changes:  MS/MS maximum injection time was 55 ms and the intensity threshold was 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to “auto” assuming a chromatographic peak width (FWHM) of 10 s. Spectra files were searched in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against the polypeptide sequence of recombinant PRX1, common contaminants (cRAP, www.thegpm.org/crap/), and the E. coli proteome (Uniprot ID UP000000625) using the MSFragger, MS Amanda and Sequest HT nodes. Default search parameters for data acquisition in the Orbitrap were used with the following exceptions, all of which regarding the modification of cysteine residues: NEM-labeling, carbamidomethylation, oxidation, dioxidation and trioxidation were chosen as variable modifications. Peptide precursor intensities were determined via the Minora feature detector node in Proteome Discoverer. Ion traces of the NEM-labeled and the carbamidomethylated versions of the PRX1 peptide VLQAIQYVQSNPDEVCPAGWKPGDK were exported directly from the software. The double peak observed for the NEM derivative is most likely due to the presence of two diastereoisomers resulting from the introduction of a new chiral centre by the labelling (Jemal and Hawthorne, 1994; Srinivas and Mamidi, 2003).

### Publication Abstract
Calredoxin (CRX) is a calcium (Ca2+)-dependent thioredoxin (TRX) in the chloroplast of Chlamydomonas (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) with a largely unclear physiological role. We elucidated the CRX functionality by performing in-depth quantitative proteomics of wild-type cells compared with a crx insertional mutant (IMcrx), two CRISPR/Cas9 KO mutants, and CRX rescues. These analyses revealed that the chloroplast NADPH-dependent TRX reductase (NTRC) is co-regulated with CRX. Electron transfer measurements revealed that CRX inhibits NADPH-dependent reduction of oxidized chloroplast 2-Cys peroxiredoxin (PRX1) via NTRC and that the function of the NADPH-NTRC complex is under strict control of CRX. Via non-reducing SDS-PAGE assays and mass spectrometry, our data also demonstrated that PRX1 is more oxidized under high light (HL) conditions in the absence of CRX. The redox tuning of PRX1 and control of the NADPH-NTRC complex via CRX interconnect redox control with active photosynthetic electron transport and metabolism, as well as Ca2+ signaling. In this way, an economic use of NADPH for PRX1 reduction is ensured. The finding that the absence of CRX under HL conditions severely inhibited light-driven CO2 fixation underpins the importance of CRX for redox tuning, as well as for efficient photosynthesis.

### Keywords
High light, Peroxiredoxin, Algae, Calredoxin, Photosynthesis, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
IBBP, WWU Muenster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
IBBP, WWU Muenster


