### Accession
PXD012043

### Title
Total protein profiles of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes in response to four tyrosine kinase inhibitors

### Description
Drug-induced cardiotoxicity is a widespread clinical issue affecting numerous drug classes and remains difficult to treat. One such drug class is Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (TKIs), which cause varying degrees of contraction-related cardiotoxicity usually after weeks of exposure. Understanding molecular mechanisms underlying both acute and chronic toxicity of TKIs could help identify new treatment opportunities. Here, we presented transcriptome responses to four TKIs (Sunitinib, Sorafenib, Lapatinib and Erlotinib) across 3 doses and 4 time points in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). Gene expression evolved continually under drug treatment and revealed changes in several biological networks that were associated with cardiac metabolism and contraction. These changes were confirmed by proteomics and resulted in metabolic and structural remodeling of hiPSC-CMs. One of the metabolic remodeling was the increased aerobic glycolysis induced by Sorafenib, which is an adaptive response in preserving cell survival under Sorafenib treatment. Drug adaptation in cardiac cells may represent new targets for managing chronic forms of TKI-induced cardiotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
hiPSC-CMs were cultured in 60 mm plates, then treated for 3 days with 3 M of each of the four TKIs (Erlotinib, Lapatinib, Sorafenib and Sunitinib) or with as a DMSO vehicle-only control, in duplicate (10 samples in total) and collected at both day 1 and day 3. Cells  were washed 3 times with PBS, lysed and scraped in 0.5 mL of lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). The cell lysate was collected and vortexed, then passed through a QIAshredder (Qiagen) column to ensure complete lysis. The protein concentration of each sample was determined using 30 µL of cell lysate measured by BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The remaining cell lysate was reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). For each sample, 0.15 mg of protein was aliquoted into separate tubes and precipitated by adding 3x volumes of chloroform and 2x volumes of methanol. The pellet was recovered by centrifugation and washed with cold methanol 2 times and re-solubilized in 8M urea with 20 mM EPPS (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.5. The sample was then diluted into 4M urea with 20 mM EPPS and digested using Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) overnight at room temperature. The sample was further diluted to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea with 20 mM EPPS and digested with Trypsin (Promega) for 6 hours at 37 °C. 60 µg of each sample was then dissolved into 10% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and labeled 2:1 (TMT:Peptide ratio) with TMT-10 reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine (0.5% final volume, Sigma-Aldrich). The ten samples per experiment were then combined, acidified by adding formic acid (FA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to 2% final volume, and desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak (Waters). The combined sample was fractionated using basic pH reversed phase chromatography on an Agilent 1200 HPLC equipped with a UV-DAD detector and fraction collection system. A total of 12 fractions were desalted using the C18 StageTip procedure (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Each fraction was loaded onto a column (35 cm long x 100 µm inner diameter) packed with 1.8 µm beads (Sepax) and separated using a 3-hour gradient from 8% Buffer B and 92% Buffer A to 27% Buffer B and 73% Buffer A (Buffer B: 99% ACN and 1% FA. Buffer A: 96% water, 3% ACN and 1% FA) using an Easy 1000 nano-LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a multi-notch MS3 method (McAlister et al., 2014; Ting et al., 2011)

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mzXML and mapped via Sequest (Eng et al., 1994) version 28 against a concatenated Uniprot database downloaded on 02/04/2014. Variable modifications of oxidized Methionine and over-labeling of TMT on Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine (Böhm et al., 2015) were considered. Linear discriminate analysis (Huttlin et al., 2010) was used to distinguish forward and reverse hits, and reverse hits were filtered to an FDR of 1% at the protein level. Shared peptides were collapsed into the minimally sufficient number of proteins using rules of parsimony. Quantitation filters of > 200 sum reporter ion S:N and > 0.7 isolation specificity were incorporated. After converting raw data into values of signal intensity based on these pre-processing steps, data were further normalized so that protein expression values for the 10 samples of each protein sum up to 100 in each 10-plex TMT experiment. The two 10-plex TMT experiments of 72-hour treatment, were combined by calculating the mean of one replicate from each of the two experiments. To confirm the validity of combining the results from the two independent experiments, we performed a hierarchical clustering analysis based on the average unweighted distance between each replicate, as implemented in the linkage method in the MATLAB software. As expected, the four replicates for each condition, spanning both experiments, consistently cluster together.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are widely used to treat solid tumors but can be cardiotoxic. The molecular basis for this toxicity and its relationship to therapeutic mechanisms remain unclear; we therefore undertook a systems-level analysis of human cardiomyocytes (CMs) exposed to four TKIs. CMs differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) were exposed to sunitinib, sorafenib, lapatinib, or erlotinib, and responses were assessed by functional assays, microscopy, RNA sequencing, and mass spectrometry (GEO: GSE114686; PRIDE: PXD012043). TKIs have diverse effects on hiPSC-CMs distinct from inhibition of tyrosine-kinase-mediated signal transduction; cardiac metabolism is particularly sensitive. Following sorafenib treatment, oxidative phosphorylation is downregulated, resulting in a profound defect in mitochondrial energetics. Cells adapt by upregulating aerobic glycolysis. Adaptation makes cells less acutely sensitive to sorafenib but may have long-term negative consequences. Thus, CMs exhibit adaptive responses to anti-cancer drugs conceptually similar to those previously shown in tumors to mediate drug resistance.

### Keywords
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocyte, Mitochondrial respiration, Aerobic glycolysis, Tandem mass tag mass spectrometry, Cardiotoxicity, Drug adaptation

### Affiliations
Otto Krayer Professor Department of Systems Biology Head of the Harvard Program in Therapeutic Sciences Harvard Medical School 200 Longwood Avenue, WAB440 Boston, MA 02115
Center for Protein Degradation/Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Matthew Berberich

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Sorger
Otto Krayer Professor Department of Systems Biology Head of the Harvard Program in Therapeutic Sciences Harvard Medical School 200 Longwood Avenue, WAB440 Boston, MA 02115


