### Accession
PXD018624

### Title
The Batten disease gene product CLN3 is required for the efflux of glycerophosphodiesters from lysosomes

### Description
The lysosome has many cellular roles, including degrading and recycling macromolecules and signaling to the mTORC1 growth regulator. Lysosomal dysfunction occurs in various human diseases, including common neurodegenerative diseases as well as monogenic lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). For most LSDs the causal genes have been identified, but in many cases the function of the implicated gene is unknown. Here, we develop the LysoTag mouse line for the tissue-specific isolation of intact lysosomes that are compatible with the multimodal profiling of their contents. We apply it to the study of CLN3, a lysosomal transmembrane protein of unclear function whose loss causes juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten disease), a lethal neurodegenerative LSD. Untargeted metabolite profiling of lysosomes from the brains of mice lacking CLN3 revealed a massive accumulation of glycerophosphodiesters (GPDs), the end products of glycerophospholipid catabolism. GPDs also accumulate in the lysosomes of CLN3-deficient cultured cells and stable isotope tracing experiments show that CLN3 is required for their lysosomal egress. Loss of CLN3 also alters upstream glycerophospholipid catabolism in the lysosome. Our results suggest that CLN3 is a lysosomal effluxer of GPDs and reveal Batten disease as the first, to our knowledge, neurodegenerative LSD with a primary defect in glycerophospholipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from LysoIP and aliquots of the matched starting lysates (corresponding to approx. 50g of protein extract) were processed as described in Wyant et al. Science 2018. Briefly, proteins were solubilized by addition of SDS to a final concentration of 2% (v/v), followed by sonication in Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) and heating for 10min at 95C. Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were precipitated by cold acetone precipitation. The resulting pellet were resuspended in digestion buffer (3M Urea in 100mM HEPES pH8.0) and digested by consecutive addition of LysC (Wako, 3h at 37C) and trypsin (Promega, 16h at 37C). The obtained digested peptides were acidified and desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm (Waters) following manufacturer instructions. The desalted peptides were dissolved in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to a peptide concentration of approximatively 1μg/μL and spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys AG) prior to analysis by LC-MS. Approximatively 1μg of reconstituted peptides were analysed by Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) using the UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with a trapping (Waters nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) FA and solvent B was 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.08% (v/v) FA. Peptides were eluted via a non-linear gradient from 1% to 62.5% B in 131min. Total runtime was 150min, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The S-lens RF value was set to 60. MS acquisition parameters were set as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM.  The filling time was set at maximum of 60ms with an AGC target of 3x 106 ions.  DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. The default charge state was set to 3+. HCD fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200m/z after accumulation of 3x 106 ions or after filling time of 35ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing Tune version 2.9 and Xcalibur 4.1 were employed.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were processed using Spectronaut Professional v13.10 (Biognosys AG). Raw files were searched by directDIA search with Pulsar (Biognosys AG) against the mouse UniProt database (Mus musculus, entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended, using default settings. For quantification, default BGS factory settings were used, except: Proteotypicity Filter = Only Protein Group Specific; Major Group Quantity = Median peptide quantity; Major Group Top N = OFF; Minor Group Quantity = Median precursor quantity; Minor Group Top N = OFF; Data Filtering = Qvalue percentile with Fraction = 0.2 and Imputing Strategy = Global Imputing; Normalization Strategy = Local normalization; Row Selection = Automatic. The candidates and protein report tables were exported from Spectronaut and used for volcano plots generation and Principal Component Analysis (PCA), respectively, using R version 3.4.1 and RStudio server version 1.1.463. Protein groups were considered as significantly enriched in LysoIP samples if they displayed a Q value < 0.01 and average log2 ratio > 1.5. Known lysosomal proteins were defined based on Gene Ontology Cellular Component or UniProt sub-cellular localization annotation.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomes have many roles, including degrading macromolecules and signalling to the nucleus<sup>1</sup>. Lysosomal dysfunction occurs in various human conditions, such as common neurodegenerative diseases and monogenic lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs)<sup>2-4</sup>. For most LSDs, the causal genes have been identified but, in some, the function of the implicated gene is unknown, in part because lysosomes occupy a small fraction of the cellular volume so that changes in lysosomal contents are difficult to detect. Here we develop the LysoTag mouse for the tissue-specific isolation of intact lysosomes that are compatible with the multimodal profiling of their contents. We used the LysoTag mouse to study CLN3, a lysosomal transmembrane protein with an unknown function. In children, the loss of CLN3 causes juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten disease), a lethal neurodegenerative LSD. Untargeted metabolite profiling of lysosomes from the brains of mice lacking CLN3 revealed a massive accumulation of glycerophosphodiesters (GPDs)-the end products of glycerophospholipid catabolism. GPDs also accumulate in the lysosomes of CLN3-deficient cultured cells and we show that CLN3 is required for their lysosomal egress. Loss of CLN3 also disrupts glycerophospholipid catabolism in the lysosome. Finally, we found elevated levels of glycerophosphoinositol in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Batten disease, suggesting the potential use of glycerophosphoinositol as a disease biomarker. Our results show that CLN3 is required for the lysosomal clearance of GPDs and reveal Batten disease as a neurodegenerative LSD with a defect in glycerophospholipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Lysosome, Batten disease, Cln3

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany


