### Accession
PXD024138

### Title
Proteomic response of Escherichia coli to membrane lytic and iron chelating Amaranthus tricolor defensin

### Description
Plant defensins are a broadly distributed family of antimicrobial peptides which have been primarily studied for agriculturally relevant antifungal activity. Recent studies have probed defensins against gram negative bacteria revealing evidence for multiple mechanisms of action including membrane lysis and ribosomal inhibition. In this study, a γ-core motif synthetic analog ( Atr-DEF2(G39-C55) ) of Amaranthus tricolor DEF2 (Atr-DEF2) is used to probe plant defensin antibacterial mechanism of action via proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
All culturing was conducted at 37°C with shaking (250 rpm)in Mueller Hinton broth. E. coli 25922 was inoculated in 5 mL cultures and grown for 16 h after which, it was used to inoculate three 5 ml cultures at 0.25 OD600. After 1 h, E. coli cultures were homogenized and the homogenate was used to generate eight 0.1 OD600 1 mL cultures. Then, 1 mL cultures were treated with 37 μM Atr-DEF2(G39-C55) or water such that four biological replicates were performed for each condition. After 3 h, each replicate was harvested by centrifugation and immediately flash frozen until further analysis. Cell pellets were lysed via sonication and the proteins with extracted using an ammonium acetate in methanol precipitation. 50 μg aliquots of each replicate were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, room temperature, dark) and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (45 min, room temperature, dark), and digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50, 37 °C, 16 h). Digestion was quench by acidifying with trifluoracetic acid (pH<3). Samples were desalted via C18 SepPak (50 mg, Waters) prior to further analysis. Samples were analyzed as using an Acquity M-class UPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex source operated positive polarity mode. Injections (4 µL) were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm × 20 mm; Waters) and then separated on a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 250 mm; Waters). Data was acquired using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition mode survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350–2000 m/z. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS/MS scans were performed with a scan range of 200–2000 m/z and precursors were subject to a dynamic exclusion of 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectral files (*.raw) were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0; Northumberland, UK). Peak picking sensitivity was set to maximum of five and a reference spectrum was automatically assigned. Total ion chromatograms (TICs) were then aligned to minimize run-to-run differences in peak retention time. Each sample received a unique factor to normalize all peak abundance values resulting from systematic experimental variation. A combined peak list (*.mgf) containing the top 25 fragmentation spectra for each m/z was exported for peptide sequence determination and protein inference by Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1; Boston, MA, USA). Database searching was performed against the E coli O6:H1 UniProt proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001410, 5,336 entries) with sequences for common laboratory contaminants (https://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/, 116 entries) appended. Searches of MS/MS data used a trypsin protease specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, and variable modifications of protein N-terminus acetylation, and methionine oxidation. Alkylation of Cys with IAM (carboxyamidomethylcysteine) was set as a fixed modification. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to less than 1% peptide FDR using the embedded Percolator algorithm and imported to Progenesis for peak matching. Identifications with a Mascot score less than 13 were removed from consideration in Progenesis before exporting both “Protein Measurements” from the “Review Proteins” stage. For LC-MS/MS-based proteomics, data were parsed using custom scripts written in R for pre-processing and statistical analysis (https://github.com/hickslab/QuantifyR) to determine significantly changing protein abundances. Statistical significance was determined using a two-tailed, equal variance t-test and the method of Benjamini and Hochberg (BH) was used to correct p-values for multiple comparisons. Fold change was calculated by the difference of the mean abundance values between conditions being compared. Only observations with FDR-adjusted p < 0.05 and log2-transformed fold change +/− 1.0 were considered significantly different.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iron chelation, Defensins, Escherichia coli, Membrane lysis, Iron reduction, Amaranthus tricolor

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Chemistry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Chemistry


