### Accession
PXD039332

### Title
The Super Elongation Complex Drives Transcriptional Addiction in MYCN-amplified Neuroblastoma

### Description
MYCN amplification in neuroblastoma leads to aberrant expression of MYCN oncoprotein, which binds active genes promoting transcriptional amplification. Yet how MYCN coordinates transcription elongation to meet productive transcriptional amplification and which elongation machinery represents MYCN-driven vulnerability remain to be identified. We conducted a targeted screen of transcription elongation factors and identified the super elongation complex (SEC) as a unique vulnerability in MYCN-amplified neuroblastomas. MYCN directly binds EAF1 and recruits SEC to enhance processive transcription elongation. Depletion of EAF1 or AFF1/AFF4, another core subunit of SEC, leads to a global reduction in transcription elongation and elicits selective apoptosis of MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells. A combination screen reveals SEC inhibition synergistically potentiates the therapeutic efficacies of FDA-approved BCL2 antagonist ABT-199, in part due to suppression of MCL1 expression, both in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells and in patient-derived xenografts. These findings identify disruption of the MYCN-SEC regulatory axis as a promising therapeutic strategy in neuroblastoma.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells transfected with MYCN-TurboID or Flag-MYCN were prepared for TurboID or co-IP respectively, followed by mass spectrometry analysis. TurboID was performed as previously described (28). Cells were cultured in biotin-containing DMEM medium for labeling, then lysed with RIPA lysis buffer in the presence of Benzonase (Yeasen Biotechnology #20125ES50). After precipitation at 21,000× g for 20 minutes, the supernatant was incubated with streptavidin beads, which was blocked with 1% BSA, at 4°C. Beads were then washed with RIPA Lysis Buffer containing 2M urea, MYCN and associated proteins were then eluted with 8M urea. For co-IP, transduced 293T cells were lysed with buffer A (10 mM HEPES-KOH at pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2 and 10 mM KCl) containing 0.3% NP-40 and protease inhibitor. Cell lysate was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1,300× g and the resulting cell pellet was resuspended with MNase Digestion Buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5,10 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2) in the presence of Micrococcal Nuclease (Thermo Fisher #EN0181). After centrifuging at 20,000× g, the supernatant was incubated with Flag-beads and then MYCN and associated proteins were harvested by TEV protease digestion to remove the flag tag.

### Data Protocol
Purified proteins were digested with typsin (Promega #V5280) and desalted with C18 columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific #87782). The resulting peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, equipped with the FAIMS Pro interface, and an EASY-nLC system using a Hypersil GOLD C18 Selectivity HPLC column. To processed raw files, Proteome Discoverer 2.4 was used with a four-stage searching program. The strict target FDR for PSMs or peptides was set at 0.01, and peptides with a lower confidence than 0.01 are excluded. q-values are greater than 0.01 for high confidence hits and 0.05 for medium confidence hits.

### Publication Abstract
<i>MYCN</i> amplification in neuroblastoma leads to aberrant expression of MYCN oncoprotein, which binds active genes promoting transcriptional amplification. Yet, how MYCN coordinates transcription elongation to meet productive transcriptional amplification and which elongation machinery represents MYCN-driven vulnerability remain to be identified. We conducted a targeted screen of transcription elongation factors and identified the super elongation complex (SEC) as a unique vulnerability in <i>MYCN</i>-amplified neuroblastomas. MYCN directly binds EAF1 and recruits SEC to enhance processive transcription elongation. Depletion of EAF1 or AFF1/AFF4, another core subunit of SEC, leads to a global reduction in transcription elongation and elicits selective apoptosis of <i>MYCN</i>-amplified neuroblastoma cells. A combination screen reveals SEC inhibition synergistically potentiates the therapeutic efficacies of FDA-approved BCL-2 antagonist ABT-199, in part due to suppression of MCL1 expression, both in <i>MYCN</i>-amplified neuroblastoma cells and in patient-derived xenografts. These findings identify disruption of the MYCN-SEC regulatory axis as a promising therapeutic strategy in neuroblastoma.

### Keywords
Abt-199, Mycn, Super elongation complex (sec), Transcription elongation, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University
Wuhan University Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Donghai Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Hudan Liu
Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University


