### Accession
PXD022525

### Title
Grad-seq Clostridium difficile 630

### Description
Grad-seq in Clostridium difficile 630. Cell lysate is analyzed in a gradient and fractionated into 21 fractions which are analysed for proteins by MS and for transcripts by RNA-sequencing.

### Sample Protocol
Clostridium difficile 630 lysate preparation, glycerol gradient fractionation, protein sample preparation.

### Data Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS of Grad-seq samples Protein samples were homogenized with ultrasound (5 cycles, 30 seconds on, 30 seconds off, 4°C). Samples were subsequently centrifuged for 15 minutes at 4°C and 16,100 g. 20 µl of each sample was mixed with 10 µl UPS2 spike-in (Sigma Aldrich) diluted in 250 µl 1.25x protein loading buffer. To reduce proteins 50 mM DTT was added and the samples were incubated for 10 min at 70°C. Subsequently, proteins were alkylated with 120 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature.   Precipitation was done overnight at -20°C with 4-fold volume of acetone. The pellets were washed four times with acetone at -20°C and dissolved in 50 µl 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were digested for two hours at 30°C with 0.25 µg Lys-C (Wako), followed by dilution with 150  µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and further digestion overnight with 0.25 µg trypsin at 37°C. Peptides were desalted with C-18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Each tip was prepared with three discs of C-18 Empore SPE Discs (3M) in a 200 µl pipet tip. Elution of peptides was performed with 60% acetonitrile in 0.3% formic acid, subsequently followed by drying and storing at -20°C. Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) with PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150  µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 140-minute linear gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 500 nl/min.  MS and MS/MS scans were conducted in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy was applied.  A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 seconds whereas singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. The minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a AGC target value of 2e5 for MS and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.   LC-MS/MS data analysis for GRAD-seq samples MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Database search with Andromeda was performed against Uniprot Clostridium difficile UP000001978 (strain 630) and a database containing the proteins of the UPS2 proteomic standard. A database containing common contaminants was also used. Tryptic cleavage specifity was set to 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of a false discovery rate of 1% on protein and peptide level. MaxQuant was set to default setting except of: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used (Cox et al., 2014). Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clostridium, Grad-seq

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Infection Biology (IMIB), University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany
Institute for Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Milan Gerovac

### Lab Head
Dr Franziska Faber
Institute for Molecular Infection Biology (IMIB), University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany


