### Accession
PXD042073

### Title
Mechanism of TP53 and RB1 inactivation-induced neuroendocrine phenotype transformation in TKI-resistant lung adenocarcinoma

### Description
In order to study the mechanism of co-inactivation of RB1 and TP53 in the transformation of lung adenocarcinoma to small cell lung cancer, we established the NCI-H1975 cell line with RB1 knockdown.NCI-H1975 cells were cultured and infected with lentivirus expressing RB1-shRNA (n=3) or pLKO.1-shRNA (n=3), We then performed transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) on the above cells.

### Sample Protocol
The RB1-knockdown H1975 experimental group cells (n=3) and control cells (n=3) were subjected to Label-free analysis, and 20μg of protein was taken from each sample for SDS-PAGE electrophoresis (constant voltage 250V, 40 min). Subsequently, DTT was added to each sample to a final concentration of 100 mM, followed by incubation in a boiling water bath for 5 min, and cooled to room temperature. Next, 200μL of UA buffer was added to each sample and mixed well. The mixture was then transferred to a 30kD ultrafiltration centrifuge tube for centrifugation, and the filtrate was removed. After that, 100μL of IAA buffer solution was added, and the samples were shaken for 1 min, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark, and then centrifuged. Next, 100μL of UA buffer was added, and centrifugation was performed. Then, 100μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution was added, followed by centrifugation. The collection tube was replaced, and 40 μL of trypsin buffer (4 μg trypsin in 40 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution) was added. The samples were shaken for 1 min and placed at 37 ℃ for 16-18 h. After that, the samples were centrifuged, and 40 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution was added again, followed by centrifugation, and the filtrate was collected. Finally, the peptides were desalted, lyophilized, and then reconstituted by adding 40μL of 0.1% formic acid solution. In the Easy nLC system, 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution (solution A) and 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (solution B) were used as flow phases, and the separation of peptides was performed in the chromatographic column.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0. MS data were searched against the database( determined by project ). An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Protein aboundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). Proteins which Fold change>2 or <0.5 and p value (Student’s t test) <0.05 were considered to be a differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sclc, Transformation, Tki therapy resistance, Notch, Luad

### Affiliations
Jinan University First Affiliated Hospital

Department of Clinical Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Ying Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuanzhi Lu
Department of Clinical Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


