### Accession
PXD008536

### Title
Systematic Investigation of Targeted Analysis of Metabolites and Proteins in Tear Fluid

### Description
Since the sampling of tear fluid seems rather variable we sought to evaluate a protocol for combined metabolomic and proteomic analyses with regard to clinical applicability. Tear fluid was taken from twelve human volunteers at different time points using specially designed Schirmer strips. Following liquid extraction of metabolites from standardized punchesthe remaining material was processed for bottom-up proteomics. The targeted proteomic analysis of 15 tear proteins revealed a mean intra-individual variation of 23 % merely for the three most abundant proteins. Overall, our newly established workflow opens perspectives for clinical and routine diagnostic applications using well accessible tear fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Human tear fluid was collected from 12 healthy volunteers who had no recent history of ocular disease. Tear samples were collected by special Schirmer-like filter papers without using local anesthesia. The strips were inserted for 5 min in the lower eyelid in the standard fashion in both eyes consecutively. In case of subjects that exhibited a very high tear secretion rate the collection was stopped when the strip was filled with tear fluid, and the time was documented. After collection all strips were air-dried at room temperature until completely dry. Then the strips were stored in paper envelops at -20°C until analysis.Punches of 4 mm diameter were cut out of the front end of each Schirmer-like strip using a custom-made punching tool. To perform a highly standardized, well reproducible metabolite extraction and analysis the AbsoluteIDQ p180 kit was used. The punches were transferred to a 96-well plate either for direct protein digestion or for storage at -20°C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
For shotgun proteomic analysis, MS raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.3). Trypsin/P was set as cleaving enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, and both methionine oxidation and protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. The SwissProt_2014 database (selected for homo sapiens, 20203 entries) was used for peptide and protein identification. A minimum number of 2 unique peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids needed to be detected to perform protein quantification. Only unique peptides were selected for quantification. For label-free quantification (LFQ) the minimum LFQ count was set to 2, the re-quantify option was chosen. The option match between runs was enabled with a time window of 0.7 minutes, fast LFQ was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tear fluid

### Affiliations
University of Tuebingen
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics, University of Tübingen, Elfriede-Aulhorn-Strasse 7, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Janina D'Alvise

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Dammeier
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics, University of Tübingen, Elfriede-Aulhorn-Strasse 7, 72076 Tübingen, Germany


