### Accession
PXD035938

### Title
PRM for JEV infected BV2 cells proteomics

### Description
Quantification of Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) by PRM For the JEV-infected group, 15 upregulated DEPs were selected for validation by PRM. Protein extraction and tryptic digestion were performed following the same protocol used for the label-free quantitative proteomics experiment.

### Sample Protocol
PRM mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) coupled online to a UPLC (Thermo scientific). The peptides are dissolved in the mobile phase A of liquid chromatography and then separated using the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid system. Mobile phase A is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. Liquid gradient setting: 0-16 min, 7%~25%B; 16-22 min, 25%~35%B; 22-26 min, 35%~80%B; 26-30 min, 80%B, and flow rate is maintained at 500 nL/min. The electrospray voltage was applied at 2.1 kV. The m/z scan ranged from 300 to 1040 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 27, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. AGC was set at 3E6 for full MS and 1E5 for MS/MS. The maximum IT was set at 50 ms for full MS and 200 ms for MS/MS. The isolation window for MS/MS was set at 1.6 m/z. The resulting MS data were processed using Skyline (v.3.6). After normalizing the quantitative information, relative quantitative analysis was performed on the target peptides.

### Data Protocol
The isolation window for MS/MS was set at 1.6 m/z. The resulting MS data were processed using Skyline (v.3.6). After normalizing the quantitative information, relative quantitative analysis was performed on the target peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Thousands of people die each year from Japanese encephalitis (JE) caused by the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), probably due to exacerbation of the inflammatory response that impairs the course of the disease. Microglia are mononuclear phagocytic cells located within the parenchyma of the central nervous system; these play a key role in the innate immune response against JEV infections. However, the involvement of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in the inflammatory response during the early stages of JEV infection in BV2 cells remains. Here, we evaluated protein profiles and determined the role of TLR2 in the inflammatory response of JEV-infected BV2 cells. High-depth tandem mass tags labeling for quantitative proteomics was used to assess JEV infected-BV2 cells and compare immune response profiles at 6, 12, and 24 h post-infection (hpi). In total, 212 upregulated proteins were detected at 6 hpi, 754 at 12 h, and 191 at 24 h. According to GO and KEGG enrichment analysis, the upregulated proteins showed enrichment for proteins related to the immune response. Parallel reaction monitoring tests, western blotting, and qPCR results showed that the adaptor protein MyD88 was not activated. The expression levels of key proteins downstream of MyD88, such as IRAK1, IRAK4, and TRAF6 did not increase; however, the expression levels of PI3K-AKT did increase. By inhibiting key proteins (TLR2, PI3K, and AKT) we confirmed that JEV activated TLR2, thus resulting in a robust inflammatory response. Consequently, the TLR2-PI3K-AKT signaling axis was proven to play a critical in the early stages of the JEV infection-induced inflammatory response in microglia.

### Keywords
Prm, Jev, Bv2

### Affiliations
1.College of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Science, Jilin University, Changchun, 130062, China. 2. Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun, 130122, China.
Jilin university

### Submitter
Guanyu Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Guanyu Zhao
1.College of Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Science, Jilin University, Changchun, 130062, China. 2. Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changchun, 130122, China.


