### Accession
PXD030640

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human Sertoli cells-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
We performed a proteomic analysis of EVs derived from human Sertoli cells, aiming to obtain the profiling of the proteins in these EVs to explore their possible roles in the development of testis.

### Sample Protocol
The EVs were isolated from conditioned media of human Sertoli cells grown in EVs-depleted media, which were later subjected to differential centrifugation. In brief, the culture medium was successively centrifuged at 2,000 xg for 10 min and 10,000 xg for 30 min to remove cells, apoptotic bodies and debris. The supernatant was subsequently ultracentrifuged at 110,000 xg for 75 min at 4℃, using a polycarbonate tube (SW 45 Ti rotor, Beckman Optima XPN-80 ultracentrifuge, Brea, California, USA). EV pellets were then resuspended with phosphate-buffered saline, followed by filtration with 0.22-µm membranes. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 110,000 xg for 75 min at 4℃ once again. EVs were utilized directly or stored at -80℃ for up to 3 months. According to the filter-aided sample preparation protocol, the proteins of EVs were precipitated with acetone, reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, trypsinized, and desalted.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis was performed on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18-reverse-phase analytical column (2 µm, 100 Å, 50 µm × 15 cm; nanoViperTM, ThermoFisher Scientific) in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired over 300-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The MS equipment has a higher-energy collision dissociation for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 28%. MS raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.8.3 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) against the Swissprot database for Homo sapiens with the 1% false discovery rate threshold. Two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed for protein identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spermiogenesis, Extracellular vesicles, Sertoli cells

### Affiliations
Peking University First Hospital 
Peking University First Hospital

### Submitter
Xiao-Hui Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Rui-Li Guan
Peking University First Hospital


