### Accession
PXD012007

### Title
Therapeutic targeting of RNA splicing catalysis through inhibition of protein arginine methylation

### Description
Cancer-associated mutations in RNA splicing factors commonly occur in myeloid and lymphoid leukemias as well as a variety of solid tumors and confer dependence on wild-type (WT) splicing. These observations have led to clinical efforts to directly inhibit the spliceosome in patients with refractory leukemias. Here we identify that inhibiting symmetric (SDMA) or asymmetric dimethyl arginine methylation (ADMA), mediated by PRMT5 and type I protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) respectively, reduces splicing fidelity and results in strong preferential killing of spliceosomal mutant leukemias over WT counterparts. Consistent with this, proteomic analyses identified RNA binding proteins and splicing factors as the most enriched PRMT5 and/or PRMT Type I substrates in leukemia. Accordingly, combined PRMT5/type I PRMT inhibition resulted in synergistic cell killing and pronounced effects on splicing compared with inhibiting either enzymatic activity alone. These data identify genetic subsets of cancer most likely to respond to PRMT inhibition and a mechanistic basis for the therapeutic efficacy of PRMT inhibition in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Equal numbers of Light and Heavy-labelled NB4 cells differentially treated were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, pelleted and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were lysed in urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0), supplemented with 1X Roche proteases and phosphatases inhibitors, sonicated and cleared by ultracentrifugation (20.000 x g for 15 min at 15°C). For in-solution digestion, 50 mg of proteins were reduced by adding 4.5 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 55°C, alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA: 10% v/v for 15 min at room temperature in the dark, Sigma Aldrich) and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega), after a fourfold dilution in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Protease digestion was terminated with the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to adjust pH < 3. Precipitated material was removed by centrifugation for 15 min at 1780 × g at room temperature. Soluble peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and eluted off the Sep-Pak with 40% can, followed by a step of acetonitrile removal and concentration through 48 hours of lyophilization. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 25 mM ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) and subsequently off-line fractionated by High-pH (HpH) reversed-phased chromatographic separation using a Phenomenex Jupiter® C12 4 µm Proteo 90Å, LC column 250 x 4.6 mm, on an ÄKTA-FPLC (fast protein liquid chromatography) system (GE Healthcare) operating at 1 ml/min. Buffer A was 25 mM NH4OH and Buffer B was 25 mM NH4OH in 90% ACN. Fractions were collected using a collector in a 96-deep well plate at 1-min intervals. Samples were initially loaded onto the column at 1 ml/min for 3 min, after which the fractionation gradient was as follows: 5% B to 30% B in 60 min, 30% B to 60% in 2 min and ramped to 70% B for 3 min. Then, fraction collection was halted and the gradient was held at 100% B for 5 min, before being ramped back to 5% B, when the column was washed. The 60 fractions collected were concatenated to 14 throughout each experiment. After lyophilisation, each concatenated fraction was dissolved in 250 µl of 1x immuno-Affinity Purification Buffer (IAP buffer, #9993, Cell Signaling Technologies, CST) and subjected to two consecutive steps of methyl-R-peptides enrichment using the SDMA antibody-conjugated beads (PTMScan [sdme-R] Kit #13563, Cell Signaling Technologies) and the MMA antibody-conjugated beads (PTMScan Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif [mme-RG] Kit #12235, Cell Signaling Technologies), following the manufacturer’s instructions. For the MS023 experiments, ADMA-bearing peptides were also enriched using the specific PTMScan kit #13474, starting from the same amount of desalted and lyophilized peptides. After peptides incubation with the antibody conjugated beads for 2 hours at 4 °C, the immuno-precipitates were washed twice in ice-cold IAP buffer, followed by three washes in water; then, the bound methyl-peptides were eluted with two consecutive runs of elution in 50 µl 0.15% TFA. Peptide eluates were desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips, as described previously 42 and subjected to a second round of trypsin digestion prior to nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures were analysed by online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using an EASY-nLC™ 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with a 50 cm analytical column (75-µm inner diameter, 350-µm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 2M 50 cm x 75 M, Thermo Fisher Scientific) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were injected in an aqueous 0.1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. SILAC immuno-enriched methyl-peptides were separated with a gradient of 5–40% solvent B over 90 min followed by a gradient of 40–60% for 10 min and 60–80% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min in the EASY-nLC 1000 system. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300-1150) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=35,000 at m/z 400. The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states =2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 25%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 50ms for MSMS and the target value for MSMS was set to 1e6. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analysed using the integrated MaxQuant software v1.3.0.5 or v.1.5.2.8, using the Andromeda search engine. In MaxQuant, the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. The main search was performed with a mass tolerance of 7 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was permitted, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The January 2016 version of the Uniprot sequence was used for peptide identification. To assign and quantify SILAC methyl-peptides, each raw file from MMA (1) and DMA (2) peptide immuno-enrichment was analysed with the following sets of variable modifications: (1) N-terminal acetylation, Methionine oxidation, mono-methyl-K/R; (2) N-terminal acetylation, Methionine oxidation and di-methyl-K/R. The MaxQuant evidence.txt output file was then filtered as follows: potential contaminants and reverse sequences were removed; methyl-peptides not fulfilling the quality criteria of Andromeda score = 25 and PTM localization probability = 0.50 were also removed. For the methyl-peptides quantified more than once, the median SILAC ratio was calculated. Finally, methyl-peptide SILAC ratios were normalised on the respective protein SILAC ratios extracted from the proteinGroups.txt MaxQuant output file. These were calculated using unmodified peptides in the “input” experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-associated mutations in genes encoding RNA splicing factors (SFs) commonly occur in leukemias, as well as in a variety of solid tumors, and confer dependence on wild-type splicing. These observations have led to clinical efforts to directly inhibit the spliceosome in patients with refractory leukemias. Here, we identify that inhibiting symmetric or asymmetric dimethylation of arginine, mediated by PRMT5 and type I protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs), respectively, reduces splicing fidelity and results in preferential killing of SF-mutant leukemias over wild-type counterparts. These data identify genetic subsets of cancer most likely to respond to PRMT inhibition, synergistic effects of combined PRMT5 and type I PRMT inhibition, and a mechanistic basis for the therapeutic efficacy of PRMT inhibition in cancer.

### Keywords
Prmt5, Prmt1, Leukemia, Methylation

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology IRCSS, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan, Italy
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Enrico Massignani

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy


