### Accession
PXD006182

### Title
Single muscle fiber proteomics reveals fiber type-specific features of human muscle aging

### Description
Skeletal muscle is a key tissue in human aging, which affects different muscle fiber types unequally. We developed a highly sensitive single muscle fiber proteomics workflow to study human aging and show that the senescence of slow and fast muscle fibers is characterized by diverging metabolic and protein quality control adaptations. Whereas mitochondrial content declines with aging in both fiber types, glycolysis and glycogen metabolism are upregulated in slow but downregulated in fast muscle fibers. Aging mitochondria decrease expression of the redox enzyme monoamine oxidase A. Slow fibers upregulate a subset of actin and myosin chaperones, whereas an opposite change happens in fast fibers. These changes in metabolism and sarcomere quality control may be related to the ability of slow, but not fast, muscle fibers to maintain their mass during aging. We conclude that single muscle fiber analysis by proteomics can elucidate pathophysiology in a sub-type specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Fibers were lysed in 10 µl of a solution containing SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (Kulak et al., 2014; Murgia et al., 2015). Fiber lysates were boiled for 5 min and sonicated in a water-bath sonicator (Diagenode) for 15 min with a 50% duty cycle. After cooling to room temperature, 10 µl of 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 were added, followed by 500 ng of endoproteinase LysC and incubated at 25°C for 3 h under continuous stirring. Trypsin (400 ng,) was added and the digestion was carried out at 37°C overnight. Peptides from each fiber were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto StageTip plugs of SDB-RPS. Purified peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile-1% ammonia and dried.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.34) was used for the analysis of raw files and peak lists were searched against the human UniProt FASTA reference proteomes version of 2016 and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle is a key tissue in human aging, which affects different muscle fiber types unequally. We developed a highly sensitive single muscle fiber proteomics workflow to study human aging and show that the senescence of slow and fast muscle fibers is characterized by diverging metabolic and protein quality control adaptations. Whereas mitochondrial content declines with aging in both fiber types, glycolysis and glycogen metabolism are upregulated in slow but downregulated in fast muscle fibers. Aging mitochondria decrease expression of the redox enzyme monoamine oxidase A. Slow fibers upregulate a subset of actin and myosin chaperones, whereas an opposite change happens in fast fibers. These changes in metabolism and sarcomere quality control may be related to the ability of slow, but not fast, muscle fibers to maintain their mass during aging. We conclude that single muscle fiber analysis by proteomics can elucidate pathophysiology in a sub-type-specific manner.

### Keywords
Aging, Muscle fibers, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried 82152, Germany

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried 82152, Germany


