### Accession
PXD030784

### Title
MetaNetwork Enhances Biological Insights from Quantitative Proteomics Differences by Combining Clustering and Enrichment Analyses

### Description
Interpreting proteomics data remains challenging due to the large number of proteins that are quantified by modern mass spectrometry methods. Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) can identify groups of biologically related proteins using only protein intensity values by constructing protein correlation networks. However, WGCNA is not widespread in proteomic analyses due to challenges in implementing workflows. To facilitate adoption of WGCNA by the proteomics field, we created MetaNetwork, an open-sourced, R-based application to perform sophisticated WGCNA workflows with no coding skill requirements for the end user. We demonstrate MetaNetwork’s utility by employing it to identify groups of proteins associated with prostate cancer from a proteomics analysis of tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples. We found a decrease in epithelial cell-type specific biomarkers, a known hallmark of prostate tumors. We further identified changes in module eigenproteins indicative of dysregulation in protein translation and trafficking pathways. These results demonstrate the value of using MetaNetwork to improve the biological interpretation of quantitative proteomics experiments for experiments including fifteen or more samples.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue lysis was performed using a bead mill (Qiagen TissueLyser) with one 5mm stainless steel bead and 82uL of lysis buffer: 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Bio-Rad), 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6, Teknova), 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma), 10mM sodium butyrate (Sigma), and 1X HALT Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails (ThermoFisher). After storage at -80°C, samples were thawed, then bath sonicated for 2 min. (cycles of 20s on, 20s off). Protein was extracted and then digested into peptides using an adaptation of the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure34. Briefly, samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 5 min., and then 34uL of supernatant (2.3 mg tissue equivalent) was added to 230uL of 8 M urea (Sigma), 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 in a 30K MWCO filter (Vivacon 500 from Sartorius). In addition to multiple washing steps, the proteins were alkylated (reduction was performed during cell lysis) on the filter with iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested on the filter with 2ug of trypsin (Promega). Peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the trypsin quenched by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (Fluka) to 0.5%. The tryptic peptide digests were off-line fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase chromatography on a Shimadzu HPLC system with a Phenomenex C18 Gemini 3 μ, 110 Å, 3.0 x 150 mm column Mobile phases (MPA and MPB) were both 20 mM ammonium formate adjusted to pH 10 with NH4OH, with MPA being aqueous and MPB being 70% acetonitrile. The HPLC flow was 1.0 mL/min, and the gradient was 0% MPB isocratic for 10 min (trapping step), linear ramp to 100% MPB over 20 min, hold at 100% MPB for 5 min, to 0% MPB over 1 min, and equilibration at 0% MPB for 10 min. The 24 samples contained 100–174 ug of peptides, as estimated from the UV−vis traces. Twelve fractions were collected during the time of peptide elution, and then pairs of fractions were pooled (#1 with #7, #2 with #8, etc.) to yield six fractions, which were dried down using vacuum centrifugal concentration. Samples were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 2% formic acid such that 4uL LC-MS/MS injections of each fraction contained ~0.6ug of peptides. The resulting six fractions of tryptic peptides for each of the 24 samples were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a system consisting of a high-performance liquid chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters) connected to an electrospray ionization (ESI) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Velos, ThermoFisher Scientific). HPLC separation employed a 100 x 365 µm fused silica capillary micro-column packed with 20 cm of 1.µm-diameter, 130 Angstrom pore size, C18 beads (Waters BEH), with an emitter tip pulled to approximately 1 µm using a laser puller (Sutter instruments). Peptides (~0.6ug in 4uL) were loaded on-column at a flowrate of 400 nL/minute for 30 minutes and then eluted over 120 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/minute with a gradient of 2% to 30% acetonitrile, in 0.2% formic acid. Full-mass profile scans were performed in the FT orbitrap between 300-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, followed by ten MS/MS HCD scans of the ten highest intensity parent ions at 42% relative collision energy and 7,500 resolution, with a mass range starting at 100 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of two over the duration of 30 seconds and an exclusion window of 120 seconds.

### Data Protocol
A total of 288 LC-MS raw files were acquired (24 samples, each separated into six fractions, each fraction injected twice). The data analysis was performed using MetaMorpheus version 0.0.311, available at https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus. The following search settings were used: protease = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 2; minimum peptide length = 7; maximum peptide length = unspecified; initiator methionine behavior = Variable; fixed modifications = Carbamidomethyl on C, Carbamidomethyl on U; variable modifications = Oxidation on M; max mods per peptide = 2; max modification isoforms = 1024; precursor mass tolerance = ±5 PPM; product mass tolerance = ±20 PPM; report PSM ambiguity = True. The combined search database contained 20,517 non-decoy protein entries including 294 contaminant sequences. Data files were processed on a computer running Microsoft Windows 10.0.19041 with a 64-bit Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2690 v4 @ 2.60GHz processor with 28 threads and 128GB installed RAM. FlashLFQ v1.1.2 was used for label-free quantification and data normalization, with MatchBetweenRuns set to true. Data was submitted to Perseus for standard imputation with a downshift of 1.8 and width of 0.3. Protein intensity values were log2-transformed and filtered so that each protein had to be present in at least five samples between two groups, and a minimum of fourteen of the twenty-four samples. MetaNetwork v1.0 was used with the default parameters: Scale-free approximation threshold was set to 0.85; the max power was 20; automatic power selection was chosen, and module merging cut height was set to 0.25. Minimum module size was 20. Module detection sensitivity was set to 2, indicating moderate module sensitivity. Finally, options for Signed Network and Replace Missing Adjacencies were selected. The computer used to process the prostate cancer dataset used the Windows 10 (64-bit) operating system, with 64 GB of RAM, running the Microsoft R Open distribution of R 4.0.2 in R Studio v 1.3.1073. It took this computer less than five minutes to complete MetaNetwork’s workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Interpreting proteomics data remains challenging due to the large number of proteins that are quantified by modern mass spectrometry methods. Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) can identify groups of biologically related proteins using only protein intensity values by constructing protein correlation networks. However, WGCNA is not widespread in proteomic analyses due to challenges in implementing workflows. To facilitate the adoption of WGCNA by the proteomics field, we created MetaNetwork, an open-source, R-based application to perform sophisticated WGCNA workflows with no coding skill requirements for the end user. We demonstrate MetaNetwork's utility by employing it to identify groups of proteins associated with prostate cancer from a proteomic analysis of tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples. We found a decrease in cytoskeleton-related protein expression, a known hallmark of prostate tumors. We further identified changes in module eigenproteins indicative of dysregulation in protein translation and trafficking pathways. These results demonstrate the value of using MetaNetwork to improve the biological interpretation of quantitative proteomics experiments with 15 or more samples.

### Keywords
Human, Analysis, Proteomics, Network, Prostate, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Austin Carr

### Lab Head
Dr Lloyd M. Smith
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison


