### Accession
PXD029981

### Title
Targeting mitochondrial translation overcomes multidrug resistance in FBXW7-deficient cells

### Description
FBXW7 is one of the most frequently mutated tumor suppressors, the deficiency of which has been associated with resistance to some anticancer therapies. Through bioinformatic analyses and genome-wide CRISPR screens, we here reveal that FBXW7 deficiency leads to multi-drug resistance (MDR), to a bigger extent than well-established MDR-drivers such as ABCB1. Proteomic data from FBXW7-deficient cells and human cancer samples identify the upregulation of mitochondrial function as a hallmark of FBXW7 deficiency, which has been previously linked to an increased resistance to chemotherapy. Accordingly, genetic or chemical targeting of mitochondria is preferentially toxic for FBXW7-deficient cells. For instance, targeting mitochondrial translation with the antibiotic Tigecycline efficiently kills FBXW7-deficient cells in vitro and in vivo, by a mechanism that involves activation of the Integrated Stress Response (ISR). Searching for additional drugs that overcome MDR in FBXW7-deficient cells, we found several targeted therapies such as Erlotinib, Dasatinib or Vemurafenib which unexpectedly also activate the ISR. Together, our study reveals that one of the most frequent mutations in cancer reduces the sensitivity to the vast majority of available therapies, and identifies a general principle to overcome such resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Samples were solubilized for 10 minutes at 95 °C in 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55. After cooling, DNA was sheared by 10 min of sonication. Protein concentration was determined using micro BCA and BSA as a standard. Then, 200 µg of each sample were digested by means of the Protifi™ S-Trap™ Mini Spin Column Digestion Protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated (15 mM TCEP, 25 mM CAA) 1h at 45 °C in the dark. SDS was removed from samples in the S-Trap column using 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 1 h at 47 °C). Samples (100 µg of peptides) were labeled using TMT® reagent 11-plex following manufacturer’s instructions. Labeling scheme for mouse ES cells was as follows:  wt rep1 (126), wt rep2 (127N), wt rep3 (127C), wt rep4 (128N and 130C), Fbxw7 KO line 3.3 rep1 (128C), Fbxw7 KO line 3.3 rep2 (129N and 131), Fbxw7 KO line 4.2 rep1 (129C), Fbxw7 KO line 4.2 rep2 (130N and 131C). Labeling scheme for human cell lines was as follows: DLD1 wt rep1 (129C), DLD1 wt rep2 (130N), DLD1 Fbxw7 KO cl1 rep1(130C), DLD1 Fbxw7 KO cl1 rep2 (131), DLD1 Fbxw7 KO cl2 rep1 (131C). Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount. The final mixture was finally desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried prior high pH reverse phase HPLC pre-fractionation. High pH reverse phase chromatography: Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a sample collector. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of phase A (10 mM NH4OH) and loaded onto a XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 µm, 150 mm length and 2.1 mm ID) (Waters). Phase B was 10 mM NH4OH in 90% CH3CN. The following gradient (flow rate of 100 µL/min) was used: 0-55 min 0-45% B, 55-65 min 45-65% B, 65-65.5 min 66-95% B. Fractions were collected at 1 minute intervals. 36 fractions were speed-vac dried and re-dissolved in 2% formic acid. LC-MS/MS: LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Columns 5 µm, 20 mm length) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% formic acid. Then, peptides were transferred to an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo) (2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) operated at 45 °C and separated using a 60 min effective gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: from 4% to 6% B in 2 min, from 6% to 33% B in 58 minutes, plus 10 additional minutes at 98% B. Peptides were sprayed at 1.7 kV into the mass spectrometer via the EASY-Spray source. The capillary temperature was set to 300 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method. (Intensity threshold ≥ 3.3e4, dynamic exclusion of 25 sec and excluding charges unassigned, +1 and > +6). MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM (200 m/z). Ion peptides were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z and a resolution of 35,000 (200 m/z). The ion target values were 3e6 for MS (maximum IT of 25 ms) and 1e5 for MS/MS (maximum IT of 110 msec for human cell lines and 90 msec for mESCs )

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings against either a mouse (UniProtKB/TrEMBL, 53,449 sequences) or human (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) protein database supplemented with contaminants. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was enabled for TMT 11-plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines, deamidation of asparagines (only for human cell lines) and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroups.txt” file was loaded in Prostar (Wieczorek et al, Bioinformatics 2017) using the intensity values for further statistical analysis. Briefly, a global normalization of log2-transformed intensities across samples was performed using the LOESS function. Differential analysis was done using the empirical Bayes statistics Limma. Proteins with a p.value < 0.05 and a log2 ratio higher than 0.27 (mESCs) or 0.3 (human cell lines) were defined as regulated. The FDR was estimated to be below 2% by Pounds.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q exactive, Mescs, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Biotechnology Programme, CNIO (Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas),Madrid, Spain
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Proteomics Unit, Biotechnology Programme, CNIO (Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas),Madrid, Spain


