### Accession
PXD031770

### Title
ISG15 Conjugation to Proteins on Nascent DNA Mitigates DNA Replication Stress

### Description
The pathways involved in suppressing DNA replication stress and the associated DNA damage are critical to maintaining genome integrity. The Mre11 complex is unique among double strand break (DSB) repair proteins for its association with the DNA replication fork. Here we show that Mre11 complex inactivation causes DNA replication stress and changes in the abundance of proteins associated with nascent DNA. One of the most highly enriched proteins at the DNA replication fork upon Mre11 complex inactivation was the ubiquitin like protein ISG15. Mre11 complex deficiency and drug induced replication stress both led to the accumulation of cytoplasmic DNA and the subsequent activation of innate immune signaling via cGAS-STING-Tbk1. This led to ISG15 induction and protein ISGylation, including constituents of the replication fork. ISG15 plays a direct role in preventing replication stress. Deletion of ISG15 was associated with replication fork stalling, tonic ATR activation, genomic aberrations, and sensitivity to aphidicolin. These data reveal a previously unrecognized role for ISG15 in mitigating DNA replication stress and promoting DNA replication fidelity.

### Sample Protocol
Fractions were analyzed using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 50 cm (inner diameter 75 μm) EASY-Spray Column (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) heated to 60°C coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300nL/min using a linear gradient of 1 to 35% acetonitrile (0.1% FA) in water (0.1% FA) over 4 hrs and analyzed by SPS-MS3. MS1 scans were acquired over a range of m/z 375-1500, 120K resolution, AGC target of 4e5, and maximum IT of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on MS1 scans of charge 2-7 using an isolation of 0.7 m/z, collision induced dissociation with activation of 35%, turbo scan and max IT of 50 ms. MS3 scans were acquired using specific precursor selection (SPS) of 10 isolation notches, m/z range 100-1000, 50K resolution AGC target of 1e5, HCD activation of 65%, and max IT of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set at 38 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from all fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Mouse UniProt protein database downloaded on 2019/12/13 (92,249 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modifications, while Methionine oxidation, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-term), phosphorylation (STY), GGTMT6plex (K) were set as variable modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. A 30 maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% FDR was set as threshold for identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mre11, Isg15

### Affiliations
MSKCC
Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Zhuoning Li

### Lab Head
Dr John Petrini
Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center


