### Accession
PXD022299

### Title
Improving the identification and coverage of plant transmembrane proteins in Medicago using bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Plant transmembrane proteins (TMPs) are essential for normal cellular homeostasis, nutrient exchange and responses to environmental cues. Commonly used bottom-up proteomic approaches fail to identify a broad coverage of peptide fragments derived from TMPs. Here, we used mass spectrometry (MS) to compare the effectiveness of two solubilisation and protein cleavage methods to identify shoot-derived TMPs from the legume Medicago. We compared a urea solubilisation, trypsin Lys-C (UR-TLC) cleavage method to a formic acid solubilisation, cyanogen bromide and trypsin Lys-C (FA-CTLC) cleavage method. We assessed the effectiveness of these methods by (i) comparing total protein identifications, (ii) determining how many TMPs were identified, and (iii) defining how many peptides incorporate all, or part, of transmembrane domains (TMD) sequences. The results show that the FA-CTLC method identified nine-fold more TMDs, and enriched more TMPs than the UR-TLC method. FA-CTLC identified more TMPs, particularly transporters, whereas, UR-TLC preferentially identified TMPs with one TMD, particularly signalling proteins. The results suggest that combining plant membrane purification techniques with both the FA-CTLC and UR-TLC methods will achieve a more complete identification and coverage of TMPs.

### Sample Protocol
The objective of this study was to establish a detergent-free and effective strategy to identify plant TMPs and improve the overall identification and coverage of these proteins using MS.

### Data Protocol
All raw files generated by LC-MS/MS were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Sequest HT data analysis program to search against the Medicago protein sequence databases (UniProt, 2014.12.18.) (Bairoch et al., 2005). Database searching against the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate of peptide identification. The search parameters of Sequest HT were set as follows: precursor ion mass tolerance +/-10 ppm and product ion mass tolerance of 0.05 m/z units. The cleavage specificity was set up as Trypsin/LysC: C-terminal of arginine and lysine, and CNBR/Trypsin/LysC: C-termnal of methionine, arginine and lysine.

### Publication Abstract
Plant transmembrane proteins (TMPs) are essential for normal cellular homeostasis, nutrient exchange, and responses to environmental cues. Commonly used bottom-up proteomic approaches fail to identify a broad coverage of peptide fragments derived from TMPs. Here, we used mass spectrometry (MS) to compare the effectiveness of two solubilization and protein cleavage methods to identify shoot-derived TMPs from the legume <i>Medicago.</i> We compared a urea solubilization, trypsin Lys-C (UR-TLC) cleavage method to a formic acid solubilization, cyanogen bromide and trypsin Lys-C (FA-CTLC) cleavage method. We assessed the effectiveness of these methods by (i) comparing total protein identifications, (ii) determining how many TMPs were identified, and (iii) defining how many peptides incorporate all, or part, of transmembrane domains (TMD) sequences. The results show that the FA-CTLC method identified nine-fold more TMDs, and enriched more hydrophobic TMPs than the UR-TLC method. FA-CTLC identified more TMPs, particularly transporters, whereas UR-TLC preferentially identified TMPs with one TMD, particularly signaling proteins. The results suggest that combining plant membrane purification techniques with both the FA-CTLC and UR-TLC methods will achieve a more complete identification and coverage of TMPs.

### Keywords
Tmp, Tmd

### Affiliations
Research school of biology, The Australian National University 
ANU, RSB

### Submitter
Han-Chung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Djordjevic
ANU, RSB


