### Accession
PXD031338

### Title
Design of a potent, selective and brain penetrant inhibitor of Wnt-deactivating enzyme Notum by optimization of a crystallographic fragment hit

### Description
Notum is a carboxylesterase that suppresses Wnt signaling through deacylation of an essential palmitoleate group on Wnt proteins. There is a growing understanding of the role Notum plays in human disease such as colorectal cancer and Alzheimer’s disease supporting the need to discover improved inhibitors, especially for use in models of neurodegeneration. Here, we describe the discovery and profile of 8I (ARUK3001185) as a potent, selective and brain pentrant inhibitor of Notum activity suitable for oral dosing in rodent models of disease. Crystallographic fragment screening of the Diamond-SGC Poised Library for binding to Notum, supported by a biochemical enzyme assay to rank inhibition activity, identifed a pair of outstanding hits. Fragment development of these delivered 8I that restored Wnt signaling in the presence of Notum in a cell-based reporter assay. Assessment in proteomic and pharmacology screens showed 8I to be selective against serine hydrolases, kinases and drug targets.

### Sample Protocol
Either lysates or conditioned media was then treated with the appropriate concentration of each inhibitor or DMSO across a range of concentrations then equilibrated at room temperature for 45 mins. Following this 2 μM FP-Biotin (Santa Cruz) was added to each sample for 20 mins with agitation. Lysates were then precipitated using Chloroform-Methanol and the protein pellet washed 2X with MeOH. Protein pellets were dissolved in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 with 2% SDS and 10 mM DTT, then the SDS concentration adjusted to 0.2% with further 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0.   Each solution was then added to an aliquot of dimethylated neutravidin beads, which had been washed 2X 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 with 0.2% SDS, for 16 hours at room temperature with agitation. Beads were then pelleted by centrifugation, the supernatant removed and then washed 3X 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 with 0.2% SDS followed by 3X washes with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The beads were then incubated with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 for 15 mins at room temp followed by 20 mM iodoacetamide which was incubated for 30 mins in the dark. A further aliquot of 10 mM DTT was added to the beads then they were pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant removed and the beads washed with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and all the supernatant removed.   LysC (Wako) was dissolved in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to give a 1 μg/mL solution, of which 50 μL (50 ng of LysC) was added to the beads and incubated overnight at 37°C. The beads were pelleted and the supernatant taken, and then washed with additional 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to extract as many peptides as possible. 75 ng of trypsin (Pierce) was added from a 20 ng/μL solution in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and incubated at 37°C for 7 hours.   Each set of conditions were then labelled using eight channels of a TMT10plex (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions then combined. TMT labelled tryptic peptides were filtered using 1mm Empore C18 solid phase extraction discs aka “stage tips” (3M) prior to vacuum centrifugation and resuspension in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  On an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC (Thermo Scientific), 1-10ul of sample was loaded onto a 20mm x 75um Pepmap C18 trap column (Thermo Scientific) prior to elution via a 50cm x 75um EasySpray C18 column into a Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 70’ gradient of 6%-40%B was used followed by washing and re-equilibration (A= 2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid; B= 80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid). The Orbitrap was operated in “Data Dependent Acquisition” mode followed by MS/MS in “TopS” mode, with Orbitrap accumulation at R=50,000 of HCD fragmented parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant (maxquant.org) and  with a recent download of the 26niport homo sapiens reference proteome database and a common contaminants database. A decoy database of reversed sequences was used to filter false positives, at a peptide false detection rate of 1%.  Analysis was performed using Perseus (maxquant.net/perseus) and filtered to remove contaminants, reverse and proteins identified by site. Protein groups were then filtered by those which contained valid values in at least 6 of the 8 conditions. Serine hydrolases were identified by filtering for those proteins identified as such in these two reference publications18,52b with intensity values normalized relative to the DMSO control, and concentration-response curves and IC50 values were determined using Graphpad Prism 9.1.0.

### Publication Abstract
Notum is a carboxylesterase that suppresses Wnt signaling through deacylation of an essential palmitoleate group on Wnt proteins. There is a growing understanding of the role Notum plays in human diseases such as colorectal cancer and Alzheimer's disease, supporting the need to discover improved inhibitors, especially for use in models of neurodegeneration. Here, we have described the discovery and profile of <b>8l</b> (ARUK3001185) as a potent, selective, and brain-penetrant inhibitor of Notum activity suitable for oral dosing in rodent models of disease. Crystallographic fragment screening of the Diamond-SGC Poised Library for binding to Notum, supported by a biochemical enzyme assay to rank inhibition activity, identified <b>6a</b> and <b>6b</b> as a pair of outstanding hits. Fragment development of <b>6</b> delivered <b>8l</b> that restored Wnt signaling in the presence of Notum in a cell-based reporter assay. Assessment in pharmacology screens showed <b>8l</b> to be selective against serine hydrolases, kinases, and drug targets.

### Keywords
Wnt signalling, Lc-msms, Notum, Inhibitor, Carboyxlesterase

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Alzheimer’s Research UK UCL Drug Discovery Institute, University College London, Cruciform Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, U.K.

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Paul V. Fish
Alzheimer’s Research UK UCL Drug Discovery Institute, University College London, Cruciform Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, U.K.


