### Accession
PXD005145

### Title
Comparison of Intact Glycopeptide Enrichment Methods Using Strong Anion Exchange and Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography

### Description
Heterogeneity of protein glycosylation poses great challenge for analysis that is key to un-puzzle systems glycobiology in diseases. Resolving this conundrum requires global enrichment of glycopeptides for identification and quantitation. To this aim, hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) has been proved to be an effective approach to enrich N-linked glycopeptides (N-glycopeptides). However, its effectiveness to enrich O-linked glycopeptides (O-glycopeptides) and isobaric labelled glycopeptides remains unclear. Here, we studied three different cartridges in HILIC mode. It was found that removal of N-glycosylation prior to enrichment improved identification of O-glycopeptides. It was noted that increased yield and number of glycosylation identification were seen when using cartridges having materials for strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography. Remarkably, O-glycopeptides were found to be selectively enriched by HILIC with further improved enrichment being seen when Retain AX cartridge being used. Of particular note, isobaric labelled glycopeptides could be readily enriched by SAX cartridges in HILIC mode to enable quantitative glycoproteomics. It is anticipated that the use of SAX cartridges will facilitate broad applications of qualitative and quantitative glycoproteomics in diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion, removal of glycans from glycopeptides and TMT labelling: human serum (Sigma-Aldrich) and tissue were denatured in 8 M urea/1 M AB buffer and reduced in 10 mM TCEP at room temperature (RT) for 1 hour. Proteins were alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted eight fold using 0.2 M AB buffer to decrease the concentration of urea and proteins. Trypsin (0.5 g/l, enzyme/protein ratio of 1/40 w/w) was added to digest proteins at 37C over night. After digestion, peptides were desalted by a C18 cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For removal of N-glycans from glycopeptides, peptides were dissolved in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 with 3 µl of PNGase F. The mixture was incubated in 37C over night and then desalted by C18 cartridge. To remove O-glycans from glycopeptides, speed-vac dried peptides were dissolved in 28% ammonia and incubated at 50C for 16 hours. Labelling of peptides using TMT 10plex was conducted according to the manufacturer’s instructions Enrichment of glycopeptides: after C18 desalting, peptides eluted in 60% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v) were adjusted to 80% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) for glycopeptide enrichment using ZICTM HILIC (The Nest Group, Inc. or 95% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) or using SAX (HyperSepTM Retain AX Cartridges (RAX) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Oasis MAX Cartridge (Waters)). For ZIC HILIC, cartridges were conditioned in water for three times followed by 80% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) for three times, the samples were then loaded, washed in 80% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) and eluted in 0.1% TFA. For RAX and MAX columns, the columns were equilibrated in ACN for three times, 100 mM triethylammonium acetate for three times, waters for three times and finally 95% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) for three times. The samples were loaded and washed by 95% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) for three times. Finally, bound glycopeptides were eluted in 50% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v). The samples were dried in speed-vac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: peptides (1 μg) were separated through a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) with a 75 μm × 50 cm C18 PepMapRSLC separating column (Thermo Scientific) protected by a 5 mm guarding column (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phase flow rate was 0.25 μL/min with 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile in water (A) and 0.1% TFA 90% acetonitrile (B). The gradient profile was set as following: 4−5% B for 6 min, 5−45% B for 81 min, 45−90% B for 13 min, 90% B for 20 min and equilibrated in 4% B for 12 min. MS analysis was performed using a Thermo Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set at 2 kV. Spectra (AGC target 1 × 106 and maximum IT 60 ms) were collected from 400 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 70 K followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS (at a resolution of 17,500, NCE 29%, intensity threshold of 1 × 105 and maximum IT 100 ms) of the 10 most abundant ions using an isolation window of 2 m/z. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly, and more than eight protonated ions. Fixed first mass was 100 m/z. A dynamic exclusion time of 10s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. Glycopeptide identification: glycopeptides were identified using GPQuest software (ref). Prior to search, the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) was used to convert Raw files to mzXML files with the centroid all scans option selected. During GPQuest search, mass tolerance was 10 and 20 ppm at MS1 and MS2 levels, respectively. The precursor mass matching algorithm was used with simultaneous search for N- and O-glycopeptides. In house N-linked glycan database and Functional Glycomics Gateway (CFG) O-linked glycan database each containing 277 and 83 compositions, respectively. Database of N-linked glycosite-containing peptides consisted of 2042 peptides identified using SPEG and NGAG (ref). The O-linked glycosite-containing peptides were 2026 that constituted a collection from literatures (ref). MS/MS spectra containing at least three oxonium ion with 204 being mandatory as one of the three in the 90% highest peaks were used for search. Singly charged b and y peptide fragment ions together with peptide + glycan fragment ions were included for a modified Morpheus scoring described previously (ref). Briefly, the integer number is the total number of b, y, intact peptide, Y1 and other glycopeptide fragment ions. Decimal number of the score is intensity fraction of these ions in total intensity excluding intensity of oxonium ions. To calculate the false discovery rate (FDR), a decoy strategy was used by concatenating and shuffling the amino acids of the target database and dividing the generated sequence into decoy peptides with lengths similar to the target peptides. To ensure that only high quality spectra were selected, glycopeptide-spectra-match (GSM) with at least Morpheus score five and intensity coverage above 10% were kept and ranked according to Morpheus score. The appearance of decoy match defined the FDR. GSMs with low intensity coverage were manually checked to ensure the identification.

### Publication Abstract
Heterogeneity of protein glycosylation poses great challenges for analysis that is key to understand structure and function of glycoproteins. Resolving this conundrum requires efficient and specific enrichment of intact glycopeptides for identification and quantitation. To this end, hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) has been commonly used to enrich intact N- and O-linked glycopeptides. However, its effectiveness to enrich isobarically labeled glycopeptides remains unclear. Here, we studied three different enrichment methods for enrichment of N- and O-linked glycopeptides. It was found that removal of N-glycans prior to enrichment of O-linked glycopeptides by HILIC improved identification of O-linked glycopeptides by mass spectrometry. We also compared the enrichment of intact N- and O-linked glycopeptides using other chromatography methods and found that using cartridges containing materials for strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography increased yield and identification of N- and O-linked glycopeptides. The enrichment of O-linked glycopeptides was further improved when a Retain AX cartridge (RAX) was used. In particular, isobaric tag labeled glycopeptides after C18 desalting could be readily enriched by SAX and RAX cartridges but not by HILIC to enable quantitative glycoproteomics. It is anticipated that the use of SAX and RAX cartridges will facilitate broad applications of identifications and quantitation of glycoproteins.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Hilic, Sax, Quantitation, O-linked

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Weiming Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University


