### Accession
PXD041775

### Title
G6PD K403 acetylation-dependent PTM

### Description
To identify acetylation-dependent posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of G6PD, site-specifically acetylated and Flag-tagged G6PD was expressed in HEK293T cells by genetically encoding the incorporation of acetylated lysine in response to an in-frame TAG stop codon. K403-acetylated G6PD (sample) and K414-acetylated G6PD (control) were co-expressed with WT Fyn kinase and a catalytically inactive mutant of Fyn (FynDN). G6PD was immunoprecipitated using anti-Flag beads before MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Harvested cells were lysed in lysis buffer supplemented containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. G6PD-Flag variants were isolated using anti-Flag M2 beads and eluted using 2x non-reducing Laemmli sample buffer. Eluted proteins were separated by 12% Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE, stained with 0.1% (w/v) Coomassie brilliant blue R250, and the band corresponding to G6PD was excised. The sample was reduced with 3 mM DTT (60 deg C for 30 min), modified with 10 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (in the dark, room temperature for 30 min), and digested in 10% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 enzyme-to-substrate ratio (overnight at 37 deg C). The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 tips and subjected to LC-MS-MS analysis. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075x300-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with a linear 30 min gradient of 5% to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water, 15 min gradient of 28% to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water and 15 min at 95 % acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 ul/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using a repetitively full MS scan followed by high collision dissociation (HCD) of the ten most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software with Sequest (Thermo) algorithm against the Human UniProt database and Flag-tagged WT or pWT G6PD, with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor masses and 0.05~amu for the fragment ions. Oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (K), ubiquitination (K), methylation (K), and butyrylation (K) were accepted as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl on Cys was accepted as a static modification. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids, and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed.  Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy. Semi-quantitation was done by calculating the peak area of each peptide based on its extracted ion currents (XICs), and the area of the protein is the average of the three most intense peptides from each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation has been discovered in thousands of non-histone human proteins, including most metabolic enzymes. Deciphering the functions of acetylation is key to understanding how metabolic cues mediate metabolic enzyme regulation and cellular signaling. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), the rate-limiting enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway, is acetylated on multiple lysine residues. Using site-specifically acetylated G6PD, we show that acetylation can activate (AcK89) and inhibit (AcK403) G6PD. Acetylation-dependent inactivation is explained by structural studies showing distortion of the dimeric structure and active site of G6PD. We provide evidence for acetylation-dependent K95/97 ubiquitylation of G6PD and Y503 phosphorylation, as well as interaction with p53 and induction of early apoptotic events. Notably, we found that the acetylation of a single lysine residue coordinates diverse acetylation-dependent processes. Our data provide an example of the complex roles of acetylation as a posttranslational modification that orchestrates the regulation of enzymatic activity, posttranslational modifications, and apoptotic signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Human g6pd, Ptm-dependent ptm, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel.

### Submitter
Eyal Arbely

### Lab Head
Dr Eyal Arbely
Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel.


