### Accession
PXD011975

### Title
Cephalopod Chromatophore Proteomics

### Description
using the first annotated squid chromatophore proteome together with microscopy, we identified likely biochemical components of this reflective coloration as structural reflectin proteins distributed in cells that completely envelop each chromatocyte. Within the chromatocytes, where the pigment molecules reside in nanostructured granules, we found the lens protein Ω- crystallin.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins extracted from the yellow, red and brown chromatophore cells were separated by SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were in-gel trypsinized, extracted and and analyzed using LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated by a Dionex Ultimate UHPLC and analyzed by Thermo Scientific Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peaklists of LC-MS/MS data were generated by UCSF PAVA program, and analyzed by UCSF Protein Prosepctor Bioinformatic package. Database search was carried out, searching against a squid D. pealeii skin protein databse was built from the first transcriptome of squid D. pealeii chromatophores. Bioinformatic analysis of the LC-MS/MS data led to the identification of 469 protein entries translated from the first transcriptome of squid D. pealeii chromatophores.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatophore organs in cephalopod skin are known to produce ultra-fast changes in appearance for camouflage and communication. Light-scattering pigment granules within chromatocytes have been presumed to be the sole source of coloration in these complex organs. We report the discovery of structural coloration emanating in precise register with expanded pigmented chromatocytes. Concurrently, using an annotated squid chromatophore proteome together with microscopy, we identify a likely biochemical component of this reflective coloration as reflectin proteins distributed in sheath cells that envelop each chromatocyte. Additionally, within the chromatocytes, where the pigment resides in nanostructured granules, we find the lens protein &#x3a9;- crystallin interfacing tightly with pigment molecules. These findings offer fresh perspectives on the intricate biophotonic interplay between pigmentary and structural coloration elements tightly co-located within the same dynamic flexible organ - a feature that may help inspire the development of new classes of engineered materials that change color and pattern.

### Keywords
Cephalopod molluscs, Pigments, Chromatophore, Ω- crystallin

### Affiliations
University of New Hampshire

### Submitter
Feixia Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Feixia Chu
University of New Hampshire


