### Accession
PXD007963

### Title
Synechococcus sp. (PCC 7002) analysis by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Cyanobacteria fix atmospheric CO2 to biomass and through metabolic engineering can also act as photosynthetic cell factories for sustainable productions of fuels and chemicals. The Calvin cycle is the primary pathway for CO2 fixation in cyanobacteria, algae and C3 plants, and several studies have shown that overexpression of a cyanobacterial Calvin cycle enzyme, bifunctional sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase/fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (hereafter BiBPase), enhances CO2 fixation in both plants and algae, although its impact on cyanobacteria has not yet been rigorously studied. Here, we show that overexpression of BiBPase enhanced growth, cell size, and photosynthetic O2 evolution of the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 in an environment with elevated CO2 concentration. Biochemical analysis, immunodetection, and proteomic analysis revealed that overexpression of BiBPase considerably elevated the cellular activities of two rate-limiting enzymes in the Calvin cycle, namely ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and aldolase, while it repressed several enzymes involved in the respiratory carbon metabolism (e.g. glycolysis and the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway) including glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Concomitantly, the content of glycogen was significantly reduced while the extracellular carbohydrate content increased. These results indicate that overexpression of BiBPase leads to global reprogramming of carbon metabolism in Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, promoting photosynthetic carbon fixation and repressing the respiratory carbon catabolism, while altering carbohydrate partitioning.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty milliliters of cyanobacteria liquid culture grown at the normal light in the exponential phase (OD730nm value of approximately 0.7) were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. Cells were resuspended in 10 mM Na phosphate buffer, pH7.4 to a final volume of 500 µl to which protease inhibitor (cOmplete, EDTA free) was added according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche). Samples were lysed at 4 °C by 20 cycles of 30 s ultra-sonication at a frequency of 20 kHz with maximum amplitude at 30 s intervals. The lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 ×g at 4 °C for 10 min twice before further use. Proteins were precipitated with acetone at -20 °C and resuspended in 8 M urea, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 5 mM EDTA, reduced with 25 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated in 50 mM indoacetamide for 30 min, diluted to 1 M urea with Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and then digested at 37 °C overnight with trypsin 1:10 (trypsin: protein). Peptides were concentrated using a C18 solid phase extraction procedure.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state was deconvoluted, and raw data files were converted to MGF by Proteome Discoverer version 1.4. The converted data (MGF) were processed using Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.3.02). Data were interrogated against a custom database containing the Synechococcus 7002 protein dataset (3309 entries) from CyanoBase and BiBPase from Synechococcus sp. PCC 6803 and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP version 1.0). Mascot was used with the following settings: peptide tolerance of ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of ± 0.05 Da, fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications Acetyl (N-term), Deamidated (NQ) and Oxidation (M), up to one missed cleavage for trypsin and instrument type set to ESI-FTICR. Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria fix atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> to biomass and through metabolic engineering can also act as photosynthetic factories for sustainable productions of fuels and chemicals. The Calvin Benson cycle is the primary pathway for CO<sub>2</sub> fixation in cyanobacteria, algae and C<sub>3</sub> plants. Previous studies have overexpressed the Calvin Benson cycle enzymes, ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and bifunctional sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase/fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (hereafter BiBPase), in both plants and algae, although their impacts on cyanobacteria have not yet been rigorously studied. Here, we show that overexpression of BiBPase and RuBisCO have distinct impacts on carbon metabolism in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 through physiological, biochemical, and proteomic analyses. The former enhanced growth, cell size, and photosynthetic O<sub>2</sub> evolution, and coordinately upregulated enzymes in the Calvin Benson cycle including RuBisCO and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase. At the same time it downregulated enzymes in respiratory carbon metabolism (glycolysis and the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway) including glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH). The content of glycogen was also significantly reduced while the soluble carbohydrate content increased. These results indicate that overexpression of BiBPase leads to global reprogramming of carbon metabolism in Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, promoting photosynthetic carbon fixation and carbon partitioning towards non-storage carbohydrates. In contrast, whilst overexpression of RuBisCO had no measurable impact on growth and photosynthetic O<sub>2</sub> evolution, it led to coordinated increase in the abundance of proteins involved in pyruvate metabolism and fatty acid biosynthesis. Our results underpin that singular genetic modifications in the Calvin Benson cycle can have far broader cellular impact than previously expected. These features could be exploited to more efficiently direct carbons towards desired bioproducts.

### Keywords
Cyanobacteria, Synechococcus, Rubisco, Co2 fixation, Calvin cycle

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Joshua Heazlewood

### Lab Head
Dr Yumiko Sakuragi
Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, University of Copenhagen


