### Accession
PXD036326

### Title
Arterial-Venous Endothelial Cell Cycle Proteins Differential Expression

### Description
HUVEC-FUCCI cells were used to demonstrate that different endothelial cell cycle states provide distict windows of opportunity for gene expression in response to extrinsic signals. HUVEC-FUCCI were FACS-isolated into three different cell cycle states. Peptide digests from the resulting lysates showed differentially expressed proteins among the three cell cycles. These studies show that endothelial cell cycle state determines the propensity for arterial vs. venous fate specification.

### Sample Protocol
Protein analysis by mass spectrometry Harvested cells were pelleted and frozen at -C.  Each sample was prepared according to protocol using the EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit (ThermoFisher, A40006) with Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (ThermoFisher, 78420) added to the lysis solution. Preparation of 50 g of protein per sample was performed according to kit protocol, including reduction and alkylation of cysteines. 10 g of Pierce Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix was added to each sample and incubated with shaking at 37 C for 1.5 hours, then samples were desalted using C18 spin columns, eluted, and dried via speed vacuum centrifugation. Samples were reconstituted in 50uL of 0.1% formic acid for a final concentration of 1g/L. The resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 5 L of each sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (75um x 25cm, 3um C18) equilibrated in 94% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 4% solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid).  The peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using the following gradient: 4% B from 0-5 min, 4 to 10% B from 5-10 min, 10-35% B from 10-100 min, 35-55% B from 100-120 min and 55-90% B from 120-121 min.  The samples were run in triplicate with three blank gradients in between each sample. The Orbitrap Eclipse was operated in positive ion mode with 1.9kV at the spray source, RF lens at 30% and data dependent MS/MS acquisition with XCalibur software. Positive ion Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap from 375-1500 m/z with 120,000 resolution. Data dependent selection of precursor ions was performed in Cycle Time mode, with 3 seconds in between Master Scans, using an intensity threshold of 1e4 ion counts and applying dynamic exclusion (n=2 scans within 30 seconds for an exclusion duration of 60 seconds and +/- 10 ppm mass tolerance). Monoisotopic peak determination was applied and charge states 2-7 were included for HCD/ETD toggle scans (quadrupole isolation mode; 1.6 m/z isolation window). The resulting fragments were detected in the ion trap with Rapid scan rate setting and standard AGC target.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (version 2.4.0.305 Thermo Fisher Scientific, city) was used to perform database searches of raw files. Data files were searched against the gencode.v36.pc_translations protein database with sequences for mKO2 and mAG proteins manually added to the fasta file. The Sequest HT search algorithm was used, with precursor and fragment mass tolerances set to 10ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (full) with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethyl on C was used as a static modification and oxidation on M and phosphorylation on S,T,Y were considered as variable modifications on amino acids. Strict parsimony settings were used for protein grouping, false discovery rates for peptide spectrum match and protein were set to 0.01 and determined using the Percolator node of PD with decoy database search. The Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node were used to perform relative quantitation with default settings. Only high confidence peptide spectrum matches were considered with the Minora Feature Detector. For Quan Rollup and Hypothesis Testing, summed abundances were used for protein abundance calculations, using a pairwise ratio and ANOVA (individual proteins) for hypothesis testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Late g1, Proteomics, Cell cycle, Early g1, Huvec, S/g2/m, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
University of Virginia, Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics University of Virginia School of Medicine Charlottesville, VA, USA 22908

### Submitter
Erin Jeffery

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gloria Sheynkman
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics University of Virginia School of Medicine Charlottesville, VA, USA 22908


