### Accession
PXD034796

### Title
The CX-MS-based quantifitative proteomic analysis of interactome of plant nucleus

### Description
To profile the interactome of cell nucleus,a formaldehyde-CBDPS double chemical-crosslinking method was combined with mass spectrometry to perform quantitative interactomics on the in vivo fixed nuclei.

### Sample Protocol
The soybean plants were divided into two groups,one of which was treated with 5 ppm ethylene and the other was treated with air. The plants grew for 7 days in darkness. The etiolated hypocotyls of both the air and ethylnene-treated seedlings were harvested, immediately sliced into 1.5-mm thick discs and subsequently. Next, the discs were infiltrated with 0.2% formaldehyde. The protein extaction and digestion was performed, followed by dimethyl labelling and fraction by SCX-HPLC. The CX-peptides were enricheed using strepavidin resions. The samples were then subjected for LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.3µL/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system., which directly interfaced with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The analytical column was the Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 Capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% ACN and 0.1% FA.  For the CID MS/MS experiment, we selected the ten most abundant precursors and subjected them to sequential CID MS/MS and ETD-MS/MS acquisitions. All spectral data were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. For the MS scans, the scan range was set to 300 - 2000 m/z at a resolution of 120K, the automatic gain control target was set to 500,000 and the charge state was set as +4 to +8. For the MS/MS scans, the resolution was set to 30,000, the automatic gain control target was set to 300,000, the precursor isolation width was 1.6 Da, and the maximum injection time was set to 54ms. The CID normalized collision energy was 30%; the charge-dependent Electron Transfer Dissociation (ETD) reaction time was enabled; the orbitrap resolution was 30K; the ETD automatic gain control target was set to 300,000; the scan range mode was auto normal; the precursor isolation width was 1.6 Da; and the maximum injection time was set to 54 ms. For the HCD MS/MS experiment, the settings were the same as the CID MS/MS except the MS/MS activation type was set as HCD and the collision energy was 26%.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were converted and deconvoluted with Hardklor. The soybean protein database was constructed with the previous proteome data. The mXlinkX was used for the CX-peptides identification. For the in-silico protein digestion, the variable modifications were set as oxidation on “M”, light and heavy isotope-coded dimethyl (28.031300 Da and 34.063117 Da, respectively.) on “K” and peptide N-terminus. The Carbamidomethyl on “C” was set as the fixed modification. The enzyme was set as trypsin. For the crosslinking searching, the tolerance for MS and MS/MS searching were 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The short-chain monoisotopic mass of the crosslinker was set as 54.010565 Da while the heavy chain was set as 455.087842 Da and 471.081982 Da; The Precursor selection tolerance was 0.05 Da. The fragment types were set as “CID/HCD” and “ETD” respectively. The false discovery rates of the output were calculated by the Percolator (version 3.02) and only the PSMs with q-value <= 0.01 was collected.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear proteins are major constituents and key regulators of nucleome topological organization and manipulators of nuclear events. To decipher the global connectivity of nuclear proteins and the hierarchically organized modules of their interactions, we conducted two rounds of cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) analysis, one of which followed a quantitative double chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry (in&#xa0;vivoqXL-MS) workflow, and identified 24,140 unique crosslinks in total from the nuclei of soybean seedlings. This in vivo quantitative interactomics enabled the identification of 5340 crosslinks that can be converted into 1297 nuclear protein-protein interactions (PPIs), 1220 (94%) of which were non-confirmative (or novel) nuclear PPIs compared with those in repositories. There were 250 and 26 novel interactors of histones and the nucleolar box C/D small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex, respectively. Modulomic analysis of orthologous Arabidopsis PPIs produced 27 and 24 master nuclear PPI modules (NPIMs) that contain the condensate-forming protein(s) and the intrinsically disordered region-containing proteins, respectively. These NPIMs successfully captured previously reported nuclear protein complexes and nuclear bodies in the nucleus. Surprisingly, these NPIMs were hierarchically assorted into four higher-order communities in a nucleomic graph, including genome and nucleolus communities. This combinatorial pipeline of 4C quantitative interactomics and PPI network modularization revealed 17 ethylene-specific module variants that participate in a broad range of nuclear events. The pipeline was able to capture both nuclear protein complexes and nuclear bodies, construct the topological architectures of PPI modules and module variants in the nucleome, and probably map the protein compositions of biomolecular condensates.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Nucleome, Interactome, Lc-ms/ms, Chemical crosslinking, Dimethyl labelling, Quantitative interactomics

### Affiliations
LIFE Science, HKUST
Hong Kong University of Science and Techonology

### Submitter
Shuaijian DAI

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Li
LIFE Science, HKUST


