### Accession
PXD040579

### Title
Evidence of a role for CutRS and actinorhodin in the secretion stress response in Streptomyces coelicolor M145

### Description
This work was carried out to elucidate the proteins that are regulated by the two-component system CutRS in Streptomyces coelicolor M145 and how this response changes in the presence of glucose. A comparison of the whole cell proteomes of Streptomyces coelicolor M145 WT and Streptomyces coelicolor M145 ∆cutRS on both DNA (no glucose) and DNAD (with glucose) was made.

### Sample Protocol
S. coelicolor colonies were grown on cellophane covered agar plates as triplicate spots from 5 µl spores, all in duplicate. After 5-days at 30°C the mycelium was scraped into a 15 ml falcon tube and resuspended in 10 ml cell lysis buffer (50 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 2% SDS, EDTA-free protease inhibitor, PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich). The suspension was disrupted via French press 3 times before being boiled at 100°C for 10 minutes. Samples were sonicated at 50 Hz 4 times for 20 seconds per cycle and then pelleted at 4000 rpm for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay and 1 mg of protein from each sample transferred to a fresh 15 ml falcon tube. 4 volumes of methanol were added and vortexed thoroughly before 1 volume of chloroform was added and vortexed thoroughly. 3 volumes dH2O was added, vortex thoroughly, and spun for 10 minutes at 4000 rpm. The upper layer was carefully discarded, 4 volumes of methanol added and vortex thoroughly. The samples were spun for 20 minutes at 4000 rpm before aspirating the supernatant.   Pellets from the protein extraction were washed with acetone and dissolved in 50-100 µl of 2.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC; Merck). After quantification by BCA assay, 100 µg (or 75 µg in case of set 2) of protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in the presence of 0.2 M EPPS buffer (Merck) and 2.5% SDC according to standard procedures. After digestion, the SDC was precipitated by adjusting to 0.2% TFA, and the clarified supernatant subjected to C18 solid phase extraction (SPE; OMIX tips; Agilent). TMT labelling was performed using a Thermo TMT16plex™ kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications; the dried peptides were dissolved in 90 µl of 0.2 M EPPS buffer/10% acetonitrile, and 250 µg TMT16plex reagent dissolved in 22 µl of acetonitrile was added. Samples were assigned to the TMT channels in an order avoiding channel leakage between different samples, as detailed by Brenes et al., 2019. After labelling, aliquots of 1.7 µl from each sample were combined and analysed on the mass spectrometer (detailed below) to check labelling efficiency and estimate total sample abundances. The sample aliquots were then combined correspondingly and desalted using a 50 mg C18 Sep-pak cartridge (Waters). The eluted peptides were dissolved in 500 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and fractionated by high pH reversed phase HPLC. Using an ACQUITY Arc Bio System (Waters), the samples were loaded to a Kinetex® 5 µm EVO C18 100 Å LC Column 250 x 4.6 mm (Phenomenex). Fractionation was performed with the following gradient of solvents A (water), B (acetonitrile), and C (25 mM NH4HCO3) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min: solvent C was kept at 10% throughout the gradient; solvent B: 0-5 min: 5%, 5-10 min: 5-13% curve 5, 10-70 min: 13-40%, 70-75 min: 40-50%, 75-80%: 50-80%; followed by 5 min at 80% B and re-equilibration to 5% for 24 minutes. Fractions of 1 ml were collected, dried down, and concatenated to produce on average 25 final fractions for MS analysis. Aliquots of all concatenated fractions were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a trap column (nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 Trap Column, Waters) with 0.1% TFA at 15 µl/min for 3 minutes. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, 250 mm x 0.75 µm, Waters) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min: 0-3 min 3% B (parallel to trapping); 3-10 min increase B curve 4 to 12%; 10-105 min linear increase B to 47%; 105-113 min increase B curve 7 to 99%; followed 3 min at 99% B and re-equilibration to 3% B for 23 minutes. Data were acquired with the following parameters in positive ion mode: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 400-1800, AGC target 100%, max inject time 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis with the following parameters: IT Rapid mode, centroid mode, quadrupole isolation window 0.7 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1.9e4, CE=30, AGC target standard, max. inject time 50 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count/15 s/±7 ppm; MS3 synchronous precursor selection (SPS): 10 SPS precursors, isolation window 0.7 Da, HCD fragmentation with CE=50, Orbitrap Turbo TMT and TMTpro resolution 30k, AGC target 200%, max inject time 105 ms, Real Time Search: protein database S. coelicolor A3(2) M145 (uniprot.org, 8126 entries), enzyme trypsin, 1 missed cleavage, oxidation (M) as variable, carbamidomethyl (C) and TMTpro as fixed modifications, Xcorr = 1, dCn = 0.05.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed for protein identification and quantification using the Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (PD3.0) software (Thermo Scientific). A protein fasta sequence database for Streptomyces coelicolor (8126 entries) was downloaded from uniport.org and used for the database search together with a database for common contaminants (250 entries).  The workflow started with spectrum recalibration. The database search was performed using  the CHIMERYS node (MSAID, Munich, Germany) with the inferys_2.1_fragmentation model, enzyme trypsin with 1 missed cleavage, 0.5 Da fragment tolerance, oxidation (M) as variable modification, carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10plex (K, N-term) as static modifications. A parallel search was performed using the Comet node with the comet_version 2019.01 rev. 0 parameter file. For Comet the precursor tolerance was set to 6 ppm, otherwise same parameters as for CHIMERYS were used. Matches were evaluated using Percolator based on q-values. Reporter ions were extracted using the most confident centroid with 20 ppm integration tolerance.  The consensus workflow included the following parameters: only unique peptides (protein groups) for quantification, intensity-based abundance, channel correction values applied (TMT Lot VI306840), co-isolation/SPS matches thresholds 50%/70%, normalised CHIMERYS Coefficient Threshold 0.8, normalisation on total peptide abundances, protein abundance-based ratio calculation, missing values imputation by low abundance resampling, hypothesis testing by t-test (background based), adjusted p-value calculation by BH-method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Two-component system, Protein secretion, Antibiotics, Secretion stress, Actinorhodin, Streptomyces

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
Department Molecular Microbiology John Innes Centre Norwich, UK

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Matt Hutchings
Department Molecular Microbiology John Innes Centre Norwich, UK


