### Accession
PXD025499

### Title
The landscape of the SARS-CoV-2 HLA-peptidome

### Description
The human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-bound-viral antigens, serve as an immunological signature that can be selectively recognized by T cells. As viruses evolve by acquiring mutations, it is essential to identify a range of viral presented antigens. Utilizing HLA-peptidomics we Identified SARS-CoV-2-derived peptides presented by highly prevalent HLA Class-I (HLA-I) molecules using infected cells as well as overexpression of SARS-CoV-2 genes. We found 26 HLA-I peptides and 36 HLA class-II (HLA-II) peptides, which are estimated to be presented by at least one HLA allele in 99% of the world population. Among the identified peptides were recurrently presented HLA-I peptides, peptides derived from out-of-frame-ORFs and presentation-hotspots. Seven of these peptides were previously shown to be immunogenic, and we identified two novel immuno-reactive peptides using HLA-multimer staining. These results may aid the development of the next generation of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on viral-specific-presented antigens that span several of the viral genes.

### Sample Protocol
Production and purification of membrane HLA molecules Cell pellets were homogenized by pipetting on ice with a lysis buffer containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340), 1 mM PMSF and 1% octyl-b-D glucopyranoside in PBS. Samples were then incubated in rotation at 4˚C for 1 hour. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 48,000 g for 60 minutes at 4˚C and then passed through a pre-clearing column containing Protein-A Sepharose beads. HLA-I molecules were immunoaffinity purified from cleared lysate with the pan-HLA-I antibody (W6/32 antibody purified from HB95 hybridoma cells) covalently bound to Protein-A Sepharose beads. HLA-II molecules were then purified by transferring the flow-through to similar affinity columns containing a pan-HLA-II antibody (purified from HB-145 hybridoma cells). Affinity columns were washed first with 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris–HCl and then with 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0. The HLA-peptide complexes were then eluted with 1% trifluoracetic acid followed by separation of the peptides from the proteins by binding the eluted fraction to Sep-Pak (Waters). Elution of the peptides was done with 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid for HLA-I and 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid for HLA-II.  Mass-spectrometry analysis of eluted HLA peptides ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was solubilized in 12 µL 97:3 water: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size, Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/minute. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 5% to 28%B in 120 minutes, 28% to 35%B in 15 minutes, 35% to 95% in 15 minutes, maintained at 95% for 10 minutes and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon).  For the discovery experiments, data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400m/z), mass range of 300-1800m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 100 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, quadrupole isolation 1.8m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds and maximum injection time of 150 msec. Charge exclusion was set to ‘unassigned’, 4-8, greater than 8 and an exclusion list of singly charge, background ions.

### Data Protocol
Identification of SARS-CoV-2-derived HLA peptides SARS-CoV-2 proteome FASTA file of the infection experiment was generated according to the genome of the virus used for the infections (BetaCoV/Germany/BavPat1/2020 EPI_ISL_406862, GISAID Acc. No. EPI_ISL_406862), as well as the 23 novel unannotated virus ORFs whose translation is supported by Ribo-seq (Finkel et al., 2020a). . For the overexpressed genes, the protein sequences used derived from the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 isolate Wuhan-Hu-1, NCBI Reference Sequence: NC_045512.2). Human proteome was downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/). MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.0.25. Enzyme specificity was set as “unspecific” and peptides’ FDR was set to 0.05. The “match between runs” option was disabled to avoid the matching of identifications across the samples.  For the identification of SARS-CoV-2 derived peptides, as Leucine and Isoleucine residues are generally considered indistinguishable by MS, because their molecular masses are the same, we removed from our list all peptides in which replacing their I/L position (by either I/L) resulted in peptides that can be derived from a human origin. We also removed peptides that have the same sequence (or with a change of I/L) as possible non-coding regions (https://www.gencodegenes.org/human/release_19.html) as well as possible pseudogenes (http://www.pseudogene.org/Human/Human90.txt). NetMHCpan (Hoof et al., 2009; Jurtz et al., 2017; Nielsen and Andreatta, 2016) version 4.1 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan/) and NetMHCIIpan (Jensen et al., 2018) version 4.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCIIpan/) were used to check if the peptides can bind the patient’s HLA alleles. Peptides with %rank=< 2 or =<10 were kept for HLA-I and HLA-II, respectively. We predicted the binding of SARS-CoV-2 derived peptides also by MixMHCpred (peptide length: 8-14 for HLA-I and >=9 aa for HLA-II, peptides with %rank=<2 were determined as binders) (Bassani-Sternberg et al., 2017; Gfeller et al., 2018), HLAthena (HLA-I peptides, peptide length: 8-11, binders were determined according to columns 'best.MSi_allele' and 'assign.MSi_allele', %rank=<10) (Abelin et al., 2017; Sarkizova et al., 2020) and NeonMHC2 (HLA-II peptides, peptide length: >=9, %rank <=10). We validated the identification of randomly selected peptides by comparing their MS/MS spectra fragmentation to that of synthetic peptides (see methods: “Validation using synthetic peptides”). We also clustered human and SARS-CoV-2 derived peptides using Gibbs clustering, to see if they clustered according to the expected HLA binding motifs of the patient (see methods: “Gibbs clustering”).

### Publication Abstract
The human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-bound viral antigens serve as an immunological signature that can be selectively recognized by T&#xa0;cells. As viruses evolve by acquiring mutations, it is essential to identify a range of presented viral antigens. Using HLA peptidomics, we are able to identify severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)-derived peptides presented by highly prevalent HLA class I (HLA-I) molecules by using infected cells as well as overexpression of SARS-CoV-2 genes. We find 26 HLA-I peptides and 36 HLA class II (HLA-II) peptides. Among the identified peptides, some are shared between different cells and some are derived from out-of-frame open reading frames (ORFs). Seven of these peptides were previously shown to be immunogenic, and we identify two additional immunoreactive peptides by using HLA multimer staining. These results may aid the development of the next generation of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on presented viral-specific antigens that span several of the viral genes.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Immunopeptidomics, Hla-peptidomics

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute of science
Weizmann Institute of science

### Submitter
Shelly Kalaora

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Yardena Samuels
Weizmann Institute of science


