### Accession
PXD006393

### Title
Proteomic analysis to investigate lung injury in a mouse model of Streptococcus pneumonia infection

### Description
Infections by Streptococcus pneumoniae are a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, often causing community-acquired pneumonia, otitis media and also bacteremia and meningitis. Studies on S. pneumoniae are mainly focused on its virulence or capability to evade the host immune system, but little is known about the injury caused in lungs during a pneumococcal infection. Herein we compared the proteome profile of lungs from S. pneumoniae-infected mice with control mice by means of DIGE technology. In order to obtain reliable results three biological replicas were used, and four technical replicas were carried out for each biological replica. Proteomic comparison was performed at two time points: 24 and 48 hours post infection. A total of 91 proteins were identified with different abundance. We found important changes in the protein profiles during pneumococcal infection mainly associated with regulation of vesicle-mediated transport, wound healing, and cytoskeleton organization. In conclusion, S. pneumoniae may manipulate cytoskeleton of the cell during a lung infection likely by the death of eukaryotic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Female Balb/c mice were purchased from Envigo (Horst, Netherlands) and kept under conventional conditions with ad libitum access to food and water. Mice of 10-12 weeks of age were used in all experiments. The mice were anesthetized by intraperitonal injection with ketamine 10% (100 mg/kg; Wirtschaftsgenossenschaft deutscher Tierärztee eG, Garbsen, Germany) and xylazine 2% (10 mg/kg; CP-Pharma GmBH, Burgdorf, Germany) and intranasally inoculated with either 5×107 colony forming units of S. pneumoniae in 20 µl of PBS or with mock treatment with sterile 20 µl PBS. The mice were weighed after 24 and 48 hours. The animals were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation, bacterial loads were determined in lungs and systemic organs. Blood was collected and supplemented with EDTA and measured in the hematologic system VetScan HM5 (Abaxis). Absolute cell counts for each population were used to determine the ratio of granulocytes to lymphocytes in blood. The lung tissue samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-2-hydroxy-1-propanesulfonate, 5% 3-[N,N-Dimethyl(3-myristoylaminopropyl)ammonio]propanesulfonate supplemented with protease inhibitor (GE Healthcare) by filtering through a 40 µm cell strainer. The homogenate was sonicated for 10 min with 1 min breaks at 4°C in ice-water and then centrifuged at 17,000 xg for 5 min to pellet remaining debris. The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80°C. The protein extracts were quantified with the 2-D Quant Kit and treated with the 2-D Clean-up Kit. A protein concentration of 50 µg of each sample was minimally labeled with 400 pmol CyDyes DIGE Fluors: Cy3 for PBS controls and Cy5 for S. pneumoniae TIGR4 infected samples and vice versa to reduce variation due to labeling. An internal standard was generated by combining equal amounts of extracts from all the samples generated at 24h or 48h, respectively, and labeled with Cy2. The samples were incubated with the CyDyes for 30 min on ice in the dark at pH 8.5. One µL of 10 mM lysine was added to quench the reaction and the samples were then incubated for 10 additional minutes on ice in the dark. After labeling, immobilized pH gradient buffer 3-10 at a final concentration of 0.5% was added to samples as well as dithiothreitol at final concentration of 20 mM and finally Destreak reagent (GE Healthcare), following manufacturer recommendations, was used for IPG Strip hydration. We performed four technical replicas for each biological replica. A total of 4 DIGE gels were run for each biological replica and per time point separating two randomly picked samples of PBS control and S. pneumoniae TIGR4-infected animals. The labeled mixtures were combined, together with the internal standard and loaded onto a Immobiline Dry Strip (3-10 pH, 24cm) for first dimension separation by isoelectric focusing for 19h (200 V for 2h, 500 V for 2h, 1000 V for 4h and 8000V for 11h, 20°C) in a IPGphor I (GE Healthcare). After focusing, each strip was equilibrated for 15 min in 10 mL of  SDS equilibration buffer solution (6 M Urea, 75 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 29.3% glycerol, 2% SDS and grains of bromophenol blue) supplemented with DTT or iodoacetamide, respectively, loaded on a precast 12.5% polyacrylamide gel and run using an Ettan DALTsix Electrophoresis System (GE Healthcare) at the following settings: 80 V, 10 mA/strip, 1 w/strip for 1h and 500 V, 40 mA/strip, 13 w/strip until the bromophenol blue tracking front ran off the end of the gel. Fluorescence images of the gels were obtained on a Typhoon 9400 scanner (GE Healthcare). Cy2, Cy3 and Cy5 images were scanned at excitation/emission wavelengths of 488/520 nm, 532/580 nm and 633/670 nm, respectively, at a resolution of 100 µm. Image analysis was performed using Progenesis SameSpots 4.6.206 (Totallab, Newcastle, UK) as well as molecular weight and pI estimation. In order to visualize spots, 2-D gels were silver stained as described elsewhere (25). Briefly, the gels were fixed twice in 40% ethanol and 10% acetic acid for 30 min each. Sensitizing was carried out for 30 min in 0.02% (w/v) sodium thiosulfate. The gels were then washed three times for 5 min with distilled water and incubated in 0.1% (w/v) silver nitrate for 20 min. The gels were washed again twice for 1 min with distilled water and developed with 3% (w/v) sodium carbonate and 0.025% (v/v) formaldehyde until the desired contrast was reached. Reaction was stopped with 1.5% (w/v) EDTA-Na2 for 45 min, after which the gels were washed twice with distilled water.

### Data Protocol
For peptide mass fingerprinting analysis, obtained spectra were processed with FlexAnalysis 3.4 in order to find the peaks. No further processing was carried out. The Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) was used with the following parameters: one missed cleavage permission site, 150 ppm measurement tolerance, and at least four matching peptide masses. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification when appropriate, with methionine oxidation as the modification variable. First, common contaminants were removed using the contaminants database available in the Mascot search engine and then searches were performed restricted to mus musculus using the NCBInr database (release 19042017). Positive identifications were accepted with a Mascot score corresponding to a p-value ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Infections by <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> are a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, often causing community-acquired pneumonia, otitis media and also bacteremia and meningitis. Studies on <i>S. pneumoniae</i> are mainly focused on its virulence or capacity to evade the host immune system, but little is known about the injury caused in lungs during a pneumococcal infection. Herein we investigated this issue comparing the proteome profile of lungs from <i>S. pneumoniae-</i>infected mice with control mice by means of difference gel electrophoresis (DIGE) technology. In order to obtain reliable results three biological replicas were used, and four technical replicas were carried out in each biological replica. Proteomic comparison was performed at two time points: 24 and 48 h post infection. A total of 91 proteins were identified with different abundance. We found important changes in the protein profiles during pneumococcal infection mainly associated with regulation of vesicle-mediated transport, wound healing, and cytoskeleton organization. In conclusion, the results obtained show that the cytoskeleton of the host cell is modified in <i>S. pneumoniae</i> infection.

### Keywords
Pneumonia, Dige, Lung injury, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
ISGlobal
Professor of Microbiology Hospital Clinic Head of the Department of Clinical Microbiology School of Medicine, University of Barcelona Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
MARIO Ferrer-Navarro

### Lab Head
Dr Jordi Vila
Professor of Microbiology Hospital Clinic Head of the Department of Clinical Microbiology School of Medicine, University of Barcelona Barcelona, Spain


