### Accession
PXD023882

### Title
Proteomic analysis of U2OS cells treated with the dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) inhibitor Brequinar

### Description
The mitochondrial respiratory chain assembles into higher order complexes termed supercomplexes (SCs) under certain physiological or metabolic stimuli. A small molecule screen developed by the lab identified DHODH inhibitors as potent activators of SC assembly in cancer cells. To investigate the proteomic regulation of SCs under nucleotide deficiency, we treated U2OS cells for 48 hours with Brequinar (500 nM). Proteomic analysis highlighted strong signatures of respiratory chain subunit abundance and peroxisomal-derived ether phospholipid synthesis enzymes. Bypassing DHODH inhibition through uridine supplementation prevented these alterations. These findings establish a coordinated cellular response to reduced nucleotide pools that stimulates ether phospholipid synthesis and respiratory chain supra-assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was performed as previously described (Balsa et al., 2019). Briefly, 1x 15 cm plates of semi-confluent U2OS cells were harvested for proteomics after 48 hours of drug treatment. Cell pellets were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (2.0 % SDS w/v, 250 mM NaCl, PhosStop (Roche) phosphatase inhibitors, EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Promega), and 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5), reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 60C for 30 minutes, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes, and chloroform/methanol precipitated. Samples were then solubilized in 8 M urea dissolved in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and protein content was quantified. 500 μg of protein/sample was diluted to 4 M urea with digestion buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 8.5) and digested with LysC (Wako) (2 μg/μl) 1:100 for 2 hours. Samples were then diluted to 2M urea and further digested with Lys-C (2 μg/μl) 1:100 and Trypsin (0.5 μg/μl) 1:100 overnight at 37C. In the morning, samples were diluted to 1M urea, and further digested with Trypsin (0.5 μg/μl) 1:100 for 6 hours at 37C. Samples were then acidified with 200 μl 25% acetic acid and centrifuged at max speed for 5 minutes, and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (50 mg, Sep-Pak, Waters). 50 ug of digested peptides were labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific), combined into one fraction, acidified with 20 µL of 20 % FA (pH ~2), and subjected to C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (50 mg). Next, basic pH reversed-phase HPLC, followed by MS analysis was performed as previously described (Balsa et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
ext, basic pH reversed-phase HPLC, followed by MS analysis was performed as previously described (Balsa et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
The protein complexes of the mitochondrial electron transport chain exist in isolation and in higher order assemblies termed supercomplexes (SCs) or respirasomes (SC I+III<sub>2</sub>+IV). The association of complexes I, III and IV into the respirasome is regulated by unknown mechanisms. Here, we designed a nanoluciferase complementation reporter for complex III and IV proximity to determine in vivo respirasome levels. In a chemical screen, we found that inhibitors of the de novo pyrimidine synthesis enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) potently increased respirasome assembly and activity. By-passing DHODH inhibition via uridine supplementation decreases SC assembly by altering mitochondrial phospholipid composition, specifically elevated peroxisomal-derived ether phospholipids. Cell growth rates upon DHODH inhibition depend on ether lipid synthesis and SC assembly. These data reveal that nucleotide pools signal to peroxisomes to modulate synthesis and transport of ether phospholipids to mitochondria for SC assembly, which are necessary for optimal cell growth in conditions of nucleotide limitation.

### Keywords
Supercomplexes, Mitochondria, Pyrimidines, Nucleotides, Respirasome, Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Dana Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA USA

### Submitter
mark Jedrychowski

### Lab Head
Dr Pere Puigserver
Dana Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA USA


