### Accession
PXD022492

### Title
The lysosomal proteome of senescent cells contributes to the senescence-associated secretome

### Description
Senescent cells accumulate in tissues over time, favoring the onset and progression of multiple age-related diseases.  The senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) is considered the main pathological feature of senescent cells, however, little is known about the mechanism of secretion of SASP factors.  Here, we report that human senescent cells present higher levels of the two main types of authophagy, namely macroautophagy (MA) and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), together with an increase in the transcription factor TFEB and in lysosomal mass.  Proteomic analyses showed profound and widespread changes in the composition of lysosomal substrates in both CMA- and MA-derived lysosomes.  Notably, some proteins previously identified as plasma biomarkers of aging in humans are highly enriched in the lysosomes of senescent cells, as it is the case of cathepsin D (CTSD).  Moreover, we found that senescent cells have the ability to perform lysosomal exocytosis in a RAB27A-dependent manner and this is the main route for the secretion of multiple cytokines (such as CCL2, CCL3, CXCL12), the protease inhibitor SERPINE1 and protease CTSD.  We conclude that lysosomes are hyperactive in senescent cells, display an altered pattern of constitutive proteins and lysosomal substrates, and undergo exocytosis contributing to the SAS

### Sample Protocol
Lysosome purification. Protein Extraction in 5% SDS.SolidPhase-Aided Digestion (S-TRAP). Trypsin digestion. Label-free quantification.LC-MS/MS Orbitrap (Qexactive HF-X, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis of Raw data. Trypsin KR allowing 2 missed cleavages. Fixed modifications:  C (carbamidonethyl)  Variable modifications: M (oxidation). Limma statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Senescent cells accumulate in tissues over time, favoring the onset and progression of multiple age-related diseases. Senescent cells present a remarkable increase in lysosomal mass and elevated autophagic activity. Here, we report that two main autophagic pathways macroautophagy (MA) and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) are constitutively upregulated in senescent cells. Proteomic analyses of the subpopulations of lysosomes preferentially engaged in each of these types of autophagy revealed profound quantitative and qualitative changes in senescent cells, affecting both lysosomal resident proteins and cargo proteins delivered to lysosomes for degradation. These studies have led us to identify resident lysosomal proteins that are highly augmented in senescent cells and can be used as novel markers of senescence, such as arylsulfatase ARSA. The abundant secretome of senescent cells, known as SASP, is considered their main pathological mediator; however, little is known about the mechanisms of SASP secretion. Some secretory cells, including melanocytes, use the small GTPase RAB27A to perform lysosomal secretion. We found that this process is exacerbated in the case of senescent melanoma cells, as revealed by the exposure of lysosomal membrane integral proteins LAMP1 and LAMP2 in their plasma membrane. Interestingly, a subset of SASP components, including cytokines CCL2, CCL3, CXCL12, cathepsin CTSD, or the protease inhibitor SERPINE1, are secreted in a RAB27A-dependent manner in senescent melanoma cells. Finally, proteins previously identified as plasma biomarkers of aging are highly enriched in the lysosomes of senescent cells, including CTSD. We conclude that the lysosomal proteome of senescent cells is profoundly reconfigured, and that some senescent cells can be highly active in lysosomal exocytosis.

### Keywords
Protein degradation., Senescence, Chaperone-mediated autophagy, Lysosomes, Macroautophagy

### Affiliations
Fernando García Martínez, Ph.D. Proteomics Unit, Spanish National cancer Research Center, CNIO, MADRID, SPAIN
Javier Muñoz, PhD - Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110

### Submitter
Fernando Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Javier Muñoz, PhD - Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110


