### Accession
PXD012047

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Aerococcus and Globicatella spp. colonizing polymicrobial urethral catheter biofilms

### Description
Both Aerococcus urinae (Au) and Globicatella sanguinis (Gs) colonize the human urinary tract and are in the Aerococcaceae family. These rarely pathogenic Gram-positive bacteria were identified in polymicrobial urethral catheter biofilms (CBs) using 16S rDNA and proteomic analyses in this study. For confirming the identities, Au and Gs strains were isolated from small blood agar colonies derived from the CB extracts. Longitudinal surveys of clinical urine specimens revealed their persistence in the urinary tract and recolonization of newly replaced catheters. Dominant CB cohabitating organisms were Enterobacteriaceae, especially Proteus mirabilis and Escherichia coli. The proteomes of Gs and Au profiled from the in vivo milieu suggest that their energy metabolisms rely on glycolytic, heterolactic fermentation and peptide catabolic pathways. Several PTS sugar uptake and oligopeptide ABC transport systems were also highly abundant in the in vivo proteomes of Au and Gs, indicative to adaptations to nutrients available in urine and exfoliated urothelial cells (protein and proteoglycan breakdown products). Differences in Au and Gs metabolisms pertained to citrate lyase and glycogen (only in the Gs proteome), use of Xfp to degrade D-xylulose-5’-phosphate, and synthesis pathways for enzyme cofactors pyridoxal 6’-phosphate and 4’-phosphopantothenate (the latter only in the Au proteome). Interestingly, predicted metal ion (ZnuA-like) uptake systems were abundant in Gs but not in Au in vivo. Au expressed two LPXTG-anchored surface proteins, one predicted to have a pilin D adhesion motif. We describe how two microorganisms not previously characterized metabolically adapt to the milieu in the catheterized human urinary tract. Whether they are true pathogens or bystanders in CBs needs further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested using FASP approach, desalted using StageTip and analyzed by LTQ Velos Pro and Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) and MaxQuant-Andromeda suite (version 1.5).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aerococcus urinae</i> (<i>Au</i>) and <i>Globicatella sanguinis</i> (<i>Gs</i>) are gram-positive bacteria belonging to the family Aerococcaceae and colonize the human immunocompromised and catheterized urinary tract. We identified both pathogens in polymicrobial urethral catheter biofilms (CBs) with a combination of 16S rDNA sequencing, proteomic analyses, and microbial cultures. Longitudinal sampling of biofilms from serially replaced catheters revealed that each species persisted in the urinary tract of a patient in cohabitation with 1 or more gram-negative uropathogens. The <i>Gs</i> and <i>Au</i> proteomes revealed active glycolytic, heterolactic fermentation, and peptide catabolic energy metabolism pathways in an anaerobic milieu. A few phosphotransferase system (PTS)-based sugar uptake and oligopeptide ABC transport systems were highly expressed, indicating adaptations to the supply of nutrients in urine and from exfoliating squamous epithelial and urothelial cells. Differences in the <i>Au</i> vs <i>Gs</i> metabolisms pertained to citrate lyase and utilization and storage of glycogen (evident only in <i>Gs</i> proteomes) and to the enzyme Xfp that degrades d-xylulose-5'-phosphate and the biosynthetic pathways for 2 protein cofactors, pyridoxal 6'-phosphate and 4'-phosphopantothenate (expressed only in <i>Au</i> proteomes). A predicted ZnuA-like transition metal ion uptake system was identified for <i>Gs</i> while <i>Au</i> expressed 2 LPXTG-anchored surface proteins, one of which had a predicted pilin D adhesion motif. While these proteins may contribute to fitness and virulence in the human host, it cannot be ruled out that <i>Au</i> and <i>Gs</i> fill a niche in polymicrobial biofilms without being the direct cause of injury in urothelial tissues.

### Keywords
Aerococcus, Urinary tract infection, Globicatella, Proteomics, Uti, Urethral catheter biofilms

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850


