### Accession
PXD017432

### Title
Proteolysis of zyxin by HtrA1 induces nuclear translocation of the resulting C-terminal fragment of zyxin

### Description
We identified two neo-N termini derived from proteolytic cleavage of the mechanotransducer zyxin at Asp149 and Val276. We correlated these proteolytic events with the activity of caspase-1 and serine protease HtrA1, respectively, and observed nuclear translocation of the fragment zyxin277-572. To evaluate the biological role of nuclear zyxin we used Tandem Mass Tags (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics to compare protein abundances in HeLa cell ectopically expressing zyxin277-572, full length zyxin and control cells.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were transfected in triplicates with pFLAG CMV vector encoding full length zyxin and zyxin277-572 and cultured for 48 h before lysis with Triton X-100 lysis buffer. Peptides were labelled with TMT reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 50 µg digested peptides per condition were labelled at a 4/1 (w/w) TMT/protein ratio for 1 h at room temperature. Labelling reaction was quenched with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min. Next, peptide samples were mixed, desalted with sep-pak C18 columns (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed on a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) instrument using a 50 cm column at 45ᵒC. Data was recorded in data-dependent acquisition mode over a 140 min gradient using full-MS scans recorded with 70000 resolution using 3e6 ions for MS1, and resolution 35000, top 10 precursors with isolation windows of 1.6 m/z and 120 ms transient time for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using Sequest from ProteomeDiscoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) against a database compiled from the UniProt reference proteome for Homo Sapiens (taxid: 9606 , v2017-10-25) with the following parameters: full trypsin enzyme specificity allowing up to 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl(C), TMT-6plex (N-term) and TMT-6plex (K) as fixed modifications; acetyl (N-term), pyroQ (N-term), oxidation(M), deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications; parent mass error at 10 ppm, fragment mass error at 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases modulate critical processes in cutaneous tissue repair to orchestrate inflammation, cell proliferation and tissue remodeling. However, the functional consequences and implications in healing impairments of most cleavage events are not understood. Using iTRAQ-based Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) we had characterized proteolytic signatures in a porcine wound healing model and identified two neo-N termini derived from proteolytic cleavage of the focal adhesion protein and mechanotransducer zyxin. Here, we assign these proteolytic events to the activity of either caspase-1 or serine protease HtrA1 and analyze the biological relevance of the resultant zyxin truncations. By cellular expression of full-length and truncated zyxin proteins, we demonstrate nuclear translocation of a C-terminal zyxin fragment that could also be generated in vitro by HtrA1 cleavage and provide evidence for its anti-apoptotic activities, potentially by regulating the expression of modulators of cell proliferation, protein synthesis and genome stability. Targeted degradomics correlated endogenous generation of the same zyxin fragment with increased cell density in human primary dermal fibroblasts. Hence, this newly identified HtrA1-zyxin protease signaling axis might present a novel mechanism to transiently enhance cell survival in environments of increased cell density like in wound granulation tissue.

### Keywords
Hela, Zyxin, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Fabio Sabino

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
Technical University of Denmark


