### Accession
PXD026556

### Title
OCT4 IP-MS in Naive and Primed Human ESCs

### Description
Understanding the molecular underpinnings of pluripotency is a prerequisite for optimal maintenance and application of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). While the protein-protein interactions of core pluripotency factors have been identified in mouse ESCs, their interactome in human ESCs (hESCs) has not to date been explored. Here we mapped the OCT4 interactomes in naïve and primed hESCs, revealing extensive connections to mammalian ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling complexes.

### Sample Protocol
IPed proteins were eluted by boiling for 5 min in Laemmli buffer and fractionated on a 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel lanes were horizontally cut into 8-10 pieces and each piece was subjected to digestion with porcine trypsin (Promega).The samples were reconstituted in 5-10 ul of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5um C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 um inner diameter x 12 cm length) with a flame-draw tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded onto the column. A gradient of acetonitrile from 2.5% to 97.5% was used to elute the peptides. As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then they entered into an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) with collision-induced dissociation (CID). Eluting peptide were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software with SEQUEST engine against Swiss-Prot human protein sequence database. Outputs of protein identification from Proteome Discoverer were imported into a local Microsoft Access database. Duplicated records were removed by unique protein symbol. Common contamination proteins (trypsin, keratins, Actin, Tubulins) were removed, and protein lists were filtered by identification score >10, and number of identified peptides > 2. A protein needed to be identified in three out of four experiments to be considered an interactor candidate. Proteins present in more than 20% of CRAPome experiments were removed prior to calculation of empirical p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular underpinnings of pluripotency is a prerequisite for optimal maintenance and application of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). While the protein-protein interactions of core pluripotency factors have been identified in mouse ESCs, their interactome in human ESCs (hESCs) has not to date been explored. Here we mapped the OCT4 interactomes in na&#xef;ve and primed hESCs, revealing extensive connections to mammalian ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling complexes. In na&#xef;ve hESCs, OCT4 is associated with both BRG1 and BRM, the two paralog ATPases of the BAF complex. Genome-wide location analyses and genetic studies reveal that these two enzymes cooperate in a functionally redundant manner in the transcriptional regulation of blastocyst-specific genes. In contrast, in primed hESCs, OCT4 cooperates with BRG1 and SOX2 to promote chromatin accessibility at ectodermal genes. This work reveals how a common transcription factor utilizes differential BAF complexes to control distinct transcriptional programs in na&#xef;ve and primed hESCs.

### Keywords
Oct4, Esc

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Xin Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jianlong Wang
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center


