### Accession
PXD040083

### Title
Differential activation of NRF2 signaling pathway in renal cell carcinoma cells

### Description
Comprehensive comparative proteomic analysis of Caki-1, a classical ccRCC cell line versusCaki-2 cells using tandem mass tag reagents based approach for identification and quantitation of proteins in the two cell lines by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and TMT labeling of the Caki-1 and Caki-2 cell lysates were performed using TMT-6plex according to manufacturer’s instructions as follows; Caki-1 (TMT tags 126, 127 and 128) and three Caki-2 (TMT tags 129, 130 and 131) labeling reactions. The six TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a ratio of 1:1:1:1:1:1 before vacuum centrifugation to near dryness. 100 μg of the pooled Caki-1 and Caki-2 TMT-labeled peptides were used for High pH Reversed-Phase fraction that generated an unbound wash fraction and eight elution fractions. These fractions were evaporated to dryness, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry on a Tribrid Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument using SPS MS3 fragmentation scans for identification and quantitation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest-HT search engine. Peptide database searching was performed against a fasta file of annotated canonical human proteins comprising of 20,291 sequences downloaded from UniProt on January 26, 2022. The mass spectra were searched against a decoy database comprising of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Peptide spectral matches identified with less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR≤0.01) were selected for further analysis. The search parameters were as follows: full trypsin specificity selected with a maximum of two missed cleavages; Static modifications, TMT 6-plex (K and peptide N terminals) and carbamidomethylation (C). Dynamic modifications, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q). Precursor ion mass tolerances, 10 ppm for all MS acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer and fragment ion mass tolerance set at 0.6 Da for all MS/MS spectra acquired in the ion trap.

### Publication Abstract
Renal-cell carcinoma (RCC) is a heterogeneous disease consisting of several subtypes based on specific genomic profiles and histological and clinical characteristics. The subtype with the highest prevalence is clear-cell RCC (ccRCC), next is papillary RCC (pRCC), and then chromophobe RCC (chRCC). The ccRCC cell lines are further subdivided into prognostic expression-based subtypes ccA or ccB. This heterogeneity necessitates the development, availability, and utilization of cell line models with the correct disease phenotypic characteristics for RCC research. In this study, we focused on characterizing proteomic differences between the Caki-1 and Caki-2 cell lines that are commonly used in ccRCC research. Both cells are primarily defined as human ccRCC cell lines. Caki-1 cell lines are metastatic, harboring wild-type <i>VHL</i>, whereas Caki-2 are considered as the primary ccRCC cell lines expressing wild-type von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL). Here, we performed a comprehensive comparative proteomic analysis of Caki-1 and Caki-2 cells using tandem mass-tag reagents together with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) for the identification and quantitation of proteins in the two cell lines. Differential regulation of a subset of the proteins identified was validated using orthogonal methods including western blot, q-PCR, and immunofluorescence assays. Integrative bioinformatic analysis identifies the activation/inhibition of specific molecular pathways, upstream regulators, and causal networks that are uniquely regulated and associated with the two cell lines and RCC subtypes, and potentially the disease stage. Altogether, we have identified multiple molecular pathways, including NRF2 signaling, which is the most significantly activated pathway in Caki-2 versus Caki-1 cells. Some of the differentially regulated molecules and signaling pathways could serve as potential diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets amongst ccRCC subtypes.

### Keywords
Renal cell carcinoma, Tmt

### Affiliations
Eastern Virginia Medical School
Eastern Virginia Medical School Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology Leroy T. Canoles Jr. Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Julius Nyalwidhe

### Lab Head
Dr Julius O Nyalwidhe
Eastern Virginia Medical School Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology Leroy T. Canoles Jr. Cancer Research Center


