### Accession
PXD034393

### Title
Autoinhibition of Trio guanine nucleotide exchange factor activity for Rac1 by its spectrin repeats is disrupted by neurodevelopmental disorder-related genetic variants.

### Description
Function-damaging variants in the TRIO gene are enriched in individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). TRIO encodes a cytoskeletal regulatory protein with three catalytic domains – two guanine exchange factor (GEF) domains, GEF1 and GEF2, and a kinase domain, as well as several accessory domains that have not been extensively studied.  Disease variants in the GEF1 domain or the nine adjacent spectrin repeats (SRs) are enriched in NDDs, suggesting that dysregulated GEF1 activity is linked to these disorders. We provide evidence here that the Trio SRs interact intramolecularly with the GEF1 domain to inhibit its activity. We demonstrate that SRs 6-9 decrease GEF1 catalytic activity both in vitro and in cells and show that NDD-associated variants in the SR8 and GEF1 domains relieve this autoinhibitory constraint. Our results from chemical cross-linking and BioLayer Interferometry indicate that the SRs primarily contact the PH region of the GEF1 domain, reducing GEF1 binding to Rac1. Together, our findings reveal a key regulatory mechanism that is commonly disrupted in multiple NDDs and may offer a new target for therapeutic intervention for TRIO-associated NDDs.

### Sample Protocol
SR6-GEF1 in assay buffer plus 10 mM CaCl2 was diluted to 0.4 mg/mL and incubated with increasing concentrations of trypsin (0.001 mg/mL to 0.11 mg/mL) for 1 hour at room temperature in a 25 µL total reaction volume. Reactions were quenched with 8 µL quench buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.1% bromophenol blue, 5% BME, 1 mM PMSF, 4 mM EGTA, 4 mM EDTA) and immediately boiled for 10 min. Samples were immediately run on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel, and proteins were visualized by Coomassie R250 staining. Major gel bands were excised and washed with 50:50 acetonitrile:water buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins in the gel were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 37°C for 20 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min in the dark.  Gel bands were washed twice with 50:50 acetonitrile:water containing 100 mM bicarbonate and dried for 10 min in a SpeedVac. Trypsin digestion was carried out (1:100 molar ratio of trypsin to protein) by incubation with the gel piece at 37°C overnight.

### Data Protocol
The digest samples were analyzed by LC–MS/MS using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a Waters nanoACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system using a Waters Symmetry C18 180 µm by 20 mm trap column and a 1.7 µm (75 µm inner diameter by 250 mm) nanoACQUITY UPLC column (35°C) for peptide separation. Trapping was done at 15 µL/min with 99% buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 1 min. Peptide separation was performed at 300 nL/min with buffer A and buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a linear gradient. High-Energy collisional dissociation was utilized to fragment peptide ions via data-dependent acquisition. Mass spectral data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.3) and protein database search was carried out in Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, LLC, Boston, MA; v. 2.6.0). Protein searches were conducted against the Trichoplusia ni protein database and the human Trio SR6-GEF1 sequence. Mascot search parameters included: parent peptide ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm; peptide fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da; strict trypsin fragments (enzyme cleavage after the C terminus of K or R, but not if it is followed by P); fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C); and variable modification of phospho (S, T, Y), oxidation (M), and Propioamidation (C), and Deamidation (NQ).  Peptide identification confidence was set at 95% confidence probability based on Mascot MOWSE score.  Results were transferred to Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR; v. 4) for further data analysis to look at peptide abundances in reference to their start position. These were utilized to plot in a frequency distribution to determine band identity.

### Publication Abstract
TRIO encodes a cytoskeletal regulatory protein with three catalytic domains-two guanine exchange factor (GEF) domains, GEF1 and GEF2, and a kinase domain-as well as several accessory domains that have not been extensively studied. Function-damaging variants in the TRIO gene are known to be enriched in individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Disease variants in the GEF1 domain or the nine adjacent spectrin repeats (SRs) are enriched in NDDs, suggesting that dysregulated GEF1 activity is linked to these disorders. We provide evidence here that the Trio SRs interact intramolecularly with the GEF1 domain to inhibit its enzymatic activity. We demonstrate that SRs 6-9 decrease GEF1 catalytic activity both in&#xa0;vitro and in cells and show that NDD-associated variants in the SR8 and GEF1 domains relieve this autoinhibitory constraint. Our results from chemical cross-linking and bio-layer interferometry indicate that the SRs primarily contact the pleckstrin homology region of the GEF1 domain, reducing GEF1 binding to the small GTPase Rac1. Together, our findings reveal a key regulatory mechanism that is commonly disrupted in multiple NDDs and may offer a new target for therapeutic intervention for TRIO-associated NDDs.

### Keywords
Trio gene, Crosslinking, Limited proteolysis, Neurodevelopment disorders

### Affiliations
Yale University
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource at Yale University Dept. MBB, Yale University

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource at Yale University Dept. MBB, Yale University


