### Accession
PXD034479

### Title
Perturbation of protein homeostasis brings plastids at the crossroad between repairment and dismantling

### Description
The chloroplast proteome is a dynamic mosaic of plastid- and nuclear-encoded proteins, and plastid protein homeostasis is maintained through the balance between de novo protein synthesis and proteolysis. Intracellular communication pathways, including the pastid-to-nucleus retrograde communication, and the protein homeostasis machinery shape the chloroplast proteome based on developmental and physiological needs. However, the maintenance of fully functional chloroplasts is costly and under specific stress conditions the degradation of damaged chloroplasts is functional to the maintenance of a heathy population of photosynthesising organelles while promoting nutrient redistribution to sink tissues. In this study, we have addressed this complex regulatory chloroplast quality-control pathway by modulating the expression of two nuclear genes encoding the plastid ribosomal proteins PRPS1 and PRPL4. By transcriptomics, proteomics and transmission electron microscopy analyses, we show that the increased expression of PRPS1 gene leads to chloroplast degradation and early flowering, as an escaping strategy from stress conditions. On the contrary, the overaccumulation of PRPL4 protein is kept under control by the increased accumulation of plastid chaperones and other components of the unfolded protein response (cpUPR) regulatory mechanism. This study advances our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying chloroplast retrograde communication and provides new insight into cellular responses to impaired plastid protein homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins  was extracted from indPRPS1 and indPRPL4 plantlets incubated either in the absence or presence of DEX for 6 hours for a total of 5 biological replicates for each group. Proteins were extracted from 1g of plantlets following SDS/phenol method as described by Vannini et al. (2021). Proteins were then digested with trypsin via Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP; (Wiśniewski, 2019) .Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described by Paradiso et al. (2020). After LC separation peptides were sprayed into the mass spectrometer and eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 35.000 and scanned between m/z 380 and 1.500. Data dependent scans (top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD); Normalized collision energy (NCE): 25% in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17.500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.  annini C, Domingo G, Fiorilli V, Seco DG, Novero M, Marsoni M, Wisniewski-Dye F, Bracale M, Moulin L, Bonfante P. Proteomic analysis reveals how pairing of a Mycorrhizal fungus with plant growth-promoting bacteria modulates growth and defense in wheat. Plant Cell Environ. 2021 Jun;44(6):1946-1960. doi: 10.1111/pce.14039. Epub 2021 Mar 25. PMID: 33675052.  Wiśniewski JR. Filter Aided Sample Preparation - A tutorial. Anal Chim Acta. 2019 Dec 20;1090:23-30. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2019.08.032. Epub 2019 Aug 17. PMID: 31655642.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR protein database (version 2010, more 35386 entries) with MaxQuant program (v.1.5.3.3), using default parameters. For the quantitative analysis, the “ProteinGroups” output files was filtered considering for the following analysis only protein groups detected with almost two peptides and in at least three of the four biological replicates in almost one analytical group. Missing values were replaced with the R package imputeLCMD using Hybrid imputation method: imputation of left-censored missing data (missing values ≥ 50% of number of replicas) was done using QRILC method, instead missed at random data (< 50% of replicas) were imputated using KNN method. Log2 transformed LFQ intensities were centered by Zscore normalization method of Perseus (https://www.maxquant.org/perseus/) and then subjected to Student’s Tests (S0=0.1, FDR<0.05) in order to discover Differentially Abundant Proteins (DAPs) in RPS1_D vs RPS1_nD and RPL4_D vs RPL4_nD. Hierarchical clustering analysis was carried out using Perseus software and default parameters. DAPs categorization was achieved using TAIR GO annotation tool (https://www.arabidopsis.org/tools/bulk/go/index.jsp). GO term enrichment analysis was performed using the PANTHER classification system (Mi et al., 2021; http://geneontology.org).

### Publication Abstract
The chloroplast proteome is a dynamic mosaic of plastid- and nuclear-encoded proteins. Plastid protein homeostasis is maintained through the balance between de novo synthesis and proteolysis. Intracellular communication pathways, including the plastid-to-nucleus signalling and the protein homeostasis machinery, made of stromal chaperones and proteases, shape chloroplast proteome based on developmental and physiological needs. However, the maintenance of fully functional chloroplasts is costly and under specific stress conditions the degradation of damaged chloroplasts is essential to the maintenance of a healthy population of photosynthesising organelles while promoting nutrient redistribution to sink tissues. In this work, we have addressed this complex regulatory chloroplast-quality-control pathway by modulating the expression of two nuclear genes encoding plastid ribosomal proteins PRPS1 and PRPL4. By transcriptomics, proteomics and transmission electron microscopy analyses, we show that the increased expression of PRPS1 gene leads to chloroplast degradation and early flowering, as an escape strategy from stress. On the contrary, the overaccumulation of PRPL4 protein is kept under control by increasing the amount of plastid chaperones and components of the unfolded protein response (cpUPR) regulatory mechanism. This study advances our understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying chloroplast retrograde communication and provides new insights into cellular responses to impaired plastid protein homeostasis.

### Keywords
Chloroplast retrograde communication, Plastid protein homeostasis, The plastid ribosomal proteins

### Affiliations
University of Insubria

### Submitter
Milena Marsoni

### Lab Head
Dr Guido Domingo
University of Insubria


