### Accession
PXD016002

### Title
Proteomic analysis of CSF from patients with leptomeningeal melanoma metastases identifies signatures associated with disease progression and therapeutic resistance

### Description
The development of leptomeningeal melanoma metastases (LMM) is a rare and devastating complication of the late-stage disease, for which no effective treatments exist. Here, we performed a multi-omics analysis of the CSF from LMM patients to determine how the leptomeningeal microenvironment shapes the biology and therapeutic responses of melanoma cells. A total of 45 serial CSF samples were collected from 16 patients, 8 of these with confirmed LMM. Of those with LMM, 7 had poor survival (<4 months) and one was an extraordinary responder (still alive with survival >32 months). CSF samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry and incubated with melanoma cells, that were subjected to RNA-Seq analysis. Functional assays were performed to validate the pathways identified.  Mass spectrometry analyses showed the CSF of most LMM patients to be enriched for pathways involved in innate immunity, protease-mediated damage, and IGF-related signaling. All of these were anti-correlated in the extraordinary responder. RNA-Seq analysis showed CSF to induce PI3K/AKT, integrin, B-cell activation, S-phase entry, TNFR2, TGF- and oxidative stress responses in the melanoma cells. ELISA assays confirmed that TGF- expression increased in the CSF of patients progressing with LMM. CSF from poorly responding patients conferred tolerance to BRAF inhibitor therapy in apoptosis assays.  These analyses identified proteomic/transcriptional signatures in the CSF of patients who succumbed to LMM. We further showed that the CSF from LMM patients has the potential to modulate BRAF inhibitor responses and may contribute to drug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were concentrated using Amicon Ultra membrane filters (3 kDa cutoff, Millipore), followed by Depletion of Top 12 abundant serum proteins using spin columns (Pierce). The flowthrough fraction was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Tryptic peptides (10 μg) were labeled with TMT-11plex reagents(Thermo). After quality control of TMT labeling, pooled TMT-labeled samples were then separated via basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography into 24 concatenated fractions. Each of the fractions was then run using UHPLC-MS/MS with a 90 minute gradient (RSLCnano and Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Sequence assignment and quantitation were performed using Andromeda and Maxquant software; data for this upload have been searched against human entries in the UniProt database with Mascot. The identical reference pool assayed in each multiplex was used for both within-plex and between-plex normalization. First, samples within each multiplex were normalized with iterative rank order normalization (iron generic –proteomics) against the reference pool. Then, to correct for between-plex differences in expression, abundances within each multiplex were converted to log2 ratios against its reference pool. Separately, unnormalized versions of all reference pools were normalized together using IRON, and the geometric mean abundance stored for each row of data. The log2 ratios were then scaled back into abundance values using the stored row means. The normalized data was then transformed into log2 abundances prior to additional analyses. Proteins in non-responder LMM patients that were both correlated with time and anti-correlated with the single LMM responder patient were used for pathway enrichment, heat map visualization, and literature network generation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain metastasis, Melanoma, Csf, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA 33612
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Keiran Smalley, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA 33612


### SDRF
- Characteristics[organism: Homo sapiens
- Characteristics[organism part: cerebrospinal fluid
- Characteristics[cell type: not applicable
- Characteristics[disease: normal, leptomeningeal melanoma metastases
- fractionation method: NT=Reversed-phase chromatography (RP);AC=PRIDE:0000563
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive Plus;AC=MS:1002634
- separation: AC=PRIDE:0000563;NT=Reversed-phase chromatography
- label: TMT126, TMT127, TMT128, TMT129, TMT130, TMT131
- modification parameters: not available

