### Accession
PXD025910

### Title
Mechanical control of nuclear import by Importin-7 is regulated by its dominant cargo YAP

### Description
Mechanical control of nuclear import by Importin-7 is regulated by its dominant cargo YAP

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were in-filter digested with trypsin. Resulting tryptic peptides were SIL-labeled using the TMT isobaric reagents. Peptides were then analyzed with a  HF Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted by Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All MS/MS samples were analyzed using SEQUESTTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanical forces regulate multiple essential pathways in the cell. The nuclear translocation of mechanoresponsive transcriptional regulators is an essential step for mechanotransduction. However, how mechanical forces regulate the nuclear import process is not understood. Here, we identify a highly mechanoresponsive nuclear transport receptor (NTR), Importin-7 (Imp7), that drives the nuclear import of YAP, a key regulator of mechanotransduction pathways. Unexpectedly, YAP governs the mechanoresponse of Imp7 by forming a YAP/Imp7 complex that responds to mechanical cues through the Hippo kinases MST1/2. Furthermore, YAP behaves as a dominant cargo of Imp7, restricting the Imp7 binding and the nuclear translocation of other Imp7 cargoes such as Smad3 and Erk2. Thus, the nuclear import process is an additional regulatory layer indirectly regulated by mechanical cues, which activate a preferential Imp7 cargo, YAP, which competes out other cargoes, resulting in signaling crosstalk.

### Keywords
Human cells, Stretching

### Affiliations
CNIC

### Submitter
Enrique Calvo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrique Calvo
CNIC


