### Accession
PXD028562

### Title
LC-MS/MS Analysis of Respiratory Viruses

### Description
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and other respiratory viruses -Coronavirus OC43, Coronavirus 229E, Influenza A/H1N1, Influenza A/H3N2, Influenza B, Respiratory Syncytial Virus RSV A and RSV B - were analysed by bottom-up proteomics of viral cultures. High coverage of viral proteins was acheived after culturing in serum-free conditions when compared to cultures grown using standard conditions including 2% fetal bovine serum.

### Sample Protocol
Virus-containing cell culture supernatant was mixed with methanol, chloroform and water to disrupt virions and precipitate proteins. The protein pellet was washed with methanol and air-dried. Proteins were reconstituted in sodium deoxycholate, n-propanol and triethylammonium bicarbonate. Cysteine residues were reduced dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide before proteins were digested overnight with trypsin. Peptides were desalted and analysed by nano- or microflow reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometry operating in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Sequence matching of TripleTOF IDA data was performed using ProteinPilot software (v5.0.3, SCIEX). A custom FASTA file was constructed by concatenating FASTA files for Homo sapiens, Chlorocebus sabaeus, Bos taurus, SARS-CoV-2, 229E, OC43, Influenza A (H1N1 and H3N2) and Influenza B, RSV (A and B), downloaded from uniprot.org, along with a list of common contaminating proteins supplied with ProteinPilot software. Results were filtered to a global false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Diagnosis of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has primarily been achieved using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for acute infection, and serology for prior infection. Assay with RT-PCR provides data on presence or absence of viral RNA, with no information on virus replication competence, infectivity, or virus characterisation. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is typically not used in clinical virology, despite its potential to provide supplemental data about the presence of viral proteins and thus the potential for replication-competent, transmissible virus. Using the SARS-CoV-2 as a model virus, we developed a fast 'bottom-up' proteomics workflow for discovery of target virus peptides using 'serum-free' culture conditions, providing high coverage of viral proteins without the need for protein or peptide fractionation techniques. This workflow was then applied to Coronaviruses OC43 and 229E, Influenza A/H1N1 and H3N2, Influenza B, and Respiratory Syncytial Viruses A and B. Finally, we created an LC-MS/MS method for targeted detection of the eight-virus panel in clinical specimens, successfully detecting peptides from the SARS-CoV-2 ORF9B and nucleoprotein in RT-PCR positive samples. The method provides specific detection of respiratory viruses from clinical samples containing moderate viral loads and is an important further step to the use of LC-MS/MS in diagnosis of viral infection.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lc-ms/ms, Culture

### Affiliations
NSW Health Pathology
1.NSW Health Pathology, Randwick, New South Wales, 2031, Australia 2. Virology Research Laboratory, SAViD, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, New South Wales, 2031, Australia 3. Schools of Medical Sciences, Women’s and Children’s Health, Faculty of Medicine and BABS Faculty of Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, 2052, Australia 4. Serology and Virology Division (SAViD), NSW Health Pathology, Randwick, New South Wales, 2031, Australia

### Submitter
Christopher Hodgkins

### Lab Head
Dr William D. Rawlinson
1.NSW Health Pathology, Randwick, New South Wales, 2031, Australia 2. Virology Research Laboratory, SAViD, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, New South Wales, 2031, Australia 3. Schools of Medical Sciences, Women’s and Children’s Health, Faculty of Medicine and BABS Faculty of Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, 2052, Australia 4. Serology and Virology Division (SAViD), NSW Health Pathology, Randwick, New South Wales, 2031, Australia


