### Accession
PXD014348

### Title
General structural features that regulate integrin affinity revealed by atypical αVβ8

### Description
Integrins αVβ8 and αVβ6 are master activators of proTGF-βs. Whereas most integrins including αVβ6 are activated by tensile force applied by the cytoskeleton, αVβ8 links differently to the cytoskeleton and lacks the open headpiece conformation that represents the high affinity state of other integrins. Here, we shed light on the atypical activation mechanism of integrin αVβ8 using crystal structures in the absence and presence of proTGF-β1 peptide, comparisons of the hydrogen deuterium exchange dynamics of αVβ8 and αVβ6, and affinity measurements on mutants in which structurally atypical residues of αVβ8 and typical residues of αVβ6 were reciprocally exchanged.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Two microliters of αVβ6 and αVβ8 stock solutions (23 and 33 µM, respectively), either alone or mixed with 100 µM TGF-β1 ligand peptide, were diluted 15-fold (to 1.53 and 2.20 µM, αVβ6 and αVβ8, respectively, and 6.67 µM TGF-β1 ligand peptide) with labeling buffer (20mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2 and 1mM CaCl2, 99.9% D2O (pD 7.5) at 21 °C to initiate deuterium exchange. Peptide Kd values of 12 and 30 nM for αVβ6 and αVβ8, respectively, predict binding to 99.8% and 99.6% of the integrin, respectively.  At time points from 10s to 240m, an aliquot was removed and an equal volume of quench buffer [4M GnHCl, 200mM sodium phosphate, 0.5M tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), H2O, pH 2.25] was added to adjust the pH to 2.5.  Each sample (46 pmol αVβ6 or 66 pmol αVβ8) was immediately subjected to LC/MS analysis.  For binding experiments, protein and ligand were allowed to equilibrate for 20 minutes at 21 °C before deuterium labeling.  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested in solution with pepsin (10 mg/mL, Sigma P6887; Lot#SLBL1721V) for 5 minutes on ice, then injected into an M-class Acquity UPLC with HDX technology (Waters). The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. The injected peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min at 100 µL/min using a BEH C18 2.1 x 5mm column (Waters, 186003975) and then separated in 14 min by an 5% – 40% acetonitrile:water gradient at 40 µL/min. The separation column was a 1.0×100.0 mm Acquity UPLC C18 BEH (Waters, 186002346) containing 1.7 µm particles.  The back pressure αVeraged 8800 psi at 0.1 °C.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.15 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution of [1.5 M GnHCl, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected after each run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  A conventional electrospray source was used and the instrument was scanned over the range 100 to 1900 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 6 V, sampling cone at 35 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using 6 replicates of undeuterated αVβ6 and 6 replicates of undeuterated αVβ8.  Raw data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum number of products of 3; minimum consecutive products of 2; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.2; maximum mass error of 10 ppm. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.  Peptides with low signal to noise ratios in either bound or free states were removed.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
Integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;8, which like &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;6 functions to activate TGF-&#x3b2;s, is atypical. Its &#x3b2;8 subunit binds to a distinctive cytoskeleton adaptor and does not exhibit large changes in conformation upon binding to ligand. Here, crystal structures, hydrogen-deuterium exchange dynamics, and affinity measurements on mutants are used to compare &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;8 and &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;6. Lack of a binding site for one of three &#x3b2;I domain divalent cations and a unique &#x3b2;6-&#x3b1;7 loop conformation in &#x3b2;8 facilitate movements of the &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;1' helices at the ligand binding pocket toward the high affinity state, without coupling to &#x3b2;6-&#x3b1;7 loop reshaping and &#x3b1;7-helix pistoning that drive large changes in &#x3b2;I domain-hybrid domain orientation seen in other integrins. Reciprocal swaps between &#x3b2;6 and &#x3b2;8 &#x3b2;I domains increase affinity of &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;6 and decrease affinity of &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;8 and define features that regulate affinity of the &#x3b2;I domain and its coupling to the hybrid domain.

### Keywords
Integrin, Affinity, Protgf-β, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Conformational change, Crystal structure

### Affiliations
Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


