### Accession
PXD034493

### Title
The ovaries of ivermectin-resistant Rhipicephalus microplus strains display proteomic adaptations involving the induction of xenobiotic detoxification and structural remodeling mechanisms

### Description
Ticks are among the most economically important arthropod parasites due to the heavy infestations they provoke, affecting human and animal health and food production. Ticks are also important vectors of pathogens, mediating the dispersion of livestock and zoonotic diseases. Some examples of livestock diseases vectored by ticks include bovine babesiosis, anaplasmosis, theileriosis, and/or heartwater disease, all of which are enlisted by the World Organization for Animals as possible threats to animals and public health. The family Ixodidae (hard ticks) is of veterinary relevance, and many ixodid tick species within the genera Ixodes, Dermacentor, Amblyomma, Haemophysalis, Hyalomma, and Rhipicephalus, among others, impact farming production worldwide. However, there is no doubt that most pernicious tick species is Rhipicephalus microplus, commonly known as the southern cattle fever tick. This specie is not only the major economically important tick parasite for livestock production, but it is also the vector of Babesia bovis and B. bigemina, the causal agents of babesiosis, a severe disease that affects cattle from tropical and subtropical regions.  Currently, global economic losses of the cattle industry attributable to R. microplus are estimated at around $18.7 US billion dollars per year. The economic impact is the leading reason to develop different strategies to constrains R. microplus and its vector-borne pathogens, including chemical, mechanical or environmental treatments, biological control, and/or genetic methods. Chemical, among other methods, are the most frequently applied, but the intense use worldwide, has led to the selection of acaricidal-resistant ticks populations. The molecular adaptations of ticks to overcome the effects of acaricides (e.g., deltamethrin, cypermethrin, amitraz, ivermectin) includes metabolic detoxiﬁcation mechanisms and/or the selection of mutated molecular targets. Recently, a couple of systematic reviews pointed out a significant increment in the number of studies intended to understand the acaricidal resistance in ticks. These reports highlighted the acaricide resistance observed in R. microplus and the wide geographical dispersion of this problem. Whereas many acaricide-resistant R. microplus populations have been reported in Brazil, India, and Mexico, the lack of strict regulatory policies on tick control, leaving the application of acaricides at discretion of farmers. Therefore, the correct implementation of existing strategies together with novel sustainable control methods may be crucial to safeguard livestock production in the context of growing population and global warming. However, until the implementation of such sanitary measures becomes the rule, the main control strategy will still rely on the use of chemical acaricides, such as ivermectin (IVM).   Ivermectin is an antiparasitic macrocyclic lactone used to control the populations of R. microplus and other ticks in livestock farming. As occurs in other countries, in Mexico ivermectin is the primary synthetic antiparasitic drug, and its abuse during the last three decades represents an important selection pressure that boosted the development of ivermectin-resistant populations of R. microplus. Therefore, the understanding of the molecular basis of the R. microplus resistance to ivermectin, especially in those cases occurring in tropical and subtropical areas of developing countries, can help to underpin the development of novel strategies to tackle this problem. In this context, omics tools can provide helpful information for the discovery of the molecular mechanisms behind the ivermectin resistance in R. microplus and other related tick species. Previous studies identified the main proteomic components of ovaries of R. microplus, including proteins involved in protein synthesis, post-translational modification, nuclear regulation, cytoskeleton, proteasome, transcriptional regulation, energetic metabolism, detoxification metabolism, or energy storage. Recently, the vitellogenin receptor (VgR) was suggested as a target for tick control because of its essential role in egg formation and maturation. However, molecular information on tick ovaries currently available limits explores the feasibility of VgR or other reproduction-related molecules as promissory targets for tick control.

### Sample Protocol
The ovary of each 120 semi-engorged ticks (60 IVM-resistant R1 and R2, and 60 IVM-susceptible) was dissected using a Leica Zoom 2000 stereomicroscope. Pre-chilled phosphate-buffered saline solution, pH 7 containing 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Cat. No. 11 697 498 001, Roche® Germany) was used to prevent sample degradation. Then, the samples were washed thoroughly several times with PBS containing 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Cat. No. 11 697 498 001, Roche® Germany) until no blood was observed. Afterward, the ovary was pooled from 20 samples and placed in microcentrifuge tubes. Each pool was stored at –80 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
The spectra generated with SPS-MS3 were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the search engines Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science), SEQUEST HT [24], and AMANDA [25]. The searches were directed against non-redundant proteins of R. microplus deposited in the NCBI database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). We also used Bos taurus database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000009136) to detect if host proteins were also present in the samples. Search parameters included: full-tryptic protease specificity, allowing two missed cleavages, static modifications covered carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), and TMT 9-plex N-terminal/lysine residues (+229.163 Da). Dynamic modifications included methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da). For the SPS-MS3 method (in which identification was performed at a lower resolution in the linear ion trap), tolerances of ± 10 ppm and ± 0.6 Da were applied. The resulting peptide hits were filtered for a maximum of 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm [26]. The reporter ion quantification for TMT tags was obtained with a PD software template at the MS3 level applying mass tolerances of ± 10 ppm in the case of the most confident centroid and a precursor co-isolation filter of 75%.

### Publication Abstract
Controlling Rhipicephalus microplus is among the most significant challenges for livestock production worldwide. The indiscriminate use of acaricides stimulates the selection of resistant tick populations and is therefore ineffective. Understanding the molecular foundations of resistance could help inform the search for new alternatives for tick control. Although the ovary has been suggested as a relevant target organ for tick control, there are few existing studies that focus on tick ovarian tissue. Therefore, we conducted a comparative proteomic analysis on ovaries of R. microplus strains with differential resistance to ivermectin. In resistant ticks, we observed the over-accumulation of proteins involved in several biological processes, including translation, proteolysis, transport, cellular organization, differentiation, and xenobiotic detoxification. We also observed the accumulation of many structural and extracellular proteins such as papilin-like protein, which glycosylation increase its stability-based molecular modeling. Therefore, we propose that ovaries of ivermectin-resistant ticks overcome the negative impact of ivermectin through the activation of detoxification mechanisms and structural proteins associated with the remodeling of the ovary's extracellular matrix. SIGNIFICANCE: Understanding the molecular foundation of ivermectin resistance in Rhipicephalus microplus represents an essential step in cattle farming, which could provide clues and alternatives for tick control. Excessive use of chemicals like ivermectin allows the generation of resistant tick strains in different countries. However, limited molecular information is available concerning the tick's resistance to ivermectin. Detailed proteomics scrutiny in various tick organs will provide more comprehensive molecular information. Thus, we conducted an ovary comparative proteomic-based TMT-SPS-MS3 approach. We highlight in ivermectin-resistant ticks the over-accumulation of structural proteins and enzymes connected to detoxification mechanisms.

### Keywords
Proteomics; ovary; rhipicephalus microplus

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecolog'ia A.C.
Instituto de Ecología A.C.

### Submitter
Miguel Elizalde

### Lab Head
Dr Eliel Ruiz May
Instituto de Ecología A.C.


