### Accession
PXD014511

### Title
Proteome analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded colorectal adenomas reveals the heterogeneous nature of Traditional Serrated Adenoma compared to the other colorectal adenomas

### Description
Traditional serrated adenoma (TSA) remains the least understood of all the colorectal adenomas although these lesions have been associated with a significant cancer risk- twice that of the conventional adenoma (CAD) and of the sessile serrated adenoma (SSA/P).  This study was performed to investigate the proteomic profiles of the different colorectal adenomas to better assess the pathogenesis of TSA. We performed a global quantitative expression profile of 44 colorectal adenomas (12 TSA, 15 CAD, 17 SSA/Ps) and 17 normal colonic mucosa, conserved as formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples, by the label-free quantification (LFQ) method. Unsupervised consensus hierarchical clustering applied to the whole proteomic profile of the 44 colorectal adenomas identified four subtypes. The C1 and C2 were well-individualized clusters composed of most of the CAD (14/15) and most of the SSA (13/17) respectively. This is consistent with the fact that CAD and SSA/Ps are homogeneous but distinct colorectal adenoma entities. In contrast, TSA were subdivided into C3 and C4 clusters that also contained CAD and SSA/Ps, consistent with the more heterogeneous entity of TSA at the morphological and molecular levels. The comparison of the proteome expression profile between the adenoma subtypes and normal colonic mucosa further confirmed the heterogeneous nature of TSA that merged either on CAD or SSA, while CAD and TSA formed homogeneous and distinct entities. Furthermore, we identified LEFTY1 a new potential marker for TSA that may be relevant for the TSA pathogenesis. LEFTY1 is an inhibitor of the Nodal/TGFb pathway that we found to be one of the most overexpressed proteins specifically in the TSA and confirmed by immunohistochemistry.  Taken together, our study confirms that CAD and SSA form homogenous but distinct colorectal adenoma entities while TSA are an heterogeneous entity and may arise from either SSA or from normal mucosa that will evolve along the conventional adenoma pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Ten 15 µm thick sections were cut for each sample in a 1.5 mL reaction tube. Macrodissected tissue was deparaffinized through consecutive incubations. Sections were first incubated in xylene for 10 minutes with agitation at 600 r.p.m., then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 12000 r.p.m.  and supernatant was discarded. This step was repeated two times. Secondly, sections were incubated in ethanol abs. for 10 minutes with agitation at 600 r.p.m., then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 12000 r.p.m. and supernatant was discarded. This step was repeated once. Thirdly, sections were incubated in ethanol 96% for 10 minutes with agitation at 600 r.p.m., then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 12000 r.p.m. and supernatant was discarded. This step was repeated once. Finally, sections were incubated in ethanol 70% for 10 minutes with agitation at 600 rpm, then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 12000 r.p.m. and supernatant was discarded. This step was repeated once.  Protein extraction  200 µl of extraction buffer consisting of 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, TCEP 20 mM, 0.5% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 20 000 and 4% SDS was added to each sample. Samples were heated for 5 mins. Samples were sonicated using a Covaris S220 Focused Ultrasonicator at a setting of 20 W for 20 s. The resulting homogenate was heated with shaking at 650 r.p.m. for 2 h at 99 °C followed by a second series of sonication, as described above. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated with chloroacetamide (30 mM, 5 min, 95°C). Samples were then centrifuged for 15 minutes at 25000 g and supernatant was collected.  Determination of Protein Concentration A protein concentration measurement was then obtained for each sample using tryptophan fluorescence assay.  Protein Digestion and Peptide Fractionation Samples were processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol [20]. 100 µg of proteins for each sample were diluted with 200 µl Tris Urea buffer (8M Urea, 50mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and loaded on 30 kDa centrifuge device filter (Millipore). Proteins were digested employing two consecutive steps of digestion with trypsin (Promega) consiting in a 14h step at 37°C (protein to trypsin ratio 50:1) and   a 4h step at 37°C with 0.5 µg trypsin.  Peptides were then fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) resin. As previously described (Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods . 2009;6(5):359-362 )   LC−MS/MS Analysis Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a Di onex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).. One tenth of each peptide fraction was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase resin (2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 15 cm length from Dionex) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ H2O and ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile and 0.085% formic acid in milliQ H2O. Peptides were electrosprayed and the mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by MS/MS HCD fragmentations acquired with the Ion Trap on the most abundant ions detected in top speed mode for 3 seconds. Resolution was set to 60,000 for full scans at AGC target 2.0e5 within 60 ms maximum injection ion time (MIIT). The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS scan resolution was set with AGC target 2.0e4 within 100 ms MIIT. HCD Collision Energy was set at 30%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s duration.   The mass spectrometer performance was checked prior to the runs using 10ng of trypsinized whole cell extracts as a quality control. The different conditions (SSA/P, CAD, TSA and Normal samples were analyzed in an alternate order to minimize potential bias batch effects related to preparation conditions as well as possible separation drift over time.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis (see extended methods of the article for detailed methods with references) The mass spectrometry data were analyzed in a single run using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30  using Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2016_02) as a reference. Protein quantification was performed using the Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using both unique and razor peptides.  Statistical Analysis For analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were processed using the R environment for statistical computing. Imputation of the missing values was performed using the Quantile Regression for Imputation of Left-Censored missing data (QRILC) method after stringent filtering of proteins with excessive number of missing values to limit the effects due to imputation.  Differential expression Differential expression was performed using the limma package, comparing adenoma subtype (SSA, CAD, TSA) against normal colon mucosa, used as reference. Benjamini and Hochberg’s method was used to adjust P values for multiple testing. Differentially expressed proteins were deﬁned as proteins whose adjusted P value was less than 0.05.  Functional analysis of differentially expressed proteins In order to identify categories of biological processes displaying enrichment for proteins that are differentially expressed (DE) in adenomas versus normal mucosa, we used Over-Representation Analysis (ORA) with several annotation databases (KEGG, WikiPathways, Reactome, MSigDB C6 Oncogenic Signatures, Gene Ontology and HumanCyc). ORA detects enrichment in a given set of proteins (pathway members, signature of a biological process) if the proportion of differentially expressed proteins contained within that set, exceeds the proportion of proteins that could be randomly expected.  Unsupervised separation of adenoma subtypes based on protein expression profiles We used the Consensus hierarchical clustering method to estimate the number of adenoma subtypes without using assumptions derived from prior knowledge of the samples class labels.   Biomarker selection Models for adenoma subtype classiﬁcation (SSA vs TSA vs CAD) were trained using Random Forest (RF) classification methods. In this supervised multiclass learning approach, cases with known labels (adenoma subtypes) are used to extract rules from the data, depending on the quality of class discrimination using the protein expression profiles. Alternatively we conducted feature selection for the most relevant discriminant proteins using Support Vector Machines models via the Multiclass SVM Recursive Feature Extraction (SVM-RFE) function of the OmicsMarkeR package. Finally we ranked the proteins according to the p-values computed from the Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) statistical technique. Ultimately, the top 200 candidate biomarkers identiﬁed in all three models (RF, SVM-RFE and SAM) were aggregated using a rank aggregation method to produce a consensus top 100 biomarker list.

### Publication Abstract
Traditional serrated adenoma (TSA) remains the least understood of all the colorectal adenomas, although these lesions have been associated with a significant cancer risk, twice that of the conventional adenoma (CAD) and of the sessile serrated adenoma (SSA/P). This study was performed to investigate the proteomic profiles of the different colorectal adenomas to better understand the pathogenesis of TSA. We performed a global quantitative proteome analysis using the label-free quantification (LFQ) method on 44 colorectal adenoma (12 TSAs, 15 CADs, and 17 SSA/Ps) and 17 normal colonic mucosa samples, archived as formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded blocks. Unsupervised consensus hierarchical clustering applied to the whole proteomic profile of the 44 colorectal adenomas identified four subtypes: C1 and C2 were well-individualized clusters composed of all the CADs (15/15) and most of the SSA/Ps (13/17), respectively. This is consistent with the fact that CADs and SSA/Ps are homogeneous and distinct colorectal adenoma entities. In contrast, TSAs were subdivided into C3 and C4 clusters, consistent with the more heterogeneous entity of TSA at the morphologic and molecular levels. Comparison of the proteome expression profile between the adenoma subtypes and normal colonic mucosa further confirmed the heterogeneous nature of TSAs, which overlapped either on CADs or SSA/Ps, whereas CADs and SSAs formed homogeneous and distinct entities. Furthermore, we identified LEFTY1 a new potential marker for TSAs that may be relevant for the pathogenesis of TSA. LEFTY1 is an inhibitor of the Nodal/TGF&#x3b2; pathway, which we found to be one of the most overexpressed proteins specifically in TSAs. This finding was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Our study confirms that CADs and SSA/Ps form homogeneous and distinct colorectal adenoma entities, whereas TSAs are a heterogeneous entity and may arise from either SSA/Ps or from normal mucosa evolving through a process related to the CAD pathway. &#xa9; 2019 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

### Keywords
Colon adenoma; label free quantification; proteomics; formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded; ffpe; sessile serrated adenoma; traditional serrated adenoma; orbitrap fusion;

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, Paris, France INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, F-75014 Paris, France. CNRS, UMR8104, F-75014 Paris, France.
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christine Perret
Université de Paris, Paris, France INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, F-75014 Paris, France. CNRS, UMR8104, F-75014 Paris, France.


