### Accession
PXD018641

### Title
Nascent RNA antagonises the interaction of regulatory proteins with chromatin

### Description
Using label-free quantification to identify the changes in the association of proteins with chromatin upon RNA degradation in cells with RNaseA.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse ES cells were permeablised and treated either with PBS or RNaseA. Chromatin fractions were purified and then loaded onto a pre-cast SDS-PAGE gel until fully resolved. Each lane was excised into 5 sections (with the same section from different samples encompassing proteins of similar molecular weight) and diced into 1 mm3 pieces. Proteins were subject to in-gel tryptic digestion at 37°C for 4 h then overnight at room temperature. After digestion, peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and water washes. Samples were evaporated to dryness at 30°C and resolubilised in 0.1% formic acid. nLC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap Plus interfaced to a NANOSPRAY FLEX ion source and coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific). Thirty five percent of each sample was analysed as 7 µL injections. Peptides were separated on a 24 cm fused silica emitter, 75 μm diameter, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 200 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) over 120 min using a linear gradient of 95:5 to 70:30 buffer A:B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid), at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by electrospray ionisation using 1.8 kV applied immediately prior to the analytical column via a microtee built into the nanospray source with the ion transfer tube heated to 320°C and the S-lens set to 60%. Precursor ions were measured in a data-dependent mode in the orbitrap analyser at a resolution of 70,000 and a target value of 3e6 ions. The ten most intense ions from each MS1 scan were isolated, fragmented in the HCD cell, and measured in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant1 version 1.5.2.8 where they were searched against the mouse UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/, downloaded 14/06/2012 using default settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. To ensure high confidence identifications, PSMs, peptides, and proteins were filtered at a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Label-free quantification in MaxQuant was used with a match time window of 0.7 min, an alignment time window of 20 min to quantify the proteins with the ‘match between runs’ feature selected. For statistical protein quantification analysis, the ‘proteinGroups.txt’ and ‘evidence.txt’ output files from MaxQuant were loaded into the MSstats quantification package2 (version 3.14.0) run through RStudio (version 1.1.456, R version 3.5.1). Contaminants and reverse sequences were removed and data was log2 transformed. To find differential abundant proteins across conditions, significance analysis consisting of fitting a statistical model and performing model-based comparison of conditions. The group comparison function was employed to test for differential abundance between conditions. p values were adjusted to control for the false discovery rate using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
A number of regulatory factors are recruited to chromatin by specialized RNAs. Whether RNA has a more general role in regulating the interaction of proteins with chromatin has not been determined. We used proteomics methods to measure the global impact of nascent RNA on chromatin in embryonic stem cells. Surprisingly, we found that nascent RNA primarily antagonized the interaction of chromatin modifiers and transcriptional regulators with chromatin. Transcriptional inhibition and RNA degradation induced recruitment of a set of transcriptional regulators, chromatin modifiers, nucleosome remodelers, and regulators of higher-order structure. RNA directly bound to factors, including BAF, NuRD, EHMT1, and INO80 and inhibited their interaction with nucleosomes. The transcriptional elongation factor P-TEFb directly bound pre-mRNA, and its recruitment to chromatin upon Pol II inhibition was regulated by the 7SK ribonucleoprotein complex. We postulate that by antagonizing the interaction of regulatory proteins with chromatin, nascent RNA links transcriptional output with chromatin composition.

### Keywords
Mouse chromatin chromatome lc-msms

### Affiliations
Proteomic Research Translational Technology Platform, University College London Cancer Institute London UK
UCL

### Submitter
Silvia Surinova

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Surinova
Proteomic Research Translational Technology Platform, University College London Cancer Institute London UK


