### Accession
PXD007681

### Title
Evaluation of the MPA Portable software performance on analyzing benchmark datasets

### Description
Within the scope of a technical note we tested our MetaProteomeAnalyzer Portable software workflow on experimental data sets from samples with known composition. For generating a benchmarking data set, the bacterial strains (5BCT) Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Micrococcus luteus and Desulfovibrio vulgaris were mixed with a protein ratio of 1:1:1:1:1.

### Sample Protocol
Pure cultures of Bacillus subtilis (DSM No. 10), Escherichia coli (DSM No. 498), Pseudomonas fluorescens (DSM No. 50090), Micrococcus luteus (DSM No. 20030), and Desulfovibrio vulgaris (DSM No. 644) were cultivated as recommended by DSMZ. Cells were lysed by beat beating, cell debris was depleted by centrifugation, and protein content of the resulting supernatant was quantified using Lowry protein assay. According to protein quantification, a 1:1:1:1:1 ratio was set up containing mixtures of all five microorganisms. Triplicates of each set, containing 50 µg of total protein, were submitted to proteolytic digest using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) following the protocol of Wiśniewski et al 2009. Peptide extracts were dried and resuspended in 11 µL chromatographic liquid loading phase from which 5 µL were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC system, applied solvents and gradients, as well as technical details of the used MS and its parameter settings were described by Kohrs et al. 2015.

### Data Protocol
Recorded spectra were exported as Mascot Generic Format using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), which were subsequently imported by the MPA Portable to perform protein identification. Therefore, the search engine MS-GF+ was used along with 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics, the mass spectrometry-based analysis of proteins from multispecies samples faces severe challenges concerning data analysis and results interpretation. To overcome these shortcomings, we here introduce the MetaProteomeAnalyzer (MPA) Portable software. In contrast to the original server-based MPA application, this newly developed tool no longer requires computational expertise for installation and is now independent of any relational database system. In addition, MPA Portable now supports state-of-the-art database search engines and a convenient command line interface for high-performance data processing tasks. While search engine results can easily be combined to increase the protein identification yield, an additional two-step workflow is implemented to provide sufficient analysis resolution for further postprocessing steps, such as protein grouping as well as taxonomic and functional annotation. Our new application has been developed with a focus on intuitive usability, adherence to data standards, and adaptation to Web-based workflow platforms. The open source software package can be found at https://github.com/compomics/meta-proteome-analyzer .

### Keywords
Protein identification, Metaproteomics, Data visualization, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Bioprocess Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Bioprocess Engineering, Magdeburg, Germany.
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Germany

### Submitter
Fabian Kohrs

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Dirk Benndorf
Bioprocess Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Bioprocess Engineering, Magdeburg, Germany.


