### Accession
PXD018832

### Title
Primary myeloid cell proteomics and transcriptomics: importance of β-tubulin isotypes for osteoclast function

### Description
Among hematopoietic cells, osteoclasts (Oc) and immature dendritic cells (Dc) are closely related myeloid cells with distinct functions; Oc participate skeleton maintenance while Dc sample the environment for foreign antigens. Such specificities rely on profound modifications of gene and protein expression during Oc and Dc differentiation. We provide global proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of primary mouse Oc and Dc, based on original SILAC and RNAseq data. We established specific signatures for Oc and Dc including genes and proteins of unknown functions. In particular, we showed that Oc and Dc have the same alpha and beta tubulin isotypes repertoire but that Oc express much more beta tubulin isotype Tubb6 (also known as Tubulin beta class V). In both mouse and human Oc, we demonstrate that elevated expression of Tubb6 in Oc is necessary for correct podosomes organization and thus for the structure of the sealing zone, which sustains the bone resorption apparatus. Hence, lowering Tubb6 expression hindered Oc resorption activity. Overall, we highlight here potential new regulators of Oc and Dc biology and illustrate the functional importance of the tubulin isotype repertoire in the biology of differentiated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow cells were extracted from long bones of C57BL/6J mice 6 to 8 weeks of age and cultured in α-minimal essential medium (α-MEM, Lonza) containing 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, BioWest), heat inactivated at 56°C for 30 minutes, 2 mM glutamine (Lonza) and 100 U/mL penicillin and streptomycin (Lonza), 3 x 107 cells per 150 mm dishes at 37°C, 5.5% CO2, in a humidified incubation for 24 hours. Non-adherent cells were then collected and used to differentiate the three myeloid cell types and prepare samples for stable isotope labeling by amino acids (SILAC). For bone marrow macrophages (Mo) and osteoclasts (Oc), non-adherent cells were then plated 5 x 106 cells per 10-cm plate in the same medium containing 100 ng/ml Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF, Miltenyi) for 5 days. Cells were then detached using Accutase (SIGMA), washed in PBS and resuspended in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium: SILAC RPMI 1640 (Lonza) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Life Technologies), 2.4 mM L-Prolin (SIGMA), 2 mM glutamine (Lonza) and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (Lonza). For Mo SILAC sample preparation, cells were then plated 0.8 x 105 cell per well in 24 well plates in RPMI medium supplemented with 30 ng/ml M-CSF and with the L-enantiomers amino acids Lys (0.4 mM) and Arg (0.8 mM) (SIGMA) non-isotope-labeled (L amino acids). For Oc SILAC samples, L amino acids were substituted for the same concentrations of heavy isotope–labeled (H) amino acids 13C6-15N2 L-Lys:2HCl and 13C6-15N4 L-Arg (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). For immature dendritic cells (Dc), cells were plated 4x105 cells per well in 24 well plates in RPMI medium supplemented with 20 ng/ml Granulocyte Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF, Miltenyi) and with non-labeled amino acids as above. For Dc SILAC sample preparation, L amino acids were substituted for the same concentrations of intermediate isotope–labeled (M) amino acids 4,4,5,5-D4 L-Lys:2HCl and 13C6 L-Arg (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). All media were changed every other day for 8 to 10 days. In these conditions, H and M amino acid incorporation in Oc and Dc respectively was over 95% and the Arg to Pro conversion rate was below 0.4%. Following differentiation, Oc cultures were incubated with 120 µl per well Accutase (SIGMA), for a few minutes to remove mono-nucleated cells. Then all cultures were rinsed once with PBS and processed for protein or RNA extraction. For SILAC samples, cells were lysed in 8M urea (SIGMA) and 10 mM HEPES (SIGMA), pH 8.0, 12 wells per cell type in a total of 400 µl. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 2 minutes; protein concentration was determined using BCA reagent (ThermoFisher), protein concentration was around 25 µg/mL per sample. Lysates were stored at -80°C until SILAC proteomic analysis. For each SILAC analysis, Oc, Dc and Mo protein samples derived from the same mouse, the experiment was done in triplicate with three independent mouse bone marrow extractions. Within each of the 3 replicate SILAC experiments, equal amounts of Oc and Mo or Oc and Dc or Dc and Mo proteins were mixed, leading to a total of 9 samples that were processed in parallel. All MS grade reagent were from Thermo Fisher Scientific, grade Optima. For each sample, a total of 10 µg of proteins were digested with 0.5 µg LysC (Wako) in 600 µl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 30°C. Then samples were diluted 3 times in the buffer and 1 µg trypsin (Gold, Promega) was added overnight at 30°C. Peptides were then desalted using OMIX (Agilent) and analyzed online by nano-flow HPLC-nanoelectrospray ionization using a Qexactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano- LC system (U3000-RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and preconcentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® precolumn (0.3 × 10 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). A gradient consisting of 0–40% B in A for 120 min (A: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water, and B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min, was used to elute peptides from the capillary reverse-phase column (0.075 × 500 mm, Pepmap®, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were acquired using the Xcalibur 4.0 software. A cycle of one full-scan mass spectrum (375–1,500m/z) at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS spectra (at a resolution of 30,000, isolation window 1.2 m/z) was repeated continuously throughout the nanoLC separation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) with standard settings. Used database consist of mouse entries from UniProt (reference proteome UniProt 2016_11), 250 contaminants (MaxQuant contaminant database) and corresponding reverse entries. Each protein identified was associated to the corresponding gene in Mus musculus genome GRCm38. Relative proteins quantifications were calculated on the median SILAC ratios to determine log2 fold changes.

### Publication Abstract
Among hematopoietic cells, osteoclasts (OCs) and immature dendritic cells (DCs) are closely related myeloid cells with distinct functions: OCs participate skeleton maintenance while DCs sample the environment for foreign antigens. Such specificities rely on profound modifications of gene and protein expression during OC and DC differentiation. We provide global proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of primary mouse OCs and DCs, based on original stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and RNAseq data. We established specific signatures for OCs and DCs, including genes and proteins of unknown functions. In particular, we showed that OCs and DCs have the same &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-tubulin isotype repertoire but that OCs express much more of the &#x3b2; tubulin isotype Tubb6 (also known as TBB6). In both mouse and human OCs, we demonstrate that elevated expression of Tubb6 in OCs is necessary for correct podosomes organization and thus for the structure of the sealing zone, which sustains the bone resorption apparatus. Hence, lowering Tubb6 expression hinders OC resorption activity. Overall, we highlight here potential new regulators of OC and DC biology, and illustrate the functional importance of the tubulin isotype repertoire in the biology of differentiated cells.

### Keywords
Tubulin beta class v, Tubb6, Rnaseq, Tubulin, Silac, Osteoclast, Myeloid cell

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche en Biologie cellulaire de Montpellier (CRBM), CNRS UMR 5237, Montpellier University, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Blangy
Centre de Recherche en Biologie cellulaire de Montpellier (CRBM), CNRS UMR 5237, Montpellier University, France


