### Accession
PXD014436

### Title
Conserved GTPase LepA (Elongation Factor 4) functions in biogenesis of the 30S subunit of the 70S ribosome

### Description
The physiological role of LepA, a paralog of EF-G found in all bacteria, has been a mystery for decades. Here, we show that LepA functions in ribosome biogenesis. In cells lacking LepA, immature 30S particles accumulate. Four proteins are specifically underrepresented in these particles-S3, S10, S14, and S21-all of which bind late in the assembly process and contribute to the folding of the 3' domain of 16S rRNA. Processing of 16S rRNA is also delayed in the mutant strain, as indicated by increased levels of precursor 17S rRNA in assembly intermediates. Mutation ΔlepA confers a synthetic growth phenotype in absence of RsgA, another GTPase, well known to act in 30S subunit assembly. Analysis of the ΔrsgA strain reveals accumulation of intermediates that resemble those seen in the absence of LepA. These data suggest that RsgA and LepA play partially redundant roles to ensure efficient 30S assembly.  This data is published in paper PMID: 28096346

### Sample Protocol
This data is published in paper PMID: 28096346  Gibbs et al. PNAS 2017 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1613665114

### Data Protocol
This data is published in paper PMID: 28096346  Gibbs et al. PNAS 2017 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1613665114

### Publication Abstract
The physiological role of LepA, a paralog of EF-G found in all bacteria, has been a mystery for decades. Here, we show that LepA functions in ribosome biogenesis. In cells lacking LepA, immature 30S particles accumulate. Four proteins are specifically underrepresented in these particles-S3, S10, S14, and S21-all of which bind late in the assembly process and contribute to the folding of the 3' domain of 16S rRNA. Processing of 16S rRNA is also delayed in the mutant strain, as indicated by increased levels of precursor 17S rRNA in assembly intermediates. Mutation &#x394;lepA confers a synthetic growth phenotype in absence of RsgA, another GTPase, well known to act in 30S subunit assembly. Analysis of the &#x394;rsgA strain reveals accumulation of intermediates that resemble those seen in the absence of LepA. These data suggest that RsgA and LepA play partially redundant roles to ensure efficient 30S assembly.

### Keywords
Ef4; rsga; yjeq; protein synthesis; translation

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada


