### Accession
PXD009952

### Title
Maximally-multiplexed proteome quantification platform for isotopic metabolic and chemical labeling

### Description
Quantitative proteomic platforms based on precursor intensity in mass spectrometry (MS1-level) uniquely support in vivo metabolic labeling with superior quantification accuracy but suffers from limited multiplexity (≤3-plex) and frequent missing quantities. Herein, we present a maximally-multiplexed MS1-level quantification platform that comprises new six-plex in vivo SILAC or in vitro di-ethylation with a dedicated algorithm. We demonstrate accurate and missing quantity-free quantification of highly complex samples with broad dynamic ranges. With our  platform, we globally profile the proteome dynamics under the heat shock response of HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Six-plexed SILAC media preparation and HeLa cell culture For six-plexed SILAC, lysine and arginine deficient DMEM (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium, Thermo Fisher) was used with supplement of isotopically distinct L-lysine:2HCl (K, 0.80 mM) and L-arginine:HCl (R, 0.40 mM) for 6 individual SILAC channels (Supplementary Fig. S2) . The detail ingredients of each SILAC channel are described as follows; light K and R from Cambridge Isotopes Laboratory (CIL) for channel 1, K-15N2 (NLM-1554, CIL) and R-15N2 (NLM-395, CIL) for channel 2, K-D4 (NLM-2640, CIL) and R-15N4 (NLM-396, CIL) for channel 3, K-13C6 (CLM-2247, CIL) and R-D7 (DLM-541, CIL) for channel 4, K-D8 (DLM-2641, CIL) and R-D715N2 (in-house synthesized, see Supplementary Experiment Note) for channel 5, and K-D9 (DNLM-7545, CIL) and R-D715N4 (DNLM-7543, CIL) for channel 6. After supplementing the appropriate lysine and arginine isotopologues, Each customized SILAC medium was filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane (Merck) before adding dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS) to be 10 % (v/v). HeLa cell line from ATCC was cultured without antibiotics in the customized DMEM media to > 5 cell cycle passages. The normal DMEM (Welgene) containing 10 % FBS was used for HeLa cell culture as well, which cells were used for other labeling experiments. Six-plexed di-ethylation (DE) of tryptic peptides  De-salted tryptic peptide samples were subject to reductive di-ethylation using acetaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride isotopologues. Only deuterated isotopologues were used for DE-6plex labeling, i.e., acetaldehyde-1-d1 (CH3CDO), acetaldehyde-2,2,2-d3 (CD3CHO), acetaldehyde-1,2,2,2-d4 (CD3CDO), and sodium cyanoborodeuteride (NaBD3CN) all from CDN isotopes. The DE-6plex labeling was carried using the following reagent combinations: acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) and NaBH3CN for channel 1, CH3CDO and NaBH3CN for channel 2, CH3CDO and NaBD3CN for channel 3, CD3CHO and NaBH3CN for channel 4, CD3CDO and NaBH3CN for channel 5, and CD3CDO and NaBD3CN for channel 6 (Supplementary Fig. S3). In detail, the lyophilized peptides (30 µg) were dissolved in 100 µL of 100 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.5) and followed by addition of individual di-ethylating reagents for each channel to be 500 mM acetaldehyde form and 250 mM sodium cyanoborohydride form with 2 hr of mild vortexing at room temperature (RT). The identical di-ethylation procedure was carried again to reach quantitative labeling efficiency (> 97 %), and finally followed by quenching with 1 M ABC buffer. The labeled samples were mixed together with various desired input ratios for LC-MS/MS and further cleaned up using C18 cartridge column.  LC-MS/MS analysis of labeled HeLa samples LC-MS/MS analysis of the labeled samples was carried by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid or Q-Exactive Classic mass spectrometer coupled with Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography), which was equipped with an in-house packed trap (150 μm i.d. x 3 cm) and analytical column (75 μm i.d. x 100 cm) using 3 μm of Jupiter C18 particle (Phenomenex). A linear gradient of solvent A (water with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (ACN with 0.1% formic acid) was applied at a flow rate 350 nL/min as follows: 1) as for DE-6plex samples, 5 to 10 % solvent B for initial 5 min, 10 to 30 % solvent B for next 90 min, and 30 to 40 % for final 20 min 2) as for SILAC-6plex, 5 to 10 % solvent B for initial 5 min, 10 to 30 % solvent B for next 100 min, and 30 to 40 % for final 10 min. Full MS scans (m/z 300 – 1,500) were acquired at a resolution of 60k (or 70k) at m/z 200 with 5E5 (or 1E6) of AGC target value and 50 ms (or 20 ms) of ITmax for Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (or Q-Exactive, respectively). Precursor ions with charge 2-7 were subject to HCD fragmentation under 30 % (or 27 % for Q-Exactive) of NCE via precursor isolation within 1.6 Th of window. The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15k (or 17.5k) at m/z 200 with 30 ms (or 60ms) of ITmax and 3E4 (or 1E6) of AGC for for Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (or Q-Exactive, respectively). Dynamic exclusion value was set to 30 sec. 1 sec cycle time and top-12 setting were used for Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and Q-Exactive, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Used proteome databases for EPIQ (*.fasta files) For all sample analyses, UniProt reference proteome UP000005640 (last modified on March 15, 2019) was used. Canonical and isoform sequence of all reviewed (SwissProt) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins were downloaded. For the downloaded database, the cRAP (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins) protein sequences version 2012.01.01 (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html) were firstly appended to remove common contaminant proteins. Decoy sequences were generated by reversing target protein sequences and further concatenated to the target proteome database to estimate FDR. After the searches using MS-GF+, the spectra matched to cRAP sequences are removed before further analysis.  EPIQ parameters The search tolerance and quantification tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively. For MS-GF+ search, we set carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. For DE-6plex datasets, the label mass shifts were set at N-terminus of peptide and lysine residue to +56.06260, +58.07515, +60.08771, +62.10026, +64.11281, and +66.12537 from channel 1 to channel 6, respectively. As for SILAC-6plex datasets, the respective label mass shifts of arginine (R) and lysine (K) were assigned as follows; R+0.0/K+0.0 for channel 1, R+1.99407/K+1.99407 for channel 2, R+3.98814/K+4.02511 for channel 3, R+7.04394/K+6.02013 for channel 4, R+9.03801/K+8.05021 for channel 5, and R+11.03208/K+11.05056 for channel 6. For all analyses, we enforced 1% PSM and protein-level FDR threshold (estimated as recommended in {Jeong, 2012 #1101} and {Carr, 2004 #1125}). Each PSM is assigned to a single protein group (see Supplementary Algorithm Notes), and the protein groups with less than two matched/quantified PSMs were removed. The SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) thresholds for peptide/protein quantification were set to 2.  Label impurity bias correction parameters for EPIQ PSM quantities were corrected for label impurity bias by procedures described in Supplementary Algorithm Notes. For label impurity correction of DE-6plex multidimensional analysis (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. S6b), -1 Da isotope abundance ratio of 0%, 1.7%, 4.6%, 8.4%, 6.9%, 9.7% (channel 1 to channel 6) were applied to correct label impurity bias. For DE-6plex DEP analysis (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. S7a), 0%, 1.8%, 4.3%, 8.4%, 5.3%, 7.9% were used. For SILAC-6plex, label impurity of arginine and lysine were set separately. -1 Da isotope abundance ratio of 0%, 4.2%, 4.7%, 12.7%, 9.1%, 10.4% and 0%, 2.8%, 7.0%, 4.6%, 3.4%, 12% were used for arginine and lysine, respectively.  Label incorporation rate bias correction parameters for EPIQ For each SILAC-6plex PSM quantity, label incorporation rate bias was corrected as described in Supplementary Algorithm Notes. Per each arginine, quantity correction was done with following incorporation rates: 100%, 98.7%, 99.1%, 99.2%, 98.7%, 99.4% (channel 1 to channel 6). Per each lysine, PSM quantity correction with incorporation rates 100%, 99.5%, 99.7%, 99.7%, 99.5%, 99.4% (channel 1 to channel 6) was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomic platforms based on precursor intensity in mass spectrometry (MS1-level) uniquely support <i>in vivo</i> metabolic labeling with superior quantification accuracy but suffer from limited multiplexity (&#x2264;3-plex) and frequent missing quantities. Here we present a new MS1-level quantification platform that allows maximal multiplexing with high quantification accuracy and precision for the given labeling scheme. The platform currently comprises 6-plex <i>in vivo</i> SILAC or <i>in vitro</i> diethylation labeling with a dedicated algorithm and is also expandable to higher multiplexity (e.g., nine-plex for SILAC). For complex samples with broad dynamic ranges such as total cell lysates, our platform performs highly accurately and free of missing quantities. Furthermore, we successfully applied our method to measure protein synthesis rate under heat shock response in human cells by 6-plex pulsed SILAC experiments, demonstrating the unique biological merits of our <i>in vivo</i> platform to disclose translational regulations for cellular response to stress.

### Keywords
Diethylation, Quantification, De-6plex, Silac-6plex, Heat shock response, Silac, Protein quantification, Hela cell, Heat shock

### Affiliations
Seoul National University
Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 08826, Korea School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea

### Submitter
Yeon Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Seo Kim
Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 08826, Korea School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea


