### Accession
PXD021498

### Title
Evidence for long-distance trade in exotic foods and spices from South Asia to the Near East in the 2nd millennium BCE

### Description
Although the key role of long-distance trade in the transformation of cuisines worldwide has been well-documented since at least the Roman era, the prehistory of the Eurasian food trade is less visible. In order to shed light on the transformation of Eastern Mediterranean cuisines during the Bronze and Early Iron Age, we analyzed microremains and proteins preserved in the dental calculus of individuals who lived during the 2nd millennium BCE in the Southern Levant. Our results provide clear evidence for the consumption of expected staple foods, such as cereals (Triticeae), sesame (Sesamum) and dates (Phoenix). We additionally report evidence for the consumption of soybean (Glycine), probable banana (Musa), and turmeric (Curcuma), which pushes back the earliest known availability of these foods in the Mediterranean by centuries (turmeric) or even millennia (soybean). We find that, from the early 2nd millennium onwards, at least some people in the Eastern Mediterranean had access to food from distant locations, including South Asia, and such trade goods likely reached the Eastern Mediterranean in the form of oils, dried fruits, and spices. These novel insights force us to rethink the complexity and intensity of Indo-Mediterranean trade during the Bronze Age and also the degree of globalization in early Eastern Mediterranean cuisine.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic extractions were performed at the Department of Archaeogenetics in the ancient protein clean lab at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. Protein extractions were performed on 14 dental calculus samples following 5 days of decalcification in 0.5M EDTA. Samples were extracted and digested using a low volume filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) modified for ancient protein recovery from dental calculus. (Protocols.io). Extracted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters AG, Baden-Dättwil, Switzerland) at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich of the University/ETH Zurich according to previously described protocols by Jeong et al. (2018). Potential contamination and sample carryover was monitored through the use of extraction blanks as well as injection blanks between each sample.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were converted to Mascot generic files by MSConvert version 3.0.11781 using the 100 most intense peaks in each spectra. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt Release 2019_08 database (560,823 entries) and Uniprot Trembl 2017_07 (88,032,926 sequences), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine and proline were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at a protein FDR of less than 3.0%, a peptide FDR of less than 1%, and contained at least 2 unique identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Dietary proteins were only accepted at a 95% or higher protein probability. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dental calculus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History Department of Archaeogenetics
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Ashley Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Warinner
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History Department of Archaeogenetics


