### Accession
PXD037544

### Title
Liver proteome of red deer (Cervus elaphus) infected by liver fluke Fascioloides magna

### Description
The aim of the current study was to analyse differences in liver proteomes between F. magna infected and control, apparently healthy, red deer using a label-based high- throughput quantitative proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples from red deer were collected immediately after the individual or driven, following the regular hunting operations. In total, 25 animals were sampled, including 12 animals which served as a control group and 13 animals from the area where fascioloidosis is established. Cold cut frozen liver samples (50 mg), taken from the unaffected part of the liver, were homogenized in 300 µL of lysis buffer (2% SDS in 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA)) using an Omni TH220 homogenizer (Omni International, Kennesaw, USA), followed by 2 cycles of sonication at maximum amplitude (Qsonica, Newtown, USA) on ice. After centrifugation (16 000 x g, 4 ºC, 20 min), total protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). Protein extracts were processed using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with some modifications (Wiśniewski, Zougman et al. 2009) . In brief, for each sample, an amount of 35 μg of total proteins was diluted to a volume of 200 μL with urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5), transferred to the 10-kDa membrane filter units (Microcon YM-10, Merck Millipore), centrifuged (13 000 x g, 20 min, 20 °C) and washed subsequently with 100 μL of urea buffer. Proteins were alkylated (50 mM IAA, 20 min at room temperature in the dark), washed twice with urea buffer, twice with TEAB (100 mM pH 8.5), and digested by trypsin gold (Promega, enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:35, v/v, at 37 °C overnight). Peptides were then eluted from the filter by centrifugation and washed with 50 μL of TEAB/ACN (1:1, v/v). TMT 6plex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were prepared according to manufacturer&#39;s procedure. An amount of 19 μl of specific TMT  label was added to each sample for labelling (60 min, room temperature), quenched (15 min, room temperature) using 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Five TMT-modified samples were randomly combined with the labelled internal standard, aliquoted, dried and proceeded with LC-MS/MS analysis. For internal standard, pool of all samples were used, prepared in the same way and at the same time as all the samples.High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm), desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 55% to 95% for 1 min, held at 95% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1×10 6 , a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×10 5 . Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Cervidae FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot database on July 9 th 2021, 105,671 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was set at 1% FDR. At least two unique peptides was required for reporting confidently identified proteins. Protein quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem  mass spectra to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard was used to compare relative quantification results between different sixplexes.

### Publication Abstract
Liver fluke infections are recognised as diseases with worldwide distribution and considerable veterinary and public health importance. The giant liver fluke, <i>Fascioloides magna</i>, is an important non-native parasite which has been introduced to Europe, posing a threat to the survival of local wildlife populations such as red deer (<i>Cervus elaphus</i>). The aim of the study was to analyse differences in liver proteomes between <i>F. magna</i>-infected and control red deer groups using a label-based high-throughput quantitative proteomics approach. The proteomics analysis identified 234 proteins with differential abundance between the control and infected groups. Our findings showed that <i>F. magna</i> infection in this definitive host is associated with changes in the metabolism of proteins and fatty acids, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and signaling pathways. The identified proteins and associated biological pathways represent a valuable contribution to the understanding of host-parasite interactions and the pathogenesis of liver fluke infection.

### Keywords
Wildlife, Proteomics, Liver fluke, Tmt, Zoonosis

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


