### Accession
PXD023088

### Title
Nucleolin is a cell surface receptor of C1QTNF4

### Description
C1QTNF4 is a secreted protein that is structurally unique within the C1QTNF family, a family of proteins that have structural homology with both complement C1q and the tumor necrosis factor superfamily. The role of C1QTNF4 in immunity and inflammation remains poorly defined and a cell surface receptor has yet to be identified. Here we performed co-immunoprecipitation with subsequent mass spectrometric analysis in order to identify a cell surface receptor of C1QTNF4. We report identification of nucleolin as a cell surface binding partner of C1QTNF4. Nucleolin may serve as a docking molecule for C1QTNF4 and act in a context-dependent manner through co-receptors. Having identified nucleolin as a cell surface receptor is a further step to understanding C1QTNF4’s function in the healthy immune system.

### Sample Protocol
A neuroblastoma cell line was used for receptor identification, with exogenously added GFP-C1QTNF4 as bait. Immunoprecipitation was performed with GFP-Trap agarose and samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. In-gel reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin were performed on excised gel bands. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by a series of acetonitrile and aqueous washes prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operating under Xcalibur v4.1.5.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 and the data searched against the Human Taxonomy Uniprot database using the Mascot v2.6.0 and Sequest search algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
The C1q and TNF related 4 (C1QTNF4) protein is a structurally unique member of the C1QTNF family, a family of secreted proteins that have structural homology with both complement C1q and the tumor necrosis factor superfamily. C1QTNF4 has been linked to the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus through genetic studies; however, its role in immunity and inflammation remains poorly defined and a cell surface receptor of C1QTNF4 has yet to be identified. Here we report identification of nucleolin as a cell surface receptor of C1QTNF4 using mass spectrometric analysis. Additionally, we present evidence that the interaction between C1QTNF4 and nucleolin is mediated by the second C1q-like domain of C1QTNF4 and the C terminus of nucleolin. We show that monocytes and B cells are target cells of C1QTNF4 and observe extensive binding to dead cells. Imaging flow cytometry experiments in monocytes show that C1QTNF4 becomes actively internalized upon cell binding. Our results suggest that nucleolin may serve as a docking molecule for C1QTNF4 and act in a context-dependent manner through coreceptors. Taken together, these findings further our understanding of C1QTNF4's function in the healthy immune system and how dysfunction may contribute to the development of systemic lupus erythematosus.

### Keywords
Ctrp4, Systemic lupus erythematosus, Monocyte, Cell surface receptor, C1qtnf4, Innate immunity, Autoimmune disease, Inflammation, Nucleolin

### Affiliations
King's College London
Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King’s College London, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Susan Vester

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy J Vyse
Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, King’s College London, United Kingdom


