### Accession
PXD003162

### Title
Shotgun Proteomics of BN-PAGE-Resolved Chloroplasts

### Description
Blue Native-PAGE resolves protein complexes in their native state. When coupled with immunoblotting, it can be used to identify the presence of high molecular weight complexes at high resolution for any protein, given a suitable antibody. To identify proteins in high molecular weight complexes on a large-scale and to bypass the requirement for specific antibodies, we applied a tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) approach to BN-PAGE-resolved chloroplasts. Fractionation of wild-type chloroplasts into 6 bands allowed identification and label-free quantification of 1000 chloroplast proteins with native molecular weight resolution. Significantly, our approach achieves a depth of identification comparable to traditional shotgun proteomic analyses of chloroplasts, indicating much of the known chloroplast proteome is amenable to our ‘mass western’ approach to BN-PAGE. The coupling of BN-PAGE to MS/MS allows for a large-scale comparison of protein complexes between samples and the identification of proteins in high molecular weight complexes. In parallel we have analyzed chloroplasts from a leaf reticulate mutant (re-6) to demonstrate the possibility for comparative analyses. Our results provide a useful resource for the chloroplast community and this strategy is anticipated to be widely adaptable to other sub-cellular compartments.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated chloroplasts were solubilized in Dodecyl-B-D-Maltoside and separated by BN-PAGE. Each gel lane was divided into 6 bands of increasing native molecular weight, subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin, and analyzed by tandem-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Thermo .Raw files were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.3.30, providing a full suite of algorithms for processing of MS/MS Raw files, including feature detection, database searching, and label-free quantification. Peak lists were searched with the embedded Andromeda search engine against a concatenated forward and reverse database comprising the TAIR10 full peptide dataset (35386 unique protein entries downloaded from ‘www.arabidopsis.org’) plus the common contaminant list appended by MaxQuant.  Wild-type samples (quadruplicate) and re-6 samples (triplicate) were analyzed independently. Each LC-MS/MS run was analyzed as a separate experiment and the ‘Match Between Runs’ option was disabled. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.1. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensity was determined as the total sum of the peak intensity of Unique and Razor peptides with ‘Fast LFQ’ deselected. Filtering of resulting protein groups was manually performed by discarding those with a MaxQuant score below that of the first decoy protein ID. In this way the estimated protein FDR was 0%. Contaminant proteins were subsequently discarded, resulting in a final protein list of 1000 chloroplast proteins identified across the WTand re-6 replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Blue native-PAGE (BN-PAGE) resolves protein complexes in their native state. When combined with immunoblotting, it can be used to identify the presence of high molecular weight complexes at high resolution for any protein, given a suitable antibody. To identify proteins in high molecular weight complexes on a large scale and to bypass the requirement for specific antibodies, we applied a tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) approach to BN-PAGE-resolved chloroplasts. Fractionation of the gel into six bands allowed identification and label-free quantification of 1000 chloroplast proteins with native molecular weight separation. Significantly, this approach achieves a depth of identification comparable with traditional shotgun proteomic analyses of chloroplasts, indicating much of the known chloroplast proteome is amenable to MS/MS identification under our fractionation scheme. By limiting the number of fractionation bands to six, we facilitate scaled-up comparative analyses, as we demonstrate with the reticulata chloroplast mutant displaying a reticulated leaf phenotype. Our comparative proteomics approach identified a candidate interacting protein of RETICULATA as well as effects on lipid remodeling proteins, amino acid metabolic enzymes, and plastid division machinery. We additionally highlight selected proteins from each sub-compartment of the chloroplast that provide novel insight on known or hypothesized protein complexes to further illustrate the utility of this approach. Our results demonstrate the high sensitivity and reproducibility of this technique, which is anticipated to be widely adaptable to other sub-cellular compartments.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Native gel, Oligomeric state, Native molecular weight, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Heinrich Heine University - Institute for Plant Biochemistry
Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation

### Submitter
Peter Lundquist

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas P. M Weber
Heinrich Heine University - Institute for Plant Biochemistry


