### Accession
PXD030164

### Title
Regulation of cellular proteome and acetylome by catalytic and non-catalytic functions of class I histone deacetylases

### Description
Project description: Taking advantage of a newly generated model system, we examined the influence of class I HDAC catalytic and non-catalytic function on the cellular proteome and acetylome. Therefore, we generated HAP1 cell lines either lacking individual class I HDACs or expressing catalytically inactive isoforms. Using these cell lines, we investigated whether deletion or inactivation of specific class I HDACs better mimics inhibitor treated cells using isobaric labeling (TMTpro).

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: HAP1 cells were grown in IMDM+++ medium (IMDM (12440053, Thermo Scientific), supplemented with Penicillin-Streptomycin (P4333, Sigma-Aldrich, 1% final concentration) and fetal bovine serum (F7524, Sigma-Aldrich, 10% final concentration)) at 37°C, 5% CO2. Cells were washed twice in 1x PBS, supplemented with 10 mM sodium butyrate (303410, Sigma-Aldrich) and 3 mM nicotinamide (72340 Sigma-Aldrich), and pelleted prior to lysis. We used cells with a knockout of respective class I HDACs or cells expressing catalytically inactive class I HDAC transgenes from the safe harbour locus AAVS1. The inactive HDAC transgenes were expressed either in a knockout background (with the respective endogenous HDAC being absent) or in a wildtype background (with the respective endogenous HDAC still being present). In addition, we included wildtype cells treated with MS-275 (S1053, Selleck Chemicals) at 3 µM concentration for 6 and 24 hours.   Sample preparation: Cells were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 10 ng/ml Nicotinamide (NAM), 10 ng/ml Trichostatin A (TSA) and 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail (+EDTA). 250 U of benzonase (Merck) using ultrasonification in a Bioruptor. After acetone precipitation proteins were reduced with DTT and carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were predigested for 90 min at 37 °C with Lys-C (Wako Laboratories) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 and then overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50. Following digestion samples were acidified using 10% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 0.5%, and desalted on a 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters). 300 µg of trypsin-digested and desalted peptides were used for each sample for isobaric labeling. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 20 µl 100 mM TEAB (Sigma). 20 µg of peptides in TEAB of each sample and replicate were additionally mixed (final volume 60 µl) as reference sample (REF). Labels used: 126C: Ctrl; 127C: 6h_MS-275; 128C: 24h_MS-275; 129C: HDAC1 Ci in ctrl; 130C: HDAC2 CI in ctrl; 131N: HDAC1 KO; 131C: HDAC3 CI in ctrl; 132N: HDAC2 KO; 132C: HDAC8 CI in ctrl; 133N: HDAC3 KO; 133C: REF 134N: HDAC8 KO. Small aliquots of all samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to check labeling efficiency. Samples were pooled and subsequently desalted with Sep-Pak tC-18 (200mg) cartridges (Waters). Desalted samples were dried for 30 min in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge and subsequently lyophilized overnight.  Neutral pH fractionation: Peptides were dissolved in ammonium formate, pH 6.8 and separated on a UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH preparative C18 (130Å, 3.5 µm, 4.6 mm x 250 mm) column (Waters). 45 fractions were collected and subsequently pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 8 pools.  Acetylated peptide enrichment: Acetylated peptides were enriched using the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signaling). Aliquots of roughly 10 µg of peptide/pool were stored for proteome analysis. Enriched peptides were eluted twice from antibody beads with 20 μl of 0.15% TFA and desalted using C18 StageTips.  Mass spectrometry:  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), containing both a trapping column for peptide concentration (PepMap C18, 5 x 0.3 mm, 5 µm particle size) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 x 0.075 µm , 2 µm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (with HCD, higher-energy collisional dissociation mode) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) via a Proxeon nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher). For peptide separation on the HPLC the concentration of organic solvent (acetonitrile) was increased from 1.6% to 32% in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 230 nl/min, using 2 hours gradient time for acetylome analysis and 3 hours gradient time for proteome analysis. The instruments were operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. MS1 survey scans were recorded with the following parameters: resolution 120,000, scan range 375 – 1,500 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3E+06, and maximum injection time (IT) 50 ms. The top 20 precursors were selected for MS2 analysis (HCD) with the following parameters: resolution 45,000, AGC 2E+05, maximum IT 96 ms (proteome) or 200 ms (acetylome), isolation window 0.7 m/z, and normalized collision energy (NCE) 35. The minimum AGC target was set at 8E+03(acetylome) or 1E+04 (proteome), which corresponds to an intensity threshold of 4E+04 or 1E+05, respectively. In addition, unassigned, singly and >6+ charged species were excluded from MS2 analysis and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 or 30 sec, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0, using default parameters with the following modifications. MS2 spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens (human) Uniprot database (release 2020.01; with isoforms) and a database of common laboratory contaminants (provided with MaxQuant). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”, the minimal peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 4. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. “Acetyl (Protein N-term)”, “Oxidation (M)” and “Acetyl (K)” were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 6 variable modifications per peptide was allowed. Proteome and acetylome raw data were included in the same search but in separate parameter groups. For proteome measurements “Acetyl (K)” was not used as a variable modification and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The identification and quantification information of acetylated peptides, sites, and proteins was obtained from the MaxQuant “Acetyl (K) Sites”, “ModificationSpecificPeptides”, and “ProteinGroups” tables. Data were analysed using R (4.1.0) using custom scripts (deposited here). The analysis procedure covered: correction for isotopic impurities of labels, within-plex median normalization, between-plex IRS-normalisation (Plubell et al., 2017), and statistical between-group comparisons using LIMMA (3.50). To account for differences of protein abundance on modified peptide-level, mean protein- and peptide-fold changes for any comparison of interested were compared. Modified peptides with ratios that were 1.5-fold higher or lower than the protein ratio and which were statistically significant at 5% FDR in LIMMA were considered to be regulated.

### Publication Abstract
The class I histone deacetylases are essential regulators of cell fate decisions in health and disease. While pan- and class-specific HDAC inhibitors are available, these drugs do not allow a comprehensive understanding of individual HDAC function, or the therapeutic potential of isoform-specific targeting. To systematically compare the impact of individual catalytic functions of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3, we generated human HAP1 cell lines expressing catalytically inactive HDAC enzymes. Using this genetic toolbox we compare the effect of individual HDAC inhibition with the effects of class I specific inhibitors on cell viability, protein acetylation and gene expression. Individual inactivation of HDAC1 or HDAC2 has only mild effects on cell viability, while HDAC3 inactivation or loss results in DNA damage and apoptosis. Inactivation of HDAC1/HDAC2 led to increased acetylation of components of the COREST co-repressor complex, reduced deacetylase activity associated with this complex and derepression of neuronal genes. HDAC3 controls the acetylation of nuclear hormone receptor associated proteins and the expression of nuclear hormone receptor regulated genes. Acetylation of specific histone acetyltransferases and HDACs is sensitive to inactivation of HDAC1/HDAC2. Over a wide range of assays, we determined that in particular HDAC1 or HDAC2 catalytic inactivation mimics class I specific HDAC inhibitors. Importantly, we further demonstrate that catalytic inactivation of HDAC1 or HDAC2 sensitizes cells to specific cancer drugs. In summary, our systematic study revealed isoform-specific roles of HDAC1/2/3 catalytic functions. We suggest that targeted genetic inactivation of particular isoforms effectively mimics pharmacological HDAC inhibition allowing the identification of relevant HDACs as targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Histone deacetylase, Chromatin, Acetylome, Hdac inhibitor

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Division for Cell and Developmental Biology, Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Seiser
Medical University of Vienna, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Division for Cell and Developmental Biology, Vienna, Austria


