### Accession
PXD044723

### Title
Quality control at the cell surface prevents accumulation of damaged L-type CaV1.2 calcium channels

### Description
Defective ion channel turnover and clearance of damaged proteins are associated with aging and neurodegeneration. The L-type CaV1.2 voltage-gated calcium channel mediate depolarization-induced calcium signals in heart and brain. Here, we determined the interaction surface between the L-type calcium channel CaVβ subunit and actin using cross-linking mass spectrometry and protein-protein docking, and uncovered a role in replenishing damaged CaV1.2 channels. Computational and in vitro mutagenesis identified hotspots in CaVβ that decrease its affinity for actin but not for CaV1.2. Coexpression of an actin-association-deficient CaVβ mutant with the CaV1.2 channel downregulated current amplitudes with a concomitant reduction in the number of functionally available channels.  Neither alterations in the single-channel properties nor changes in the total number of channels at the cell surface were found, indicating that current inhibition resulted from a build-up of conduction-defective channels. Our findings established CaVβ–actin interaction as a key player for selective monitoring and clearing corrupted CaV proteins to ensure the maintenance of a functional pool of channels and proper calcium signal transduction. The CaVβ–actin molecular model introduces a potentially druggable protein-protein interface to intervene CaV-mediated signaling processes.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking reaction and protein digestion. Cross-linking reactions were carried out with CaVβ2-core and polymerised actin. CaVβ protein in GF-150 buffer was centrifuged at 150.000 x g for 45 min at 4 °C to remove aggregates. After centrifugation, the supernatant fraction was transferred into a new tube and saved for cross-linking reactions. CaVβ (5 µg) and actin (5 µg) were mixed and incubated at RT for 30 minutes to enable interaction. Either a molar excess of 5x for DSBU or 2.5x for DSSO was added and the reaction mix was incubated for 60 minutes at RT. The reaction volume was 50 µl. After reaction with the cross-linkers, the mixtures were quenched by the addition of Tris-HCl pH 8 to an end concentration of 50 mM. Afterwards, the cross-linking reaction mixtures were analysed by SDS-PAGE. After staining the gel with R-250 Coomassie blue staining solution, the desired bands were excised from the acrylamide gel, dehydrated and stored at -20°C until use. The protein bands were cut in small pieces and reduced with a solution of 20 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C, cooled to RT and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in darkness. The samples were digested with MS-grade approved trypsin (SERVA, Germany) using an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37 °C. Peptides  were de-salted using self-made C18 STAGE-Tips  LC-MS/MS analysis. Digested peptides were analysed using an EASY-nanoLC (Thermo) coupled to an Q-Exactive Plus or Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via  nanospray source. Peptides were separated with a 50 cm long, self-packed column filled with 1.9 µm C18-AQ Reprosil Pur beads (Dr. Maisch) and the column temperature was maintained at 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V2). Peptides were eluted with an effective solvent gradient ranging from 2-35% buffer B within 30 or 60 min.  For DSBU/DSSO-XL identification, digested proteins were analyzed using an HCD/CID-acquisition method. Full scans were recorded at resolution of 70,000 and a scan range from 375-1,750 m/z (AGC 3.6e6, max injection time 20 ms). MS/MS scans were recorded at 35,000 resolution and a scan range from 200-2,000 m/z (AGC 5e5, max injection time 115 ms for CID isolation width 1.9 m/z). Singly and doubly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation since cross-linked peptides tend to occur at a charge state of 3+ or above.  All precursors that have been selected for fragmentation were excluded from fragmentation for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were converted to mzML format with the program msconvert GUI from ProteoWizard Toolkit version 3. The cross-linked peptide fragments were subsequently identified using Merox v.2.0, MetaMorpheus v.1.0.2 and MaxLynx v.2.2.0.0. The MS data in mzML format and fasta sequence files for CaVβ2-core (residues 23-422) and actin, corresponding to UniProtKB accession numbers, Q8VGC3-2 and P68135, respectively, were provided and the searches were performed using 10 ppm as precursor, 20 ppm as fragment ion precision, and a False Discovery Rate, FDR of 1%. Fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation were used. Up to three missed cleavages of trypsin were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cav1.2 surface expression, Protein-protein docking, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Hotspots, Calcium channel β-subunit, Actin filaments

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich, ZEA-3
Forschunszentrum Jüich, Germany

### Submitter
Beatrix Santiago-Schuebel

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrix Santiago
Forschunszentrum Jüich, Germany


