### Accession
PXD023645

### Title
The strategy of a novel way to enhance bacterial motility

### Description
Bacterial motility shows a strong evolvable feature depending on the environment. Hyper-motile E. coli could be isolated by evolving non-motile E. coli due to the mutations that enhanced transcriptional expression of the master regulator of the flagellum biosynthesis, FlhDC. These hyper-motile isolates showed reduced growth fitness but with the molecular mechanisms unrevealed. Here we obtained a novel type of hyper-motile isolates by evolving a weakly-motile E. coli K12 strain on the soft agar plates. These isolates carried high accumulated FlhDC proteins and they shared one single point mutation of ClpXV78F. The V78F affected the ATP binding to ClpX via steric repulsive effect and the mutated ClpXP protease lost most of its ability to degraded FlhDC and some other of its known targets. The signal tag of FlhDC for ClpXP recognition was also characterized. Intriguingly, in the hyper-motile strains, the highly enhanced expression of the motility genes was accompanied by the reduced expression of stress resistance genes relating to the reduced fitness of these isolates. Hence, ClpX appeared to be a novel and hot locus during the evolution of bacterial motility and the molecular mechanism of the trade-off between motility and growth was proposed for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
300 ml bacterial cells from early exponential phase (OD600=0.3-0.4) were mixed with pre-cool (from -80℃) 60% methanol (v/v) and harvested by centrifugation at 4℃. Cell pellets were washed with PBS and cells were collected again by centrifugation at 4℃. To perform proteomic analysis, cells were first resuspended in 4 volumes of lysis buffer [8M urea (Sigma) and 1% protease inhibitor (Calbiochem)]. The resuspension was subjected to sonication on ice using ultrasonic processer (Scientz), followed by 10-min centrifugation at 4℃, to collect the supernatant and discard debris. The total protein concentration was determined by using PCA kit. The total protein was subjected to 30-min reduction using 5mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 56℃, and subsequently incubated with 11mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at room temperature in darkness for 15 mins. The protein solution was then diluted with 100 mM TEAB (Sigma), to alter the urea concentration to less than 2M. After the treatments above, the protein was digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin to protein) at 37℃, followed by a 4-hour digestion at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin to protein).  The peptides from digestions above were dissolved in Solvent A [0.1% formic acid (Fluka)] and separated by using the NanoElute UPLC system. In the process, the gradient of Solvent B [0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical)] was set at the following series: 1) Time 0-44 min, 6%-22%; 2) Time 44-54 min, 22%-35%; Time 54-57 min, 35%-80%; Time 57-60 min, 80%. This was conducted on the UPLC system at a flow-rate of 300 nl/min. The separated peptides were ionized in Capillary ion source and subsequently analyzed by using tims-TOF Pro mass spectrometry. The voltage used for the ion source was 1.6 kV. The parent ion and its secondary fragments of the peptide were detected and analyzed by TOF. The scanning range of the secondary MS was set at 100-1700 M / Z and the data acquisition mode of Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) was used. After the collection of the primary mass spectrum, the secondary spectrum with the charge number of the parent ion in the range of 0-5 was collected in PASEF mode for 10 times. The dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrometry scanning was set to 30 seconds to avoid the repeated scanning of the parent ion.

### Data Protocol
Data from the mass spectra described above were searched using Maxquant (v1.6.6.0) throughout the provided transcriptome database (Genome of NCM3722, NCBI accession number for chromosome: CP011495.1, for plasmid F: CP011496.1). In the meanwhile, the reverse decoy database was concatenated with the transcriptome database, to calculate FDR. In addition, databases of common contaminator peptides were used for analysis, to reduce the effect of contaminations. Several other key settings are listed here: Trypsin/P was set as the cleavage enzyme and the number of missing cleavages was not allowed to be bigger than 2; The mass tolerance set for precursor ions in First search and Main search was both 40 ppm, and the mass tolerance set for fragment ions was 0.04 Da; The fixed modification was set as Carbamidomethyl on Cys, and the variable modifications were set as oxidation on and acetylation on N-terminus of Met; The FDR for protein identification and  modification identification was both set as 1%. The expression of proteins in each sample was determined as LFQ intensity (MaxLFQ), which is based on the accurate quantification of peptides in Maxquant, as previously described in “Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ” by Cox and colleagues, in 2014.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swimming motility; flagella; clpx; trade-off

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Microbial Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Oceanology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, P. R. China
Shenzhen University

### Submitter
Bingyu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Conghui You
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Microbial Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences and Oceanology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, P. R. China


