### Accession
PXD005007

### Title
Daylily proteomics LC-MSMS

### Description
The study was aimed at the identification and quantification of the protein components of the pollen grains in parallel with the distal stigmatic tissues of daylily. Proteins were identified and quantified using iTRAQ 4-plex labeling on an orbitrap fusion Mass spectrometer.     128 differentially expressed proteins were retained for further analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (2 pool of stigman and 2 pool of pollen) were kept frozen on dry ice then homogeneized by sonication, extracted using ammonium bicarbonate 50mM  50mM DTT and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate. Proteins were precipitated with acetone and digested with trypsin prior iTRAQ 4-plex labeling. The pooled conditions were fractionated into 14 fractions by high pH RP chromatography and each fraction (900 ng) was injected with 90min gradient on an orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against an Asparagale (tax id 73496) Uniprot protein database (42187 proteins) using Proteome discover (version 2.1 Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Trypsin enzyme parameter was selected with two possible missed cleavages. MMTS alkylation of cysteins was set as static modification as well as iTRAQ modification at the N-terminus of the peptide and on lysine or tyrosine but methionine oxidation and deamidation of Asn and Gln were set as variable modifications Mass search tolerance were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for MS and MS/MS respectively. For protein validation, a maximum False Discovery Rate of 1% at peptide and protein level was used based on a target/decoy search. All observations associated with the known contaminants like trypsin, BSA and keratin was manually removed before the analysis. Only those proteins with variability between replicates lower than 20% were conserved. A protein was considered underexpressed when the ratio was lower than 0.5 and overexpressed when ratio was higher than 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Daylily pollen stigma lc-msms proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics platform, CHU de Quebec and Laval University
Proteomics platform

### Submitter
sylvie Bourassa

### Lab Head
Dr Sylvie Bourassa
Proteomics platform


