### Accession
PXD026906

### Title
Proteomic analysis of serum samples of paracoccidioidomycosis patients with severe pulmonary sequel

### Description
Pulmonary sequelae (PS) in patients with chronic paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) typically include pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema. Knowledge of the molecular pathways involved in PS of PCM is required for treatment and biomarker identification. This non-concurrent cohort study included 29 patients with pulmonary PCM that were followed before and after treatment. From this group, 17 patients evolved to mild/ moderate PS and 12 evolved severe PS. Sera from patients were evaluated before treatment and at clinical cure, serological cure, and apparent cure. A nanoACQUITY UPLC-Xevo QT MS system and PLGS software were used to identify serum differentially expressed proteins, which were then categorized using Cytoscape software and the Reactome pathway database. Seventy-two differentially expressed serum proteins were identified in patients with severe PS compared with patients with mild/moderate PS. Most proteins altered in severe PS were involved in wound healing, inflammatory response, and oxygen transport pathways. Before treatment and at clinical cure, signaling proteins participating in wound healing, complement cascade, cholesterol transport and retinoid metabolism pathways were downregulated in patients with severe PS, whereas signaling proteins in gluconeogenesis and gas exchange pathways were upregulated. At serological cure, the pattern of protein expression reversed. At apparent cure pathways related with tissue repair (fibrosis) became downregulated, and pathway related oxygen transport became upregulated. Additionally, we identified 11 proteins as candidate biomarkers for severe PS. Development of severe PS is related to increased expression of proteins involved in anabolism (gluconeogenesis and oxygen exchange), indicative of the greater cellular activity and replication associated with early dysregulation of wound healing and aberrant tissue repair. Our findings provide new targets to study mechanisms of PS in PCM, as well as potential biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Serum was collected after centrifugation of peripheral blood at 300 × g for 15 min, aliquoted, frozen at –80 °C, and thawed once before proteomic analysis. Twelve patients with severe PS (with sera from four patients in each of three pools) and 17 patients with mild/moderate PS (with sera from five or six patients in each of three pools) were included in the study. Serum albumin and immunoglobulins were depleted using a ProteoPrep Blue Albumin and IgG Depletion Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. The expected depletion of these proteins was 80–95%. After depletion, Bradford assays were performed to quantify proteins present in the pooled samples (n = 3 / group) and all samples were standardized to a concentration of 1μg/μL. Samples were submitted to proteomic analysis as previously described (KHAN et al., 2019). To 50 μL sample, 10 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, before the following steps. First, 25 μL of 0.2% RapiGest (Waters Co., Manchester, UK) was added and incubated at 80 °C for 15 min. Second, 2.5 μL of 100 mM dithiothreitol was added and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min. Third, 2.5 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide  was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (in the dark). Fourth, 10 μL of trypsin (100 ng; Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added and digestion was allowed to occur for 14 h at 37 °C. Fifth, after digestion, 10 μl of 5% trichloroacetic acid was added, and the sample was left in an incubation phase for 90 min at 37 °C. The sample was then centrifuged (16,000 g for 30 min). Finally, the supernatant was collected, and 5 μL of alcohol dehydrogenase (1 pmol/μL) plus 85 μL of 3%  acetonitrile was added.

### Data Protocol
The NanoACQUITY UPLC-Xevo QT MS system (Waters Co., Manchester, UK) was used to separate and identify peptides using the ion count algorithm, exactly as previously described (LEITE et al., 2014) . Results were used to query the database for Homo sapiens in the UniProt (Universal Protein Resource) catalog in February 2018. To determine differences serum proteins expression between PCM patients with severe and mild/moderate PS in each stage of clinical follow-up, ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) Expression E software was used, with p < 0.05 and  p > 0.95 used to identify downregulation and upregulation of proteins, respectively, as reported earlier  (KHAN et al., 2019). Bioinformatics analysis was performed to compare groups, and UniProt protein ID accession numbers were mapped back to their associated encoding UniProt gene entries. Furthermore, the Reactome database of pathways was searched using ClueGo v2.0.7 + CluePedia v1.0.8, a Cytoscape plug-in. UniProt IDs were uploaded separately analyzed with default parameters, which specify an enrichment (right-sided hypergeometric test) statistical test with a Bonferroni step-down correction method, ‘single cluster’ analysis type, using the genecluster list for Homo sapiens, evidence codes ‘All’, networking specificity: medium (GO levels 3 to 8), and a kappa score threshold of 0.4. Due to the type of sample used in this study, many immunoglobulins were identified as proteins differentially expressed between the groups. Some abundant proteins such as immunoglobulins are known to mask other protein components that are present in low concentrations (BELLEI et al., 2011; ZHOU; CONRADS; VEENSTRA, 2005). We were unable to deplete more than IgG and albumin before the proteomic analysis; therefore, we decided not to include immunoglobulins in the tables and bioinformatic analysis because these were the predominant proteins with altered expression levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulmonary fibrosis, Molecular analysis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul
Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul- UFMS

### Submitter
Amanda  Ribeiro dos Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Ribeiro dos Santos
Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul- UFMS


