### Accession
PXD000185

### Title
Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis Provides Insights into the Heterogeneity of Signaling Pathway Activation in Leukemia Cells

### Description
Experiments were performed in AML (Acute Myeloid Leukemia) cell lines and in primary cells coming from patients with AML and healthy donors.  The AML cell lines P31/Fuj and Kasumi-1 were treated with vehicle (DMSO), 100 nM or 1000 nM of the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor AZ123 or the mTOR inhibitor Ku0063794 for 2h. Both cell lines were treated also with vehicle and 1000 nM of the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI103. 6 replicates per condition were done.  AML primary cells and GMPBs (G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood cell) from patients and healthy donors respectively were  treated or untreated with 100 mM sodium pervanadate for 30 min. Samples 45-46 correspond to the GMPBs and the rest correspond to AML patients.   All samples were digested with trypsin and subjected to phosphoenrichment usin TiO2. Phosphopeptides were run in a LTQ-Orbitrap-XL.  Peaks lists were generated with Mascot Distiller (version 2.3) in MGF format and Database searches were with Mascot Server (version 2.3) against the SwissProt database restricted to human sequences (release December 2011) and trypsin cleavage. Restrictions were 7ppm for parent ions and 600 mmu for fragment masses. Allowed modifications were phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, pyro-Glu (N-term) and methionine oxidation and one miss-cleavage allowed. Quantification was by label-free using peak heights of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) constructed with narrow mass windows (7ppm) and time windows (1.5 minutes). Pescal, a computer program written in house, was used to automate the generation of XICs and to calculate peak heights.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Kinases determine the phenotypes of many cancer cells, but the frequency with which individual kinases are activated in primary tumors remains largely unknown. We used a computational approach, termed kinase-substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA), to systematically infer the activation of given kinase pathways from mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analysis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. Experiments conducted in cell lines validated the approach and, furthermore, revealed that DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) was activated as a result of inhibiting the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway. Application of KSEA to primary AML cells identified PI3K, casein kinases (CKs), cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and p21-activated kinases (PAKs) as the kinase substrate groups most frequently enriched in this cancer type. Substrates phosphorylated by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and cell division cycle 7 (CDC7) were enriched in primary AML cells that were resistant to inhibition of PI3K-mTOR signaling, whereas substrates of the kinases Abl, Lck, Src, and CDK1 were increased in abundance in inhibitor-sensitive cells. Modeling based on the abundances of these substrate groups accurately predicted sensitivity to a dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitor in two independent sets of primary AML cells isolated from patients. Thus, our study demonstrates KSEA as an untargeted method for the systematic profiling of kinase pathway activities and for increasing our understanding of diseases caused by the dysregulation of signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Pi3k/mtor inhibitors, Tio2 phosphoenrichment, Aml primary cells

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head


