### Accession
PXD014085

### Title
Impact of oligoarginine peptides in RNA-binding proteomes

### Description
Expanded intronic GGGGCC repeats in C9ORF72 produce several dipeptides, from which the two that contain arginine, (PR)n and (GR)n, accumulate at nucleoli and kill cells. While this toxicity plays an important role in ALS pathogenesis, its mechanism remains unknown. We here show that PR dipeptides bind avidly to DNA and RNA, so that any cellular reaction involving nucleic acids is impaired by the dipeptides. Consistently, PR-induced cell death can be rescued by addition of non-coding oligonucleotides. Interestingly, the effects of PR dipeptides are to a large extent mimicked by protamine, a sperm-specific Arg-rich protein, and the toxicity of either protamine or PR dipeptides is rescued by the anticoagulant heparin. We propose that the generalized coating of nucleic acids by Arg-rich peptides accounts for the toxicity of C9ORF72 mutations in ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested by means of standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Columns 5 µm, 20 mm length) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) and separated using a 89 min effective curved gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min from 2% to 42.5% of buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS (350-1400 m/z) and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (intensity threshold signal ≥ 3.8e4, z ≥2). An active exclusion of 26.3 sec was used. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroups.txt” file was loaded in Prostar (v1.14) for further statistical analysis. For the comparison “Not crosslinked vs control”, proteins with a log2 ratio <-3 and p-value<0.05 (FDR<5%) (limma) were defined as Ribosome Binding Proteins (RBP).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pr20, Als, Label free, Ribosome binding proteins, Hf

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
CNIO


