### Accession
PXD024212

### Title
Alterations in the HLA-B*57:01 immunopeptidome by flucloxacillin and immunogenicity of drug-haptenated peptides

### Description
Flucloxacillin (FLX), a -lactam antibiotic for narrow-spectrum gram-positive bacterial infections, has been associated with severe immune-mediated drug-induced liver injury caused by an influx of T-lymphocytes targeting liver cells potentially recognizing drug-haptenated peptides in the context of HLA-B*57:01.

### Sample Protocol
B721.5701 cells expressing mHLA were grown without antibiotics for 5 days with or without 150 g/ml FLX as described in the paper. Cell lysates were immune-affinity purified using anti-HLA class-I antibody W6/32. Acid-eluted peptides were analyzed using nano-LC-MS/MS with a ThermoFisher Ultimate LC and Fusion Orbitrap MS. Soluble HLA from untreated or FLX-treated cultures was collected from continuous cultures as described in in the paper. Peptides were purified from sHLA/peptide complexes by immuno-affinity purification followed by acid elution and filtration.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identity was determined using mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion and of 0.05 Da for-fragment ions subject to stringent bioinformatic parameters using PEAKS 8.5 or X software with a false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 5%. Post translational modifications (PTM) such as N-acetylation, methionine oxidation, cysteinylation and citrullination were considered. The filtered data set was further analyzed manually to exclude redundant peptides and recognized contaminants. Haptenated-peptides were identified in the HLA peptide datasets by using FLX PTM of (+453.0689).  LC-MS/MS spectra were also manually examined for FLX-related ions with z=1+ charge of +454.0689 (protonated FLX) or +160.0446 or +295.0382 representing FLX fragments). FLX modified peptides also contained MS2 fragments with +294 on lysines that supported covalent linkage at specific lysine residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flucloxacillin, Hla-b*57:01, Immunogenicity, Transgenic mice, Drug hypersensitivity, Hapten

### Affiliations
FDA
Laboratory of Immunology, Division of Biotechnology Review and Research III, Office of Biotechnology Products,Center for Drugs Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA

### Submitter
Swamy Kumar Polumuri

### Lab Head
Dr Michael A. Norcross, MD Montserrat Puig, PhD
Laboratory of Immunology, Division of Biotechnology Review and Research III, Office of Biotechnology Products,Center for Drugs Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA


