### Accession
PXD039554

### Title
Cytokine signaling converging on IL11 signalling in ILD fibroblasts induces aberrant epithelial differentiation signatures

### Description
Fibrotic interstitial lung disease (ILD) are lung disorders characterized by the accumulation of extracellular matrix, ultimately resulting in the destruction of the pulmonary scaffold. Continuous pro-fibrotic signaling perpetuates the remodeling process, specifically targeting the epithelial cell compartment, thereby destroying the gas exchange area. Studies that address this detrimental crosstalk between lung epithelial cells and fibroblasts are key to understanding ILD. With the aim of identifying functionally relevant targets that drive mesenchymal-epithelial crosstalk and their potential as new avenues to therapeutic strategies, we developed an organoid co-culture system based on human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived alveolar epithelial type 2 cells and lung fibroblasts from ILD patients as well as IMR-90 controls. While organoid formation capacity and organoid size was comparable in the presence of ILD or control lung fibroblasts, metabolic activity was significantly increased in ILD co-cultures. Alveolar organoids cultured with ILD fibroblasts further demonstrated reduced stem cell function supported by reduced Surfactant Protein C gene expression together with an aberrant basaloid-prone differentiation program indicated by elevated Cadherin 2, Bone Morphogenic Protein 4 and Vimentin transcription.  In order to identify key mediators of the misguided mesenchymal-to-epithelial crosstalk with a focus on disease-relevant inflammatory processes, we used secretome mass spectrometry to identify key signals secreted by end stage ILD lung fibroblasts. Over 2000 proteins were detected in a single-shot experiment with 47 differentially upregulated proteins when comparing ILD and non-chronic lung disease control fibroblasts.  The secretome profile was dominated by chemokines of the C-X-C motif family, including CXCL1,   -3, and -8, all interfering with (epithelial) growth factor signaling orchestrated by Interleukin 11 (IL11), steering fibrogenic cell-cell communication, and proteins regulating extracellular matrix remodeling including epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. When in turn treating 3D monocultures of iAT2s with IL11 we recapitulated the co-culture results obtained with primary ILD fibroblasts including changes in metabolic activity as well as organoid formation capacity and size.  In summary, our analysis identified mesenchyme-derived mediators likely contributing to the disease-perpetuating mesenchymal-to-epithelial crosstalk in ILD by using sophisticated alveolar organoid co-cultures indicating the importance of cytokine-driven aberrant epithelial differentiation and confirmed IL11 as a key player in ILD using an unbiased approach.

### Sample Protocol
Each 500µL supernatant was subjected to tryptic digest applying a modified filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (Grosche et al. 2015; Wiśniewski et al. 2009). After protein reduction and alkylation using DTT and iodoacetamide, samples were denatured in UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuged on a 30 kDa cut-off filter device (PALL or Sartorius) and washed thrice with UA buffer and twice with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Proteins were proteolysed for 2 h at room temperature using 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako) and subsequently for 16 h at 37 °C using 1 µg trypsin (Promega). Peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified with 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric measurements  LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) each online coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex). For subsequent analysis on the Q-Exactive HF, tryptic peptides were accumulated on a nano trap column (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings) and then separated by reversed phase chromatography (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm; Waters) in a 80 minutes non-linear gradient from 3 to 40 % acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed by the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a PepSep PSS1 source. Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1500) and MSMS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 or 15000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. The up to ten most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity (TOP10 method). Target peptides already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.  Protein Identification and label-free quantification  Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.5.0.400) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine, SequestHT score:1) against Swissprot human data base (Release 2020_02, 20432 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn, Gln and Arg, oxidation of Pro and Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <5%, and posterior error probability <0.01.  The quantification of proteins was based on abundance values for unique peptides. Abundance values were normalized on total peptide amount and protein abundances were calculated summing up the abundance values for admissible peptides. The final protein ratio was calculated using median abundance values. The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the T-test approach described in Navarro et al., 2014 (Navarro et al., 2014), which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes for proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner. Proteins considered to be up- or downregulated were filtered with the following criteria: proteins were considered to be downregulated below an abundance of ratio of 0.5 and upregulated above 2, proteins identified with a single peptide were excluded and just significant proteins were considered (P value < 0.05, P values were adjusted for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg correction). Additionally, at least two MSMS identifications had to be identified to include the protein ratio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Il11, Disease modeling, Organoids, Cytokine, Co-culture model, Secretome, Interstitial lung disease, Human pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
HMGU Core Facility Proteomics
1Institute of Lung Health and Immunity, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich with the CPC-M bioArchive, Helmholtz Center Munich, Research Center for Environmental Health, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Germany

### Submitter
Ann-Christine König

### Lab Head
Dr Carola Voss
1Institute of Lung Health and Immunity, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich with the CPC-M bioArchive, Helmholtz Center Munich, Research Center for Environmental Health, Member of the German Center of Lung Research (DZL), Germany


