### Accession
PXD045495

### Title
HeLa benchmark datasets DirectMS1 MSGF+

### Description
This technical dataset contains LC-MS runs of HeLa protein digest analyzed with a common shotgun proteomics pipeline based on MSGF+ and Percolator and DirectMS1 pipeline.

### Sample Protocol
Pierce HeLa protein digest standard (cat# 88328) was analyzed using the following protocols. Protocol 1: Peptides (500 ng) were injected into the analytical column (20cm x 75 um i.d., packed with 3 um Reprosil-Pur C18 material) connected to the Thermo EASY-nLC system and separated using a linear gradient from 2 to 35%B over 30 minutes with the flowrate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer was employed for the analysis. MS1 parameters: mass range: 375-1500; maximum injection time: 50 ms; AGC target: 1e6; Resolution: 120,000; MS2 parameters: Analyzer: ion trap; TopSpeed: 3 sec; Quadrupole isolation window: 1.2 Th; Activation: HCD; NCE: 35; AGC Target: 2e4; Maximum injection time: 35 ms; Resolution: Rapid; Included charge states: 2-6. Protocol 2: Peptides (500 ng) were injected into the analytical column (20cm x 75 um i.d., packed with 3 um Reprosil-Pur C18 material) connected to the Thermo EASY-nLC system and separated using a linear gradient from 2 to 22%B over 100 minutes and 22 to 40%B over 20 minutes with the flowrate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer was employed for the analysis. MS1 parameters: mass range: 375-1500; maximum injection time: 50 ms; AGC target: 1e6; Resolution: 120,000; MS2 parameters: Analyzer: Orbitrap; TopSpeed: 3 sec; Quadrupole isolation window: 1.2 Th; Activation: HCD; NCE: 35; AGC Target: 1e5; Maximum injection time: 54 ms; Resolution: 30,000; Included charge states: 2-6. Protocol 3: Peptides (200/500 ng) were analyzed using the DirectMS1 approach (DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b05095). Briefly, peptides were concentrated on a pre-column (5mm x 300 um i.d., packed C18 PepMap beads) and separated by the analytical column (15cm x 75 um i.d., packed with 3 um Inertsil C18 material) connected to the Dionex Ultimate 3000 system using a linear gradient from 5 to 35%B over 4.8 minutes with the flowrate of 1500 nL/min. Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometers were employed for the analysis. MS1 parameters (Lumos): mass range: 375-1500; maximum injection time: 50 ms; AGC target: 4e5; Resolution: 120,000. MS1 parameters (HF-X): mass range: 375-1500; maximum injection time: 200 ms; AGC target: 3e6; Resolution: 120,000.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were converted to mzML format using the ThermoRawFileParser (1.2.0). Shotgun LC-MS files (Protocols 1 and 2) were searched with MSGF+ (v2019.07.03) against the UniProtKB human protein database supplemented with reversed decoy sequences. Trypsin was used as a digestion enzyme. Parent ion mass accuracy was 10 ppm and isotopic error of 0 and 1, precursor charge from 2 to 6 (both included), theoretical peptide length from 6 to 40 (both included), carbamidomethylation of cysteine as the fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable ones. Instrument protocol and enzyme were set according to the LC-MS experiment. Search results were validated using Percolator (3.05), q-values, and PEPs calculated by Percolator were added to the resulting mzIdentML file. DirectMS1 runs (Protocol 3) were processed with biosaur2 (0.2.11) for LC-MS feature extraction and searched with ms1searchpy (2.3.0). Biosaur2 parameters: minimal length of hill: 1; mass accuracy for hills and isotopes: 8 ppm. Ms1searchpy parameters: minimum number of scans: 1; precursor mass tolerance: 8 ppm; FDR: 1%; minimum length of peptide: 6; two-step retention time prediction training using additive model and DeepLC model.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Directms1, Technical, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


