### Accession
PXD009641

### Title
The identification of Lipase Maturation Factor 1 (LMF1) partners

### Description
Lipase Maturation Factor 1 (LMF1) is a five-pass ER transmembrane protein necessary for the secretion of Hepatic, Endothelial and Lipoprotein Lipases. We sought to identify the protein-protein interactions between LMF1 and its ER partners.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slices containing purified LMF1 with pBPA or DSP-crosslinked binding partners were analyzed. Control gel slices were obtained from samples prepared without pBpa (pBpa experiment) or without tetracycline for induction (DSP).  Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE bands were subjected to standardized in-gel trypsin digestion. ). Extracted peptides were lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 12 µL of 0.2% formic acid/2% acetonitrile. Each sample was subjected to chromatographic separation on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC equipped with a 1.7 µm BEH130 C18 75 µm I.D. X 250 mm reversed-phase column.  The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Following a 3 µL injection, peptides were trapped for 3 minutes on a 5 µm Symmetry C18 180 µm I.D. X 20 mm column at 5 µl/minute in 99.9% A. The analytical column was then switched in-line and a linear elution gradient of 5% B to 40% B was performed over 30 minutes at 400 nL/minute. The analytical column was connected to a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Cambridge, MA) with a 10 µm tip orifice and coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through an electrospray interface operating in a data-dependent mode of acquisition. The instrument was set to acquire a precursor MS scan from m/z 375-1675 with MS/MS spectra acquired for the ten most abundant precursor ions.  For all experiments, HCD energy settings were 27v and a 120 s dynamic exclusion was employed for previously fragmented precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) and then submitted to independent Mascot searches (Matrix Science) against an SwissProt database (Human taxonomy) containing both forward and reverse entries of each protein (20,322 forward entries).  Search tolerances were 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da on C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (+15.9949 Da on M) and deamidation (+0.98 Da on NQ) were considered dynamic mass modifications. All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold (v4.3, Proteome Software) and scoring thresholds were set to achieve a peptide false discovery rate of 1% using the PeptideProphet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is a secreted lipase that clears triglycerides from the blood. Proper LPL folding and exit from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) require lipase maturation factor 1 (LMF1), an ER-resident transmembrane protein, but the mechanism involved is unknown. We used proteomics to identify LMF1-binding partners necessary for LPL secretion in HEK293 cells and found these to include oxidoreductases and lectin chaperones, suggesting that LMF1 facilitates the formation of LPL's five disulfide bonds. In accordance with this role, we found that LPL aggregates in LMF1-deficient cells due to the formation of incorrect intermolecular disulfide bonds. Cells lacking LMF1 were hypersensitive to depletion of glutathione, but not DTT treatment, suggesting that LMF1 helps reduce the ER Accordingly, we found that loss of LMF1 results in a more oxidized ER Our data show that LMF1 has a broader role than simply folding lipases, and we identified fibronectin and the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) as novel LMF1 clients that contain multiple, non-sequential disulfide bonds. We conclude that LMF1 is needed for secretion of some ER client proteins that require reduction of non-native disulfides during their folding.

### Keywords
Redox, Lmf1, Crosslinking, Lipase

### Affiliations
The Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, NC
UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Saskia Neher

### Lab Head
Dr Saskia B. Neher
The Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, NC


