### Accession
PXD038652

### Title
Genetic exchange in leishmania is facilitated by IgM natural antibodies.

### Description
Proteomics of IgM-mediated clumped vs control parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were thawed on ice and immediately lysed in 26µl of 50mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 5% SDS with vigorous mixing by vortexing for 5 min. The lysates were sonicated five times in a water bath at 30°C with five-min intervals, freeze-thawed on dry ice twice and sonicated three times more as mentioned above. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12,500 rpm at 8°C for 10 min, and the protein concentration was estimated by BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using BSA as a standard. A total of 134 µg of proteins from each sample was reduced in 5mM DTT in 50 µl of lysis buffer for 40 min at 37°C. Samples were cooled and alkylated in 15mM iodoacetamide for 20 min. The samples were adjusted to 1.2% H3PO4, and 350 µl of 50mM HEPES, pH 7.1, in 90% methanol was added. The samples were processed with an S-Trap Plate (Protifi) using 5µg trypsin in 100mM TEABC per well. The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum, dissolved in water and quantitated by fluorescence assay (Pierce). A total of 50µg of each sample was labeled using TMT-10plex reagents in 50% AcCN in 75µl of 100mM TEABC at room temperature for 1.5 h. After quenching, the samples were consolidated and reduced in volume by 80% under vacuum. 420µl of 0.1% TFA was added, and the final pH adjusted to 2.0 with 10% TFA. The peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB, a 10cc vacuum cartridge, dried, dissolved in 100µl of 50mM TEABC and fractionated on a 3 x 150 mm C18 Extend HPLC column (Agilent) using an AcCN gradient to 50% in 5mM TEABC. 60 fractions were collected and consolidated into 12 fraction pools which were lyophilized. The samples were dissolved in 25µl of 0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and quantitated by a micro-colorimetric peptide assay (Pierce). The proteomic relative quantification was performed using 10 samples (5: non-treatment, 5: IgM-treated). Liquid chromatography-Mass spectrometry (LC-MS) data acquisition was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to EASY-nLC 1200. Each TMT-labeled peptide sample was loaded onto a 2-cm PepMap trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, No. 164946) and separated using a 25-cm PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, No. ES903). The mobile phase solvent is water with 0.1% formic acid, and peptide elution was achieved using acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid: 0 – 24% for the first 120 min, then 24-48% for the next 60 min. The TMT reporter ions were monitored as following: Survey MS1 was acquired with the 120,000-resolution setting every 3 seconds. Data-dependent MS2 was acquired with Linear Ion Trap after CID. Synchronous precursor selection was carried out, and MS3 was acquired with Orbitrap at the 50,000-resolution setting after HCD at 65% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Unprocessed data raw files. Analysis and metadata details will be present in associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Host factors that mediate Leishmania genetic exchange are not well defined. Here we demonstrate that natural IgM (IgMn)<sup>1-4</sup> antibodies mediate parasite genetic exchange by inducing the transient formation of a spherical parasite clump that promotes parasite fusion and hybrid formation. We establish that IgMn from Leishmania-free animals binds to the surface of Leishmania parasites to induce significant changes in the expression of parasite transcripts and proteins. Leishmania binding to IgMn is partially lost after glycosidase treatment, although parasite surface phosphoglycans, including lipophosphoglycan, are not required for IgMn-induced parasite clumping. Notably, the transient formation of parasite clumps is essential for Leishmania hybridization in vitro. In vivo, we observed a 12-fold increase in hybrid formation in sand flies provided a second blood meal containing IgMn compared with controls. Furthermore, the generation of recombinant progeny from mating hybrids and parental lines were only observed in sand flies provided with IgMn. Both in vitro and in vivo IgM-induced Leishmania crosses resulted in full genome hybrids that show equal patterns of biparental contribution. Leishmania co-option of a host natural antibody to facilitate mating in the insect vector establishes a new paradigm of parasite-host-vector interdependence that contributes to parasite diversity and fitness by promoting genetic exchange.

### Keywords
Genetic exchange, Leishmania, Igm

### Affiliations
NIAID/NIH
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Tiago Serafim

### Lab Head
Dr Jesus Valenzuela
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health


