### Accession
PXD007244

### Title
Effect of rRNA methylation defect on protein composition of human ribosomes

### Description
Ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are main effectors of mRNA decoding, peptide-bond formation and ribosome dynamics during translation. Ribose 2'-O-methylation is the most abundant rRNA chemical modification, and display a complex pattern in rRNA. We globally challenged rRNA 2'-O-Me by inhibiting the rRNA methyl-transferase fibrillarin (FBL) in human cells. Since FBL participates in rRNA processing, we wonder if FBL knockdown could alter the assembly of ribosomes.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were transfected using X-tremeGENE siRNA transfection reagent (Roche) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 72 h after siRNA transfection, cells were plated. Cytoplasmic fractions were obtained by mechanical lysis of cells and centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min to pellet mitochondria. Cytoplasmic fractions were loaded on a 1 M sucrose cushion in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 500 mM KCl and 2 mM DTT. After 2 h of centrifugation at 240,000 g, the pellet containing the ribosome was suspended in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2 and 25 mM KCl. Ribosomal fractions were solubilized in Laemmli buffer, stacked in the top of a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and stained by R-250 Coomassie Blue (BioRad). Gel bands were excised and proteins in-gel digested using trypsin (Promega). Resulting peptides were analysed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. Spectra were searched against the SwissProt database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, October 2016 version) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were calculated from MS intensities of unique+razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are main effectors of messenger RNA (mRNA) decoding, peptide-bond formation, and ribosome dynamics during translation. Ribose 2'-O-methylation (2'-O-Me) is the most abundant rRNA chemical modification, and displays a complex pattern in rRNA. 2'-O-Me was shown to be essential for accurate and efficient protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells. However, whether rRNA 2'-O-Me is an adjustable feature of the human ribosome and a means of regulating ribosome function remains to be determined. Here we challenged rRNA 2'-O-Me globally by inhibiting the rRNA methyl-transferase fibrillarin in human cells. Using RiboMethSeq, a nonbiased quantitative mapping of 2'-O-Me, we identified a repertoire of 2'-O-Me sites subjected to variation and demonstrate that functional domains of ribosomes are targets of 2'-O-Me plasticity. Using the cricket paralysis virus internal ribosome entry site element, coupled to in vitro translation, we show that the intrinsic capability of ribosomes to translate mRNAs is modulated through a 2'-O-Me pattern and not by nonribosomal actors of the translational machinery. Our data establish rRNA 2'-O-Me plasticity as a mechanism providing functional specificity to human ribosomes.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Fibrillarin, Ribosomes

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Brun Virginie
EDyP


