### Accession
PXD013551

### Title
Transcriptome and excretory–secretory proteome of infective-stage larvae of Gnathostoma spinigerum reveal potential immunodiagnostic targets for development Parasite

### Description
This paper *potentially* provides a useful transcriptomic and proteomic resource for the parasitic nematode Gnathostoma spinigerum. Most importantly, the paper gives not only proteomics data but also immunoblot data for antigenic responses of infected humans against G. spinigerum proteins that were probably secreted into human hosts in vivo. These data are potentially useful to biomedicine.

### Sample Protocol
Excretory-secretory product (ES) of G. spinigerum L3 were prepared by in vitro culture technique. In detail, the parasites were washed twice with RPMI 1640 (company) containing 1× penicillin/streptomycin (Biowest) for 30 min each at RT and then 100 larvae were transferred into 25 cm2 culture flask (company) containing 10 ml RPMI 1640, 1× penicillin/streptomycin, and—glucose. The larvae were cultured at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 for 6 days. The culture medium was collected at every 24 h and replaced with new medium. Medium collected from each time point will be dialyzed against 1× PBS for 48 h at 4°C followed by concentrating using Amicon® Stirred Cells (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The quality of protein in each time point was examined by 12% SDS-PAGE. ES showed similar pattern as 24 h and without degradation were pooled and then determined amount of protein using the Coomassie PlusTM Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by storage at −80 °C.

### Data Protocol
1-DE and mass spectrometry  Ten micrograms of ESPs were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE prior to staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 solution (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Each gel was excised in 18 rectangles and then destained with destaining solution [50 mM NH4HCO3, 50% (V/V) acetonitrile (ACN)] followed by reducing with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (GE Healthcare, UK), and alkylating with 250 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; GE Healthcare, UK), respectively. The gel pieces were incubated in the dark for 30 min and then dehydrated with 200 ml ACN. Proteins in gels were digested by incubating with trypsin (100 ng/ml; Sigma) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gels using 50% (V/V) ACN, dried by vacuum evaporator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA) and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid. Each peptide suspension was injected into an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex; Surrey, UK) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS; micrOTOF-Q II, Bruker; Bremen, Germany) and the mass spectra were processed using analysis software (DataAnalysisTM 4.0, Bruker) as mentioned elsewhere [19]. Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to search the .mgf file against our G. spinigerum transcriptome database. Missed cleavage was set to 1. Variable modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation. Only protein hits from the MASCOT search with 95% confidence were demonstrated.   2-DE and immunomics   One hundred microliter of ESPs (25 µg) were transferred into microcentrifuge tube and then removed interfering substance using 2-D Clean-Up kit (GE Healthcare) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The pellet was resuspended with 125 µl DeStreak rehydration solution containing IPG buffer (0.5% IPG buffer pH 3−10 NL; GE Healthcare) and then transferred into IPG strip holder followed by placing Immobiline DryStrip pH 3-10 NL, 7 cm (GE Healthcare) face down to the solution. After overlaying dry strip cover fluid, the strip was allowed to rehydrate in Ettan IPGphor II with a condition of 50 µA/strip, 20 C for 14 h and then place it face up on Ettan IPGphor Manifold (GE Healthcare). Electrophoresis was performed with the running conditions of initial 0.3 kV/h for 30 min, followed by 0.3 kV/h gradient for 30 min, 4.0 kV/h for 90 min, and step and hold at 3.0 kV/h for 35 min. Downstream steps including reduction, alkylation, and SDS-PAGE were performed as mentioned previously (Sookrung). The protein spots were visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (CBB) dye.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Contexte</i>&#xa0;: <i>Gnathostoma spinigerum</i> est un n&#xe9;matode parasite nuisible qui provoque une morbidit&#xe9; et une mortalit&#xe9; graves chez les humains et les animaux. Des m&#xe9;dicaments et des vaccins efficaces et des m&#xe9;thodes de diagnostic fiables sont n&#xe9;cessaires pour pr&#xe9;venir et contr&#xf4;ler les maladies associ&#xe9;es. Cependant, l&#x2019;absence de bases de donn&#xe9;es sur le g&#xe9;nome, le transcriptome et le prot&#xe9;ome reste une limitation majeure. Dans cette &#xe9;tude, des analyses transcriptomiques et s&#xe9;cr&#xe9;tomiques de larves avanc&#xe9;es au troisi&#xe8;me stade de <i>G. spinigerum</i> (aL3G) ont &#xe9;t&#xe9; effectu&#xe9;es par des m&#xe9;thodes de nouvelle g&#xe9;n&#xe9;ration de s&#xe9;quen&#xe7;age, bioinformatique et prot&#xe9;omique. <i>R&#xe9;sultats</i>&#xa0;: Une analyse incorporant des donn&#xe9;es de transcriptome et de bioinformatique pour pr&#xe9;dire les prot&#xe9;ines excr&#xe9;to-s&#xe9;cr&#xe9;toires (ESP) a class&#xe9; respectivement 171 et 292 prot&#xe9;ines en groupes de s&#xe9;cr&#xe9;tions classiques et non classiques. Les prot&#xe9;ines prot&#xe9;olytiques (m&#xe9;talloprot&#xe9;ases), r&#xe9;gulatrices de la signalisation cellulaire (kinases et phosphatases) et r&#xe9;gulatrices m&#xe9;taboliques (m&#xe9;tabolisme du glucose et des lipides) &#xe9;taient r&#xe9;gul&#xe9;es &#xe0; la hausse dans le transcriptome et le s&#xe9;cr&#xe9;tome. Une analyse immunomique bidimensionnelle (2D) des aL3Gs-ESP avec des s&#xe9;rums humains infect&#xe9;s par <i>G. spinigerum</i> et des helminthiases apparent&#xe9;es a sugg&#xe9;r&#xe9; que l&#x2019;inhibiteur de la s&#xe9;rine prot&#xe9;ase (serpine) &#xe9;tait une cible antig&#xe9;nique prometteuse pour le d&#xe9;veloppement ult&#xe9;rieur de m&#xe9;thodes immunodiagnostiques de la gnathostomose. <i>Conclusions</i>&#xa0;: Le transcriptome et le prot&#xe9;ome excr&#xe9;to-s&#xe9;cr&#xe9;toire des aL3G peuvent faciliter la compr&#xe9;hension de la biologie mol&#xe9;culaire de base du parasite et l&#x2019;identification de multiples facteurs associ&#xe9;s, favorisant &#xe9;ventuellement la d&#xe9;couverte de nouveaux m&#xe9;dicaments et vaccins. L&#x2019;analyse 2D-immunomique a identifi&#xe9; la serpine, une prot&#xe9;ine s&#xe9;cr&#xe9;t&#xe9;e par les aL3G, comme un candidat int&#xe9;ressant pour l&#x2019;immunodiagnostic, qui m&#xe9;rite une &#xe9;valuation et une validation imm&#xe9;diates.

### Keywords
Excretory–secretory proteome, Immunodiagnosis, Transcriptome, Gnathostoma spinigerum

### Affiliations
Mahidol university
Department of Helminthology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.

### Submitter
onrapak reamtong

### Lab Head
Dr Poom Adisakwattana
Department of Helminthology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.


