### Accession
PXD008362

### Title
Specificity of the osmotic stress in Candida albicans highlighted by quantitative proteomics - C4PR_LIV

### Description
Stress adaptation is critical for the survival of microbes in dynamic environments, and in particular, for fungal pathogens to survive in and colonise host niches. Proteomic analyses have the potential to significantly enhance our understanding of these adaptive responses by providing insight into the post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms that contribute to the outputs as well as testing presumptions about the regulation of protein levels based on transcript profiling. Therefore, in this study we used label-free, quantitative mass spectrometry to re-examine the response of the major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida albicans, to osmotic stress. Of the 1,262 proteins that were identified, 84 (7.7%) were reproducibly down-regulated in response to 1 M NaCl. These changes reflected the decrease in ribosome biogenesis and translation that often accompanies stress exposure. The 64 up-regulated proteins (5.1% of the total) included the glycerol biosynthetic enzymes, Gpd2 and Gpp1/Rhr2, as well as enzymes of central metabolism that may contribute to carbon flux to glycerol, a key osmolyte for this yeast. The up-regulated proteins also included proteins with functions during stress such as Hsp12, Hsp21, Cat1, Gsh2, Glx3 and Tps2, which was consistent with a perturbation of redox homeostasis and increased synthesis of the stress protectant trehalose during salt stress. These data reinforce the view that adaptation to salt stress involves a transient reduction in ribosome biogenesis and translation together with the accumulation of the osmolyte, glycerol. Given the small proportion of C. albicans proteins whose abundances are affected by salt stress, the results highlight the specificity of the metabolic response to salt stress.

### Sample Protocol
A single C. albicans colony was cultured overnight at 30°C in shaking incubator in 5 mL CAI4-CIp10 in YPD-T, pH 7.4, 1% w/v yeast extract, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.4 ). The following day 500 µL culture was inoculated into 50 mL YPD-T and allowed to grow overnight. Fresh medium was then inoculated with culture to OD600 = 0.2 and the cells were grown to OD600 = 0.8. At this point the culture was divided into two, diluted with medium to OD600 of 0.2 and NaCl added to one flask, the other serving as the control. The triplicate analysis (three high salt, three controls) were harvested after 1 h of further growth and the cell pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Three biological replicates per treatment group were produced in this way.  Cell pellets were thawed on ice and washed in cold water. Each cell pellet was re-suspended in 250 µL water and an equal volume of acid-washed glass beads was added. The cells were disrupted using a Mini bead beater 8 by 5 cycles of 10 x 20 s with 1 min on ice between each cycle. After each cycle the samples were spun down, the supernatant containing the protein extract removed, and fresh cold waters added before repeating the bead beating. Finally, fractions from each sample were pooled before further analysis. High levels of cell breakage were confirmed by SDS-PAGE of different fractions.  Three biological replicate samples containing a broken cell preparation equivalent to 100 µg protein were dissolved in 100 µL 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and analysed for each condition. The proteins were denatured with 10 µL of 1% (w/v) RapiGest in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 80°C for 10 min. Next, the samples were reduced by the addition of 10 µL of 60 mM DTT followed by incubation for 10 min at 65°C, and alkylated by the addition of 10 µL of 180 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin was reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid to a concentration of 0.2 µg/µL and digestion performed by the addition of 20 µL of the trypsin solution to the sample followed by incubation at 37°C. After 4.5 h, an additional 10 µL of trypsin solution was added and incubation continued overnight. At the end of the digestion, TFA was added to inactivate and precipitate the RapiGest detergent. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min, the supernatant fraction, containing tryptic peptides, was used directly for LC-MS analyses.  Nanoscale LC separation of tryptic peptides was performed with a NanoAcquity system, equipped with a Symmetry C18 5 µm, 2 cm x 180 µm precolumn and an HSS T3 C18 1.7 µm, 25 cm x 75 µm analytical reversed phase column. The samples, 100 ng, were transferred with aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to the precolumn at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 5 min. Mobile phase A was water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, whilst mobile phase B was acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. After desalting and preconcentration, the peptides were eluted from the precolumn to the analytical column and separated with a gradient of 3-40% mobile phase B over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 2 min column rinse with 85% of mobile phase B. The columns were re-equilibrated at initial conditions for 20 min. The analytical column temperature was maintained at 35ºC. The lock mass compound, 200 fmol [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B/µL, was delivered by an auxiliary pump at 600 nL/min.  Mass spectrometric analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer. For all measurements, the mass spectrometer was operated in v-mode with nominal resolution of 20,000 FWHM. All analyses were performed in positive mode ESI. The ion source block temperature and capillary voltage were set to 100ºC and 3.2 kV, respectively. The time of flight analyser of the mass spectrometer was externally calibrated with a NaCsI mixture from m/z 50 to 1990. The data were post-acquisition lock mass corrected using the doubly charged monoisotopic ion of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B. The reference sprayer was sampled with a frequency of 60 s. Accurate mass LC-MS data were collected in ion mobility assisted data independent (LC-IM-DIA-MS) mode of acquisition ((U)(H)DMSE). The spectral acquisition time in each mode was 0.5 s with a 0.02 s interscan delay. In low energy MS mode, data were collected at a constant ‘Trap’ collision energy of 4 eV and a constant ‘Transfer’ collision energy of 2 eV. In elevated energy mode, the ‘Trap’ collision energy was ramped from 4 eV to 5 eV in 0.5 s and the ‘Transfer’ collision energy was set to ramp during each ion mobility separation cycle, with the ramp applying the optimum collision energy for ions at a specific drift time. The ion mobility separations were combined in the 0.5 s total elevated energy integration time. One cycle of low MS1 and elevated energy MS2 data was acquired every 1 s. The quadrupole mass analyser was operated in non-resolving mode.

### Data Protocol
ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER version 3.0.2 was used to process all data. Protein identifications were obtained by searching the C. albicans database. To detect and monitor protein and peptide identification error rates, decoy database entries were created by reversing the original protein amino acid sequences and concatenating them with the original entries. The principle of the search algorithm has been described previously 30. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were determined automatically, one missed cleavage site was allowed, as well as fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine. Identifications were accepted when the protein identification exceeded a confidence limit of identification greater than 95%,  the protein was identified in at least two experimental replicates, either technical or biological, at least two peptides per protein were identified, and an amount estimation was associated with the identification, which maintained an experiment-wide based protein identification FDR of 1%. Missing data points were replicated by data imputation after filtering for valid values. In short, missing values were imputed with the average value of technical/biological replicates if the relative standard deviation across replicates did not exceed 50%. In all other instances, i.e. when the standard deviation was greater than 50% or when the protein was not detected in any of the replicates, the 0.1% percentile value of the normalised MS2 abundance was imputed.  Normalised protein abundances were expressed as the MS2 product ion intensity sum of the fragment ions identified to a protein over the sum of all detected product ions from all proteins detected within a given replicate experiment. As demonstrated by Daly et al. 34, product ion intensities scale linearly with precursor ion intensities and are a viable alternative to estimate the concentration of a protein in cases where saturation skews the estimation of the abundance. The latter can be caused by concentration effects, i.e. high abundant and well ionising species, or by acquisition, where ion concentration results in an increased number of ions reaching the detection system. This leads in both instances to underestimation of concentration and incorrect relative abundances. Relative protein abundances, log2 and square-root transformed, assuming Poisson distribution of the data, were considered significant when the 95% confidence interval was exceeded and p < 0.05.  To carry out functional analysis of our proteomic data, we queried online S. cerevisiae database annotation(s), which are more complete than the most recent C. albicans annotations. NCBI blastp was initially used to search a reviewed UniProt S. cerevisiae database to determine the S. cerevisiae homologs of our C. albicans protein assignments. Annotation for the top S. cerevisiae hit for each C. albicans sequence submitted to blastp (lowest e-value and highest bit score), was used for subsequent GO functional analysis. The ‘simplify’ option of the ‘GOCluster_Report’ function of the ‘R/Bioconductor package systemPipeR version 1.10  was used to perform enrichment tests for “slim” GO terms based on a hypergeometric distribution against a background list of all proteins in the S. cerevisiae proteome (minimum gene set size = 3, p-value cut-off = 0.05). To generate pathway diagrams annotated with our expression data, the WikiPathways plug-in of Pathvisio version 3.2.4 was used. All other data analyses and visualisations were carried out using R version 3.4.2; specifically, PCA using ‘factoMineR’ and fuzzy c-means clustering using the Mfuzz package.

### Publication Abstract
Stress adaptation is critical for the survival of microbes in dynamic environments, and in particular, for fungal pathogens to survive in and colonise host niches. Proteomic analyses have the potential to significantly enhance our understanding of these adaptive responses by providing insight into post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms that contribute to the outputs, as well as testing presumptions about the regulation of protein levels based on transcript profiling. Here, we used label-free, quantitative mass spectrometry to re-examine the response of the major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida albicans, to osmotic stress. Of the 1,262 proteins that were identified, 84 were down-regulated in response to 1M NaCl, reflecting the decrease in ribosome biogenesis and translation that often accompanies stress. The 64 up-regulated proteins included central metabolic enzymes required for glycerol synthesis, a key osmolyte for this yeast, as well as proteins with functions during stress. These data reinforce the view that adaptation to salt stress involves a transient reduction in ribosome biogenesis and translation together with the accumulation of the osmolyte, glycerol. The specificity of the response to salt stress is highlighted by the small proportion of quantified C. albicans proteins (5%) whose relative elevated abundances were statistically significant.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Quantitation, Label-free, Dia

### Affiliations
N/A
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Hans Vissers

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Vissers
N/A


