### Accession
PXD008969

### Title
AS precipitation and protein A affinity chromatography for abundant plasma protein depletion

### Description
Plasma is a highly valuable resource for biomarker research since it is easy obtainable and contains a high amount of information on patient health status. Although advancements in the field of proteomics enabled analysis of the plasma proteome, identification of low abundant proteins remains challenging due to high complexity and large dynamic range. In order to reduce the dynamic range of protein concentrations, a tandem depletion technique consisting of ammonium sulfate precipitation and Protein A affinity chromatography was developed. Using this method, 50 % of albumin, together with other high abundant proteins such as alpha-1-antitrypin, was depleted from the plasma sample at 20 % to 40 % ammonium sulfate saturation levels. In combination with immunoglobulin removal using a Protein A column, this technique delivered up to 40 new low- to medium abundance protein identifications when performing a shotgun mass spectrometry analysis. Compared to non-depleted plasma, 270 additional protein spots were observed during 2D-PAGE analysis. These results illustrate that this tandem depletion method is equivalent to commercial kits which are based on immune-affinity chromatography. Moreover, this method using protein A immunoglobulin depletion was shown to be highly reproducible and a minimal amount of non-target proteins was depleted. The combination of ammonium sulfate precipitation and Protein A affinity chromatography offers a low cost, efficient, straightforward and reproducible alternative to commercial kits, with proteins remaining in native conformation, allowing protein activity and protein interaction studies.

### Sample Protocol
Three replicate murine plasma samples were treated with ammonium sulfate precipitation and protein A affinity chromatography in order to deplete albumin and immunoglobulins respectively. After abundant plasma depletion, proteins were trypsin digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled online to an Ultimate 3000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) instrument (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, US). Sample separation was performed using a 95 minutes gradient of 99.9 % H2O, 0.1 % FA (mobile phase A) and 19.92 % H2O, 80 % ACN, 0.08 % FA (mobile phase B). A gradient of mobile phase B in mobile phase A from 4 % to 10 % in 5 minutes, 10 % to 25 % in 50 minutes, 25 % to 45 % in 18 minutes followed by a steep increase to 95 % in 1 minute was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ionization mode with an m/z scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z. Up to ten of the most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. For precursor spectra, a resolving power of 70000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) was used with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 ions and a maximum ion injection time (IT) of 256 ms. For fragmentation spectra, a resolving power of 17000 FWHM was used with an AGC target of 1x106 ions and a maximum IT of 64 ms. Dynamic exclusion of 10 s and a charge exclusion of 1+,6+ - 8+, >8+ was applied for ion selection. Data was analyzed using Peaks software.

### Publication Abstract
Ammonium sulfate precipitation (ASP) was explored as a method for depleting some highly abundant proteins from blood plasma, in order to reduce the dynamic range of protein concentration and to improve the detection of low abundance proteins by 2D-PAGE. 40% ammonium sulfate saturation was chosen since it allowed depleting 39% albumin and 82% &#x3b1;-1-antitrypsin. ASP-depletion showed high reproducibility in 2D-PAGE analysis (4.2% variation in relative abundance of albumin), similar to that offered by commercial affinity-depletion columns. Besides, it allowed detecting 59 spots per gel, very close to the number of spots detected in immuno-affinity-depleted plasma. Thus, ASP at 40% saturation is a reliable depletion method that may help in proteomic analysis of blood plasma. Finally, ASP-depletion seems to be complementary to hydrophobic interaction chromatography (HIC)-depletion, and therefore an ASP-step followed by a HIC-step could probably deplete the most highly abundant plasma proteins, thus improving the detection of low abundance proteins by 2D-PAGE.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mouse, Abundant protein depletion

### Affiliations
KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium
KULeuven

### Submitter
Lentel Pringels

### Lab Head
Dr Liliane Schoofs
KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium


