### Accession
PXD015146

### Title
Idnetification of chicken embryo muscular and liver proteins

### Description
​ ​​ Aim of the projects to identified proteins responsible for inducing regenerative processes in adult animals.

### Sample Protocol
150ul of protein extract was concentrated on Vivacon 500, 10,000 MWCO Hydrosart filters by centrifuging at 10 000g for 30min at 4°C, filters were washed twice with 200ul of washing buffer (8M urea in 100mM NH4HCO3 aqueous solution) and spinning for 10kg for 20min in 4°C. Accordingly, proteins were reduced by addiment of 50ul of washing buffer with 20mM TCEP and incubated for 30minutes in RT then centrfuge10kg for 20min in 20°C.  Proteins were alkylated with 50ul of 20mM IAA in washing buffer then spin. Digestion was performed with proteases mix LysC/Tryp (Promega V507A). Proteases mix was resuspended in 80ul of 8M urea in 100mM NH4HCO3. 40ul of a solution was added to the filter and incubated for 3h at 37°C, then 400ul of NH4HCO3 was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Probes were centrifuge 10 000g for 30min at 30°C. 100ul of NH4HCO3 was added and centrifuge 10 000g for 30min at 30°C. The solution was acidifed with to final concentration of 0.4% TFA and speed-vaced to dryness.  Peptides mixture was fractionated using high pH protocol on Oasis HLB 10mg cartridge (Waters 186000383). Cartridges were activated by washing them with methanol and equilibrated with  25mM ammonium formate pH10. The protein pellet was resuspended in 400ul of 25 ammonium formate ph10 and loaded on a cartridge. washed once with loading buffer. The elution was carried out with a growing gradient of acetonitrile in loading buffer (5/10/15/20/30/35/40/85 %). The last elution was carried out with pure methanol. All fractions were speedvaced to dryness. Pellets were resuspended in 60 ul of 0.1%TFA with 2%MeCN.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) as described in [1]. Data were analyzed with the Max-Quant 1.6.3.4 platform[2] as described previously [3]. The Gallus gallus reference proteome database from UniProt (containing 29474 protein id's) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Finding an effective muscle regeneration technique is a priority for regenerative medicine. It is known that the key factors determining tissue formation include cells, capable of proliferating and/or differentiating, a niche (surface) allowing their colonization and growth factors. The interaction between these factors, especially between the surface of the artificial niche and growth factors, is not entirely clear. Moreover, it seems that the use of a complex of complementary growth factors instead of a few strictly defined ones could increase the effectiveness of tissue maturation, including muscle tissue. In this study, we evaluated whether graphene oxide (GO) nanofilm, chicken embryo muscle extract (CEME), and GO combined with CEME would affect the differentiation and functional maturation of muscle precursor cells, as well as the ability to spontaneously contract a pseudo-tissue muscle. CEME was extracted on day 18 of embryogenesis. Muscle cells obtained from an 8-day-old chicken embryo limb bud were treated with GO and CEME. Cell morphology and differentiation were observed using different microscopy methods. Cytotoxicity and viability of cells were measured by lactate dehydrogenase and Vybrant Cell Proliferation assays. Gene expression of myogenic regulatory genes was measured by Real-Time PCR. Our results demonstrate that CEME, independent of the culture surface, was the main factor influencing the intense differentiation of muscle progenitor cells. The present results, for the first time, clearly demonstrated that the cultured tissue-like structure was capable of inducing contractions without externally applied impulses. It has been indicated that a small amount of CEME in media (about 1%) allows the culture of pseudo-tissue muscle capable of spontaneous contraction. The study showed that the graphene oxide may be used as a niche for differentiating muscle cells, but the decisive influence on the maturation of muscle tissue, especially muscle contractions, depends on the complexity of the applied growth factors.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tissiue, Chicken

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Warsaw Univeristy of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Ewa Sawosz Chwalibóg
Warsaw Univeristy of Life Sciences


