### Accession
PXD001738

### Title
Shotgun Proteomics of Brachylophosaurus canadensis Blood Vessels

### Description
Brachylophosaurus canadensis peptides from blood vessels isolated from within the bone were characterized using high resolution mass spectrometry. This allowed identification of actin, alpha and beta tubulin, various histones, myosin, and tropomyosin. Within the peptides, evidence of age (e.g., deamidation, oxidation, protein backbone cleavage) was present.

### Sample Protocol
All blood vessels were extracted using the three-step extraction protocol from Didangelos et al. 2010. In short vessels are sequentially extracted using 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM Tris (pH 7.3), then 0.08% SDS, and finally 4 M guanidine HCl in 50 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.8). NaCl and SDS supernatants were acetone precipitated and guanidine HCl supernatant was ethanol precipitated. Sediment and buffer controls were treated the same as the vessels. After extraction and precipitation, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with Promega modified trypsin overnight at 37oC. All peptides were concentrated by elution from ZipTips. Brachylophosaurus canadensis peptides in 0.1% formic acid were injected onto a self-packed 150 µm inner diameter, 2 cm bed length, C18 125 Å pore size, 3 µm particle size (Phenomenex) trap column and washed for 10 minutes at 3 µL/min. Peptides were transferred to and eluted from a self-packed 75 µm inner diameter, 10 cm bed length, C18 125 Å pore size, 3 µm particle size (Phenomenex) analytical column with a picofrit emitter tip at 300 nL/min with a Dionex nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into either an 12T Velos FT-ICR or Velos Orbitrap Elite with a scan range of 350-2000 m/z. For the 12T Velos FT-ICR, the top ten most intense peaks for each precursor scan were fragmented using CID with an isolation window of 2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion duration of 240 s, and a repeat duration of 5000 s. Exclusion mass width was set to 1.50 Da. On the Velos Orbitrap Elite, the top five most intense peaks for each precursor scan were fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an isolation width of 2 m/z. The minimum FT mass for fragments was set at 125 Da. On all instruments, unassigned and 1+ charged molecules were rejected for fragmentation.  Chicken and ostrich peptide samples were injected onto a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC trap column (180 µm x 20 mm) with Symmetry C18 and washed for 5 minutes at 5 µL/min. Peptides were transferred to a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC (75 µm x 250 mm), BEH130C18 (1.7 µm particle size) analytical column and eluted at 300 nL/min on a Waters nanoAcquity into an LTQ-Orbitrap XL. Scan range, isolation window, and dynamic exclusion setting were the same as above. The top five most intense peaks were fragmented.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were searched in PEAKS7 using a 10 ppm mass accuracy for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragment ions of CID spectra, and 5 ppm/0.02 Da for HCD spectra. Up to 5 miss cleavages were allowed, as was non-specific cleavage at either end of the peptides. No fixed modifications were specified. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were allowed as variable modifications. All B. canadensis spectra were searched against the following databases: UniProt Vertebrates, UniProt Chicken, NCBI Archosauria (Aves+Crocodylia), NCBI Crocodylia, and NCBI Aves.  All chicken and ostrich spectra were searched against UniProt Chicken and ostrich GuHCl spectra were additionally searched against UniProt Vertebrates. To find additional, unspecified PTMs and mutations, PEAKS PTM and SPIDER were enabled. Results were filtered with the following parameters: peptide spectral match FDR ≤ 5%, proteins ≥ -10 IgP 20 plus at least 1 unique peptide.  All B. canadensis spectra were also searched in Byonic 1.1 (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA) using a 10 ppm mass accuracy for precursors and either 0.4 Da (for ion-trap MS2) or 20 ppm (for Orbitrap MS) for fragment ions. We allowed for up to 2 missed cleavages and set carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed and deamidated asparagine and glutamine; pyro-glu N-terminal glutamine, glutamic acid, and carbamidomethylated cysteine; oxidized methionine and tryptophan; and doubly oxidized tryptophan as variable. An initial search used the full Swissprot database, and a subsequent wildcard search, which allowed one unknown modification per peptide of any mass between -120 and +120 Da, was conducted on proteins identified in the initial search. A wildcard search finds unanticipated modifications and sequence variants, but is less sensitive to exact matches due to the increased size of the search space. FDR was calculated using target-decoy reverse-database searching.

### Publication Abstract
Structures similar to blood vessels in location, morphology, flexibility, and transparency have been recovered after demineralization of multiple dinosaur cortical bone fragments from multiple specimens, some of which are as old as 80 Ma. These structures were hypothesized to be either endogenous to the bone (i.e., of vascular origin) or the result of biofilm colonizing the empty osteonal network after degradation of original organic components. Here, we test the hypothesis that these structures are endogenous and thus retain proteins in common with extant archosaur blood vessels that can be detected with high-resolution mass spectrometry and confirmed by immunofluorescence. Two lines of evidence support this hypothesis. First, peptide sequencing of Brachylophosaurus canadensis blood vessel extracts is consistent with peptides comprising extant archosaurian blood vessels and is not consistent with a bacterial, cellular slime mold, or fungal origin. Second, proteins identified by mass spectrometry can be localized to the tissues using antibodies specific to these proteins, validating their identity. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001738.

### Keywords
Dinosaur, Paleoproteomics, Blood vessels, Brachylophosaurus canadensis

### Affiliations
William Beaumont Hospital
Department of Marine, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695

### Submitter
Leonid Zamdborg

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy Paul Cleland
Department of Marine, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695


