### Accession
PXD028768

### Title
Solvent Precipitation SP3 (SP4) enhances recovery for proteomics sample preparation without magnetic beads

### Description
Complete, reproducible extraction of protein material is essential for comprehensive and unbiased proteome analyses. A current gold standard is single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), in which organic solvent and magnetic beads are used to denature and capture proteins, with subsequently washes allowing contaminant removal. However, SP3 is dependent on effective protein immobilisation onto beads, risks losses during wash steps, and experiences a drop-off in protein recovery at higher protein inputs. Magnetic beads may also contaminate samples and instruments, and become costly for larger scale protein preparations. Here, we propose solvent precipitation SP3 (SP4) as an alternative to SP3, omitting magnetic beads and employing brief centrifugation—either with or without low-cost inert glass beads—as the means of aggregated protein capture. SP4 recovered equivalent or greater protein yields for 1 — 5000 µg preparations and improved reproducibility (median protein R2 0.99 (SP4) vs. 0.97 (SP3)). Deep proteome profiling (n=9,076) also demonstrated improved recovery by SP4 and a significant enrichment of membrane and low-solubility proteins vs. SP3. The effectiveness of SP4 was verified in three other labs, each confirming equivalent or improved proteome characterisation over SP3. This work suggests that protein precipitation is the primary mechanism of SP3, and reliance on magnetic beads presents protein losses, especially at higher concentrations and amongst hydrophobic proteins. SP4 represents an efficient and effective alternative to SP3, provides the option to omit beads entirely, and offers virtually unlimited scalability of input and volume—all whilst retaining the speed and universality of SP3.

### Sample Protocol
E14 murine embryonic stem cells were lysed in RIPA buffer by pipetting and sonication. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation (20,000 g, 10min, 4°C) and protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Aliquots (n=5 per experimental condition) corresponding to 50µg of total protein were removed and diluted (1:1) with 20mM HEPES, pH8.5 buffer. Reduction with 5mM TCEP final concentration was carried out at 37°C for 45 minutes and alkylation with 20mM 2-chloroacetamide (25°C, 30 minutes). SP3 and SP4 protocols were carried out as described in the materials and methods section. Following the respective processing methods, rapid digestion buffer (150 µl per sample, Promega VA 1061) was added followed by 5 µg LysC/Trypsin mixture (Promega VA1061). Protein digestion was carried out at 70°C with shaking (800 rpm) for 2h. Samples were removed from the incubator and cooled on ice. Acidification was achieved by addition of 10% TFA (final concentration: 0.25%) and glass or magnetic beads were removed by centrifugation (20,000g, 5min, 25°C). Supernatants were transferred to sample vials for analysed by LC-MS/MS. Sample aliquots corresponding to 1.0µg total digest were injected on a U3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatography system onto a trapping column (Thermo Acclaim Pepmap 100, 0.1x20 mm, 164564) at a flow rate of 8µl/min with loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). Following valve switch peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (Thermo EasySpray column, 0.075x500mm, ES803A) by applying a linear multi-step gradient (buffer A: 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 75% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250nl/min and a column temperature of 40°C. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionisation mode at a spray voltage of 1.6 KV. Data-dependent acquisition was carried out with a Top30 method, automatic gain control targets of 3x106 (MS1) and 5x104 (MS2) ions and maximum accumulation times of 25ms (MS1)  and 50ms (MS2), respectively. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursors was enabled for 50s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 and database searches carried out against a Swissprot Mus musculus database (version 2020.11.11, 17,056 entries). Settings included trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, and a false discovery rate (FDR) or 1% for peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and peptide N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion were enabled as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled with match and alignment time windows of 0.7 and 20 minutes, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Complete, reproducible extraction of protein material is essential for comprehensive and unbiased proteome analyses. A current gold standard is single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), in which organic solvent and magnetic beads are used to denature and capture protein aggregates, with subsequent washes removing contaminants. However, SP3 is dependent on effective protein immobilization onto beads, risks losses during wash steps, and exhibits losses and greater costs at higher protein inputs. Here, we propose solvent precipitation SP3 (SP4) as an alternative to SP3 protein cleanup, capturing acetonitrile-induced protein aggregates by brief centrifugation rather than magnetism&#x2500;with optional low-cost inert glass beads to simplify handling. SP4 recovered equivalent or greater protein yields for 1-5000 &#x3bc;g preparations and improved reproducibility (median protein <i>R</i><sup>2</sup> 0.99 (SP4) <i>vs</i> 0.97 (SP3)). Deep proteome profiling revealed that SP4 yielded a greater recovery of low-solubility and transmembrane proteins than SP3, benefits to aggregating protein using 80 <i>vs</i> 50% organic solvent, and equivalent recovery by SP4 and S-Trap. SP4 was verified in three other labs across eight sample types and five lysis buffers&#x2500;all confirming equivalent or improved proteome characterization <i>vs</i> SP3. With near-identical recovery, this work further illustrates protein precipitation as the primary mechanism of SP3 protein cleanup and identifies that magnetic capture risks losses, especially at higher protein concentrations and among more hydrophobic proteins. SP4 offers a minimalistic approach to protein cleanup that provides cost-effective input scalability, the option to omit beads entirely, and suggests important considerations for SP3 applications&#x2500;all while retaining the speed and compatibility of SP3.

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Protein precipitation, Sample preparation, Contaminant removal, Lc−ms/ms, Microparticles

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN United Kingdom
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Kramer
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN United Kingdom


