### Accession
PXD021755

### Title
Identification of HLA class I-presented peptides in MSI CRC model cell line HCT-116

### Description
HCT-116 cells were treated either with 5 µM of the NMD inhibitor 5-azacytidine (PMID: 25319547) or DMSO (negative solvent control) for 24 h to examine differences in HLA class I-mediated peptide presentation. Moreover, data were used for the identification of tumor-specific neoepitopes originating from insertion/deletion mutations due to microsatellite instability.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I-complexes and separation of HLA class I-peptides were purified according to the high-throughput protocol developed by Chong and colleagues (PMID: 30666599) omitting the pre-clear and HLA class II plate. For LC-MS/MS analysis pooled samples were resuspended in 30 µl of 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Scientific) and 4.5 µl were used per injection. Lyophilized synthetic peptides for validation of frameshift peptides were purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies (Berlin, Germany) and diluted to a concentration of 100 fmol/ul and 3 µl were used per injection. The mass spectrometric analysis was conducted using an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) for 3 min at 30 µL/min (0.05% TFA in water). Peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, Fisher Scientific) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile, Fisher Chemicals). Total analysis time for the HCD method was 90 min with a gradient containing an 8-25% solvent B elution step for 69 min, followed by an increase to 40% solvent B for 5 min, 85% B for 4 min and re-equilibration step to initial conditions. The LC system was coupled online to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray-Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective). The MS was operated in positive mode and a spray voltage of 2.4 kV was applied for ionization with an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in profile mode for a mass range of 300-1650 m/z at a resolution of 120 000 (RF Lens 30%, AGC target 4e5 ions, and maximum injection time of 250 ms). The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode for MS/MS acquisition. Peptide fragment spectra were acquired for charge states 1-4. The quadrupole isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z and peptides were fragmented via HCD (30%). Fragment mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30 000 for a maximum of 2e5 ions (AGC target) or after 150 ms maximum injection time. The instrument acquired MS/MS spectra for up to 3 s between MS scans. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Additionally, samples were analyzed using two HCD/EThcD decision tree methods. Here, the instrument fragmented precursors with a charge state of +1 using the parameters of the HCD method. Charge states 2-7 were fragmented using ETD (Calibrated Charge-Dependent ETD Parameters) with supplemental activation enabled (HCD, 30%). For MS/MS spectra acquisition, either high abundant (EThcD) or low abundant (lowEThcD) precursors were selected first. AGC target was set to 2e5 ions and a maximum injection time of 200 ms was allowed and the resulting MS/MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30 000. Total analysis time for the HCD/EThcD decision tree methods was 180 min with a gradient containing an 8-25% solvent B elution step for 150 min, followed by an increase to 40% solvent B for 14 min, 85% B for 4 min and re-equilibration step to initial conditions. To further validate the presence of the candidates and to obtain reliable quantification data, InDel neoepitope candidates were measured from the same samples using a targeted MS2 method with the previously described settings.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X (version 10.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), which combines peptide de novo sequencing and traditional database search approaches. Raw files were subjected to the default data refinement before de novo sequencing and database search. The parent mass error tolerance was set to 10.0 ppm while the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Fragmentation mode was set either to “HCD” or “Mixed” (for EThcD measurements with HCD fragmentation for single positive precursors). All raw files were first searched against the UniProt/SwissProt database (20659 entries, February 2019) and database containing standard contaminants with oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02 Da), and acetylation of N-termini (42.01) as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to “no enzyme”. De novo only spectra with an average local confidence of more than 50% (i.e. good spectra not matching a UniProt/SwissProt database entry), were subjected to a multi-round database search using the in-house generated frameshift peptide databases based on CCLE (747 entries), COSMIC (1071 entries) and the SNP neoepitope datasets (1526 entries). All peptides identified at a peptide spectrum match (PSM) FDR of 1% were exported and contaminants, as well as peptides shorter than 8 AAs and longer than 15 AAs, were filtered out. Unique peptides matching to entries of the UniProt/SwissProt database were reported as “endogenous”, while peptides matching one of the FSP databases were reported as “InDel neoepitopes” and peptides matching the SNP neoepitope database were reported as “SNP neoepitopes”. Binding prediction to the expressed HLA allotypes was performed using NetMHCpan (version 4.0a)(PMID: 28978689). The rank threshold for binders was set to <0.5% for strong binders (SB) and <2% for weak binders (WB). For peptides binding to more than one HLA allotype, only the best ranked HLA allotype with its corresponding affinity in nM was reported. Peptide sequences were clustered using GibbsCluster (version 2.0)(PMID: 28407089) with default parameters for MHC class I ligands and motifs were visualized with Seq2Logo (version 2.0)(PMID: 22638583). Hydrophobicity indices of identified peptides were calculated using SSRcalc version Q (PMID: 17105172) using the following parameters: 100Å C18 column, 0.1% Formic Acid (2015 model), no cysteine protection. Spectra recorded from synthetic peptides were compared to spectra measured from the samples. Briefly, all spectra recorded for a given peptide were compared to all spectra recorded from its synthetic counterpart. Raw data for matched fragment ions was exported from PEAKS Studio X (PSM-ions.txt), normalized intensities of matched fragment ions were correlated and the match with the highest correlation was reported graphically. Moreover, retention time differences between the two peptides were calculated and reported. Quantification of HLA-presented peptides was performed using the raw output (peptides.csv) from PEAKS and a custom script in the R programming language (ISBN 3-900051-07-0). First, measured intensities from InDel neoepitope candidates using parallel reaction monitoring were combined with measured intensities from endogenous peptides and data were filtered to include only peptides which were measured in at least two out of three replicates per condition and MS method used. Subsequent steps were performed for each MS method separately. Potential batch effects between biological replicates were removed using the limma package (PMID: 25605792). Next, the variance stabilization normalization method was performed on the log2 transformed raw data using the vsn package (PMID: 12169536) with individual normalization coefficients for the different MS methods. Missing values were imputed with the Msnbase package using nearest neighbor averaging (PMID: 22113085). Normalized data were tested for differential HLA presentation of peptides between DMSO and 5AZA treated samples using the limma package. The replicate factor was included in the linear model. Peptides with a FDR ≤ 0.05 and an FC > 2 were defined as hits while peptides with an FDR ≤ 0.2 and an FC ≥ 1.5 were defined as candidates. Results were visualized using the ggplot2 package (ISBN 978-3-319-24277-4).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Colorectal cancer, Microsatellite instability, Hla

### Affiliations
Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit (MMPU), Heidelberg University & European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL); Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Heidelberg University & Hopp Children`s Cancer Center, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT)
Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit (MMPU), Heidelberg University & European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Heidelberg University & Hopp Children’s Cancer Center, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT)

### Submitter
Jonas Becker

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas E. Kulozik
Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit (MMPU), Heidelberg University & European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Heidelberg University & Hopp Children’s Cancer Center, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT)


