### Accession
PXD019298

### Title
Proteomic analysis of collagen membrane and matrix

### Description
High-resolution shotgun proteomic analysis on two porcine collagen-based biomaterials designed for guided bone regeneration and soft tissue augmentation was perfomed. A porcine-derived collagen membrane and a collagen matrix derived from peritoneum and/or skin were digested, separated by nano-reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, and peptides subjected to mass spectrometric detection and analysis

### Sample Protocol
One porcine peritoneum-derived collagen membrane (Bio-Gide, Geistlich, Wolhusen, Switzerland) and a collagen matrix (Mucograft, Geistlich) derived from porcine peritoneum and skin without cross-linking (Al-Maawi et al. 2019) were prepared for proteomic analysis. Standardized fragments (1 x 1 cm) of the biomaterial were cut and submerged in a solution of 1ml 1% Rapigest (Waters, Vienna, Austria) in 50mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate, Sigma Aldrich, Vienna, Austria) for dissolving proteins eventually bound to the membrane. The membrane was sonicated for 15 minutes, centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4°C and 10000 rpm. Extracted proteins were digested uisng trypsin. Following injection onto the trapping column (µPAC trapping column, Pharma Fluidics, Gent, Belgium), peptides were separated by nano-reverse-phase (µPAC, 200 cm separation column, Pharma Fluidics, Gent, Belgium) using an UltiMate3000 nano RSLC HPLC (Thermo Fisher, Germering, Germany) separation system. Both, trap- and separation columns were operated at 50°C and the UV peptide detection at 214 nm served as quality control for HPLC separation. Mass spectrometric detection and MS/MS analysis was performed using the Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap BioPharma mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were introduced into the nano electrospray source (ESI) after the UV cell and the ionization was performed using the stainless-steel needle with 20 µm inner diameter and 10µm tip. Needle voltage was set to 2.8 kV in positive mode and the top 10 ions were selected for MS/MS analysis (fragmentation), resolution was set to 70000 for full MS scans, ions with single charge were excluded from MS/MS analysis and fragmented ions were excluded for 60 seconds from further fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) and searching the Swissprot Sus-Scrofa database (Sus scrofa, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000008227, version from January 2020. Following parameters were used: following parameters: Sus scrofa as taxonomy, modifications of carbamidomethyl on C as fixed, carboxymethylation on M as variable, peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance of 0.05Da, trypsin was selected as the enzyme used and two missed cleavages were allowed, and false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% and the decoy database search was used for estimating the FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen membranes and matrices being widely used in guided bone regeneration and soft tissue augmentation have characteristic properties based on their composition. The respective proteomic signatures have not been identified. Here, we performed a high-resolution shotgun proteomic analysis on two porcine collagen-based biomaterials designed for guided bone regeneration and soft tissue augmentation. Three lots each of a porcine-derived collagen membrane and a matrix derived from peritoneum and/or skin were digested and separated by nano-reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. The peptides were subjected to mass spectrometric detection and analysis. A total of 37 proteins identified by two peptides were present in all collagen membranes and matrices, with 11 and 16 proteins being exclusively present in the membrane and matrix, respectively. The common extracellular matrix proteins include fibrillar collagens (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL2A1, COL3A1, COL5A1, COL5A2, COL5A3, COL11A2), non-fibrillar collagens (COL4A2, COL6A1, COL6A2, COL6A3, COL7A1, COL16A1, COL22A1), and leucine-rich repeat proteoglycans (DCN, LUM, BGN, PRELP, OGN). The structural proteins vimentin, actin-based microfilaments (ACTB), annexins (ANXA1, ANXA5), tubulins (TUBA1B, TUBB), and histones (H2A, H2B, H4) were also identified. Examples of membrane-only proteins are COL12A1 and COL14A1, and, of matrix only proteins, elastin (ELN). The proteomic signature thus revealed the similarities between but also some individual proteins of collagen membrane and matrix.

### Keywords
Bone regeneration, Collagen, Soft tissue augmentation

### Affiliations
Medizinische Universität Wien
Proteomics Core Facility, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Proteomics Core Facility, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


