### Accession
PXD035665

### Title
Deep single-shot nanoLCMS proteome profiling with 1500 bar UHPLC system, long fully porous columns, and HRAM MS

### Description
This study demonstrates how the latest UHPLC (ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography) technology can be combined with high-resolution accurate-mass (HRAM) mass spectrometry (MS) and long columns packed with fully porous particles to improve bottom-up proteomics analysis with nano-flow liquid chromatography mass-spectrometry (nanoLCMS) methods. The increased back pressures from the UHPLC system enabled the use of 75 µm I.D. x 75 cm columns packed with 2 µm particles at a typical 300 nL/min flow rate as well as elevated and reduced flow rates. The constant pressure pump operation at 1500 bar reduced sample loading and column washing/equilibration stages and overall overhead time that maximizes MS utilization time. The versatility of flow rate optimization to balance the sensitivity, throughput with sample loading amount, and capability of using longer gradients contribute to a greater number of peptide and protein identifications for single-shot bottom-up proteomics experiments. The routine proteome profiling and precise quantification of >7,000 proteins with single-shot nanoLC-MS analysis open possibilities for large-scale discovery studies with deep dive into the protein level alterations.

### Sample Protocol
Pierce HeLa Digest/PRTC Standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A47996, 10 μg/vial) was reconstituted by adding 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. The vial was subsequently sonicated for two minutes, followed by aspirating and releasing 10 times with a pipette to fully reconstitute the sample. The sample was subsequently transferred to another vial of HeLa Digest/PRTC Standard, which was again sonicated for two minutes and mixed in the same way to produce a final sample concentration of 400 ng/µL HeLa containing 200 fmol/µL PRTC.

### Data Protocol
Acquired Orbitrap Exploris 480 .raw DDA files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a two-step Sequest™ HT search algorithm and INFERYS rescoring node. Further analysis was done using R scripts. The Skyline software package was used to extract and analyze peptide peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
This study demonstrates how the latest ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) technology can be combined with high-resolution accurate-mass (HRAM) mass spectrometry (MS) and long columns packed with fully porous particles to improve bottom-up proteomics analysis with nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS) methods. The increased back pressures from the UHPLC system enabled the use of 75 &#x3bc;m I.D. &#xd7; 75 cm columns packed with 2 &#x3bc;m particles at a typical 300 nL/min flow rate as well as elevated and reduced flow rates. The constant pressure pump operation at 1500 bar reduced sample loading and column washing/equilibration stages and overall overhead time, which maximizes MS utilization time. The versatility of flow rate optimization to balance the sensitivity, throughput with sample loading amount, and capability of using longer gradients contributes to a greater number of peptide and protein identifications for single-shot bottom-up proteomics experiments. The routine proteome profiling and precise quantification of &amp;gt;7000 proteins with single-shot nanoLC-MS analysis open possibilities for large-scale discovery studies with a deep dive into the protein level alterations. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035665.

### Keywords
Human, Lcms, Orbitrap, Cells

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific

### Submitter
Alexander Boychenko

### Lab Head
Dr Runsheng Zheng
Thermo Fisher Scientific


