### Accession
PXD038649

### Title
Leucine-973 is a Crucial Residue Differentiating Insulin and IGF-1 Receptor Signaling

### Description
Insulin and IGF-1 receptors (IR/IGF1R) are highly homologous and share similar signaling systems, but each has a unique physiological role, with IR primarily regulating metabolic homeostasis and IGF1R regulating mitogenic control and growth. Here, we show that replacement of a single amino acid at position 973, just distal to the NPEY motif in the intracellular juxtamembrane region, from leucine, which is highly-conserved in IRs, to phenylalanine, the highly-conserved homologous residue in IGF1Rs, results in decreased IRS-1-PI3K-Akt-mTORC1 signaling and increased of Shc-Gab1-MAPK-cell cycle signaling. As a result, cells expressing L973F-IR exhibit decreased insulin-induced glucose uptake, increased cell growth and impaired receptor internalization. Mice with knockin of the L973F-IR show similar alterations in signaling in vivo, and this leads to decreased insulin sensitivity, a modest increase in growth and decreased weight gain when challenged with high-fat diet. Thus, leucine973 in the juxtamembrane region of the IR acts is a crucial residue differentiating IR signaling from IGF1R signaling.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomics, samples were processed as described previously (1, 2). Briefly, cells were seeded and experimented so that they were confluent at the same time. The confluent cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS, lysed immediately in SDC buffer (4% SDC, 100 mM Tris pH8.5) and snap frozen. Then, the samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes, sonicated for 20 cycles in Biorupter Plus (Diagenode) and then vortexed for 10 seconds. For each sample, 750 µg of protein lysate was alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide and reduced with 40 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine by incubating for 20 minutes on ice in dark. The samples were then digested with a mixture of LysC protease and trypsin (1:100 ratio) and incubated overnight at 37°C in a ThermoMixer at 1200 rpm. Phosphopeptide enrichment was processed as described previously (2). Briefly, 750 µl acetonitrile (ACN) and 250µl TK buffer (36% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) & 3 mM KH2PO4) were added to the digested peptides, and the samples mixed in a ThermoMixer for 30 seconds at 1,500 rpm. Debris was cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min, and the supernatant transferred to 2 ml Deep Well Plates (Eppendorf). TiO2 beads (prepared in 80% ACN, 6% TFA buffer) were added (1:10 ratio protein/beads) and incubated in a ThermoMixer at 40°C and 2000 rpm for 5 min. The TiO2 bound phosphopeptides were then pelleted by centrifugation, transferred to clean tubes and washed 4 times in wash buffer (60% ACN, 1% TFA) to remove nonspecific or non-phosphorylated peptides. The beads were suspended in transfer buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and transferred on top of single layer C8 Stage Tips and centrifuged until dry. The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (40% ACN, 20% NH4OH) and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 20 minutes at 45°C. The phosphopeptides were then acidified by addition of 100µl of 1%TFA and loaded on to equilibrated SDBRPS (styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated, 3M Empore) Stage Tips. The phosphopeptides containing SDBRPS StageTips were washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Finally, the desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS measurement. LC-MS/MS measurement was performed using Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled online to a nanoflow EASY-nLC1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (2).

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic data analysis was processed as described previously (2). The raw files were processed using Maxquant (3) software environment (version 1.5.5.2) with the built in Andromeda search engine for identification and quantification of phosphopeptides. The data were searched using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot Human reference proteome fasta file with a false discovery rate of 1% at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications using minor changes to the default settings as follows: oxidized methionine, acetylation (protein N-term) and phospho was selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl as fixed modification. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. The Maxquant output phospho table was processed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.11) software suite. For analysis of only the wild-type receptors, phosphopeptides that have at least two valid values were selected, and their missing values were imputed with half of the minimum value of the corresponding phosphopeptide. For analysis of the wild-type and chimeric receptor together, phosphopeptides that have at least 50% valid values were selected, and their missing values were imputed using a random forest algorithm in the R package missForest. All values were further normalized to make all samples have the same median log intensity. The statistical significance of phosphopeptides was assessed with empirical Bayesian linear modeling using the limma package (4). P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Differences were considered significant when the FDR was <0.05. The top phosphosites that have FDR < 0.05 in the F-tests were selected, then hierarchical cluster analysis was performed based on the Euclidean distance of these selected phosphosites. Gene sets based on canonical pathways (5) and human kinase substrates (PhosphositePlus and RegPhos) (6) were tested for enrichment analysis using the Fisher exact test. Heatmaps were created with the pheatmap R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Igfr, Ir, Insulin

### Affiliations
NEOsphere Biotechnologies
Section of Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA

### Submitter
Martin Steger

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Kahn
Section of Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA


