### Accession
PXD016192

### Title
Tandem Mass Tag approach utilizing pervanadate BOOST channels delivers deeper quantitative characterization of the tyrosine phosphoproteome

### Description
Dynamic tyrosine phosphorylation is fundamental to a myriad of cellular processes.  However, the inherently low abundance of tyrosine phosphorylation in the proteome and the inefficient enrichment of phosphotyrosine(pTyr)-containing peptides has led to poor pTyr peptide identification and quantitation, critically hindering researchers’ ability to elucidate signaling pathways regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation in systems where cellular material is limited. The most popular approaches to wide-scale characterization of the tyrosine phosphoproteome use pTyr enrichment with pan-specific, anti-pTyr antibodies from a large amount of starting material.  Methods that decrease the amount of starting material and increase the characterization depth of the tyrosine phosphoproteome while maintaining quantitative accuracy and precision would enable the discovery of tyrosine phosphorylation networks in rarer cell populations. To achieve these goals, a novel method leveraging the multiplexing capability of tandem mass tags (TMT) and the use of trigger channels – cells treated with the promiscuous tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor pervanadate (PV) – selectively increased the relative abundance of pTyr-containing peptides. After PV facilitated selective fragmentation of pTyr-containing peptides, TMT reporter ions delivered sensitive quantitation of each peptide for the experimental samples while the quantitation from PV trigger channels was ignored. This method yielded up to 6.3-fold boost in quantification depth of statistically significant data derived from contrived ratios, compared to TMT without trigger channels or intensity-based label-free (LF) quantitation while maintaining quantitative accuracy and precision, allowing quantitation of over 2300 unique pTyr peptides from only 1 mg of T cell receptor-stimulated Jurkat T cells. The trigger channel strategy can potentially be applied in analyses of other post-translational modifications where treatments that broadly boost the levels of those modifications across the proteome are available.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat lysate was clarified and then reduced, alkylated, and digested using the filter-aided sample preparation method9. Protein concentration of lysate was quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (ThermoFisher). Digested peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters WAT020515) as described10. Desalted peptides were labeled using a Tandem Mass Tag 11-plex isobaric label reagent set (ThermoFisher #A37725) following the manufacturer's instructions. 4.2 mg (TMT-PV) or 6.2 mg (TMT+PV) of desalted, TMT-labeled and mixed peptides were solubilized in 1.4 mL IAP buffer and then incubated with ~1 mg SH2 superbinder beads overnight at 4°C on a rotator. The beads went through three 1 mL ice-cold IAP buffer washes and one 1 mL ice-cold unbuffered milli-Q water wash. Following the washes, pTyr peptides were eluted from the beads two times, each using 100 μL 0.15% (v/v) TFA for 10 minutes on a 1150 rpm mixer. The eluted peptides were desalted using 100 μL C18 tips (Thermo Scientific Pierce) following the manufacturer’s guidelines and then dried on a speed-vac.  To allow for the most reasonable and direct comparison between LF and TMT without significantly altering the sample-to-bead ratio, the following setup was performed.  For TMT samples, peptides were pre-fractionated under basic conditions (pH 10) into 36 fractions on an offline reverse-phase 10 cm (1 mm ID) Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher) with a 40-minute linear gradient from 1% to 40% Buffer Bbasic, and subsequently combined into 12 super fractions (Buffer Abasic = HPLC-grade water with 10 mM ammonium hydroxide; Buffer Bbasic = HPLC-grade acetonitrile with 10 mM ammonium hydroxide). Each super fraction was separated on a 15 cm (75 um ID) reversed phase analytical column packed in-house with XSelect CSH C18 2.5 μm resin (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a 300 nL/min flow rate on a 65-minute gradient from 5% to 35% Buffer Bacidic, followed by a 5-minute gradient from 35% to 95% Buffer Bacidic (Buffer Aacidic = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; Buffer Bacidic = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). An electrospray voltage of 1.85kV was applied to eluted peptides in positive ion mode, followed by data acquisition on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using MultiNotch MS3 parameters11, 12. MS data were acquired in profile mode in top-speed (2.5-second cycle) mode at a resolution of 120,000 with a scan range of 375 to 1,500 m/z using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 750,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a width of 1.4 m/z mass isolation window, with a dynamic exclusion time of 20 seconds. Only peptides with charge states of 2-7 were selected for analysis. Following collision-induced dissociation (35% energy), MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap detector in centroid mode over a range of 400–2000 m/z with an AGC target of 5000. Synchronous precursor selection parameters were used to select up to 10 MS/MS precursors for higher-energy collision dissociation (65% energy), followed by MS3 reporter ion data acquisition using the Orbitrap detector in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100 to 500 m/z with an AGC target of 30,000. For LF samples, all parameters were identical except the following. No offline fractionation was performed. Peptides were eluted on a 65-minute gradient from 5% to 30% Buffer Bacidic, followed by a 5-minute gradient from 30% to 95%. MS scans were acquired at 2.0-second cycle with an AGC target 500,000. Higher-energy collision dissociation activation was used to collect MS/MS data, with no MS3 scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant13 version 1.6.3.3 using the integrated peptide search engine Andromeda14. MS/MS spectra were searched against a human Uniprot database (Homo sapiens, 8/29/2017) comprised of 71,567 forward protein sequences and an equal number of reverse decoy entries. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set on peptide spectrum match (PSM) employing a target-decoy approach. The following parameters were used: precursor ion tolerance of 3 ppm, ITMS MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, three maximum possible missed cleavages permitted, a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, maximum peptide mass of 4800 Da, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modifications of oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, and a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. “Match-between-runs” was enabled for label-free data with the default retention time window of 2 minutes. For TMT samples, additional modifications included TMT-11plex labels on N-termini and lysine residues, where reporter ion MS3 with reporter mass tolerance of 0.005 Da was defined. All downstream analyses and graphical plotting were performed in R or Microsoft Excel based on MaxQuant output files. The rationale of the experimental design is described in detail in the results section. Equal amounts of peptide were used in each labeling reaction so that the amount of peptide and label remained proportional in separate labeling steps. Three technical replicates each of 0.1 mg, 0.3 mg and 1.0 mg labeled peptides using the protein concentration derived from BCA Protein Assay were combined to create the contrived ratios of 10:1, 10:3, and 3:1. Technical, not biological, replicates were chosen to minimize biological sample variation that would otherwise hinder our ability to determine the quantitative accuracy of this experiment from predetermined contrived ratios, which is one of the core elements in the data analysis. LF experiments with a similar setup were included as a control alongside TMT experiments as a comparison. Similar amounts of peptide input were used for pTyr peptide enrichment in all comparisons to maintain approximately equal sample-to-bead ratio. Both TMT and LF experiments are limited to approximately equal instrument time. Each TMT experiment had a total of twelve fractionated LC/MS runs, whereas LF experiment had a total of eleven unfractionated LC/MS runs. LF LC/MS runs had a similar or greater total number of MS and MS/MS scans compared to TMT experiments, making both LF and TMT experiments highly comparable. To determine statistical significance, Welch’s two sample t-test was used to calculate p values from ratios containing all three intensity values present for both numerator and denominator (no missing values). To correct for multiple-hypothesis testing, the Benjamini–Hochberg (FDR) procedure was used to adjust p values to obtain q values15. Q values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Whenever appropriate, values were corrected for heteroscedasticity to allow for parametric testing by log transformation. Coefficient of determination of a linear regression model was calculated to examine the reproducibility and correlation of peptide intensities between replicates in a pairwise fashion.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic tyrosine phosphorylation is fundamental to a myriad of cellular processes. However, the inherently low abundance of tyrosine phosphorylation in the proteome and the inefficient enrichment of phosphotyrosine(pTyr)-containing peptides has led to poor pTyr peptide identification and quantitation, critically hindering researchers' ability to elucidate signaling pathways regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation in systems where cellular material is limited. The most popular approaches to wide-scale characterization of the tyrosine phosphoproteome use pTyr enrichment with pan-specific, anti-pTyr antibodies from a large amount of starting material. Methods that decrease the amount of starting material and increase the characterization depth of the tyrosine phosphoproteome while maintaining quantitative accuracy and precision would enable the discovery of tyrosine phosphorylation networks in rarer cell populations. To achieve these goals, the BOOST (<u>B</u>road-spectrum <u>O</u>ptimization <u>O</u>f <u>S</u>elective <u>T</u>riggering) method leveraging the multiplexing capability of tandem mass tags (TMT) and the use of pervanadate (PV) boost channels (cells treated with the broad-spectrum tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor PV) selectively increased the relative abundance of pTyr-containing peptides. After PV boost channels facilitated selective fragmentation of pTyr-containing peptides, TMT reporter ions delivered accurate quantitation of each peptide for the experimental samples while the quantitation from PV boost channels was ignored. This method yielded up to 6.3-fold boost in pTyr quantification depth of statistically significant data derived from contrived ratios, compared with TMT without PV boost channels or intensity-based label-free (LF) quantitation while maintaining quantitative accuracy and precision, allowing quantitation of over 2300 unique pTyr peptides from only 1 mg of T cell receptor-stimulated Jurkat T cells. The BOOST strategy can potentially be applied in analyses of other post-translational modifications where treatments that broadly elevate the levels of those modifications across the proteome are available.

### Keywords
Phosphotyrosine proteomics, Pervanadate, Tandem mass tags, Trigger channel, Superbinder

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA

### Submitter
Xien Yu Chua

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA


