### Accession
PXD039174

### Title
High Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry- Mass Spectrometry to Enhance Cardiac Muscle Proteome Coverage

### Description
Heart tissue sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis that includes pre-fractionation reduces the cellular protein dynamic range and increases the relative abundance of non-sarcomeric proteins. We previously described “IN-Sequence” (IN-Seq) where heart tissue lysate is sequentially partitioned into three subcellular fractions to increase the proteome coverage than a single direct tissue analysis by mass spectrometry. Here, we report an adaptation of the high-field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled to mass spectrometry, and the establishment of a simple one step sample preparation coupled with gas-phase fractionation. FAIMS approach substantially reduces manual sample handling, significantly shortens MS instrument processing time, and produces unique protein identification and quantification approximating the commonly used IN-Seq method in for less time requirement.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen LV halves were minced in ice-cold HEPES extraction buffer (25 mM HEPES-NaOH, 2.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.8) supplemented with Pierce protease inhibitor mini tablets (EDTA free, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and Pierce phosphatase inhibitor mini tablets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Samples were fractionated into cytosolic-, sarcomeric-, and membrane protein-enriched fractions (i.e., F1, F2, F3) by the previously described “IN-Seq” method [12, 33]. Briefly, each tissue sample was homogenized three times in HEPES extraction buffer for 1 minute with a frequency of 30/s. Following centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant was collected and kept at 4°C as F1. The pellet was resuspended in TFA extraction buffer (1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), pH 2, 1mM TCEP in HEPES extraction buffer) and homogenized three times for 1minute with at frequency of 30/s. Following centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and supernatant was collected and kept at 4°C as F2. Insoluble pellet from F2 extraction step was further solubilized in the SDS extraction buffer (2% SDS, 1mM TCEP in HEPES extraction buffer) and homogenized at frequency of 30/s for 1 minutes, following sonication with a Q800R3 Sonicator (QSonica, Newtown, CT) for 5 minutes (amplitude of 70%, with 10s on, 10s off) and then centrifugation in 14,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C, collecting the supernatant as F3. Protein concentration of all fractions of each sample were determined by BCA (Pierce, Waltham, MA). 100 μg of each fraction (total protein quantification) were reduced using 1 mM TCEP. Clean-up of each fraction was performed using S-trap mini spin columns (ProtiFi, Long Island, NY) for complete destruction of undesired enzymatic activity (such as protease or phosphatase activities) and maximization of digestion efficiency. Each fraction was digested for 15–18h at 37°C using ultra-grade Trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 enzyme: protein ratio. All fractions from each tissue samples were speed-vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until MS analysis.For DIA-MS analysis with the IN-Seq fractionated samples, we used the Orbitrap Lumos Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EasySpray ion source and connected to Ultimate 3000 nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) as previously described [33]. Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 150 μm i.d. x 15 cm, Thermo) using a flow rate of 1.4 μL/min for 7 minutes at 1% B (mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) after which point they were separated with a linear gradient of 5-20%B for 45 minutes, 20-35%B for 15 minutes, 35-85%B for 3 minutes, holding at 85%B for 5 minutes and re-equilibrating back to 1% B over the course of 5 minutes. For the longer 120-minute gradient method, peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 5-20%B for 90 minutes, 20-35% for 30 minutes, 35-85%B for 3 minutes, holding at 85%B for 5 minutes and re-equilibrating back to 1% B over the course of 5 minutes. Each fraction was followed by a blank injection to both clean the column and re-equilibrate at 1%B. The nano-source capillary temperature was set to 300 °C and the spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV. Indexed retention time  standards (iRTs, Biognosys) were added to each fraction before acquisition

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data files were converted to mzML format using MSconvert version v.3.0.21304 from ProteoWizard for generating peak lists [36]. The MS files were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 using the spectral library-free search with Prosit against the Mouse Uniprot database [37]. In the library-free search, neural network algorithms are used to accurately predict hypothetical spectra and retention times for each potential tryptic peptide in the database. Only proteotypic peptides that consist of amino acid sequences unique to one proteins are used for protein identification [38]. The search was conducted with the second pass and match between runs (MBR) options enabled. The quantitation at the protein levels was summed between the different CV fractions. MS protein quantification for the IN-Seq method samples was carried out by averaging the raw peptide intensity among technical replicates and summed among three sub-cellular fractions. Statistical analysis and software data was filtered by interquartile range and normalized to the median. One-way ANOVA with post-hoc Fisher’s LSD test was used to compare datasets with more than two groups. An unpaired t-test was used to analyze the rest of the datasets. A p value of ≤0.05 was considered significant. MetaboAnalyst 5.0 was used for statistical analysis and data visualization [39]. Cellular component visualization was performed using Protein Interaction Network Extractor (PINE) [40].

### Publication Abstract
Heart tissue sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis that includes prefractionation reduces the cellular protein dynamic range and increases the relative abundance of nonsarcomeric proteins. We previously described "IN-Sequence" (IN-Seq) where heart tissue lysate is sequentially partitioned into three subcellular fractions to increase the proteome coverage more than a single direct tissue analysis by mass spectrometry. Here, we report an adaptation of the high-field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled to mass spectrometry, and the establishment of a simple one step sample preparation coupled with gas-phase fractionation. The FAIMS approach substantially reduces manual sample handling, significantly shortens the MS instrument processing time, and produces unique protein identification and quantification approximating the commonly used IN-Seq method in less time.

### Keywords
In-seq, Cardiac, Dia-ms, Faims

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Heart Institute Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Aleksandr Stotland

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Heart Institute Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute


