### Accession
PXD014088

### Title
EMSY expression affects multiple components of skin barrier with relevance to atopic dermatitis

### Description
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a heritable inflammatory disease, characterised by skin barrier dysfunction. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified molecular targets with relevance for drug development, but the strongest genetic association, FLG, has not yet been successfully targeted in atopic disease. An AD-associated locus on chromosome 11q13.5 lies between two genes - EMSY and LRRC32 - but the functional mechanisms leading to AD are unclear. We applied a combination of genomic and molecular analytical techniques followed up in patient biopsies, to investigate pathomechanisms at this GWAS locus. Chromosome conformation capture data in keratinocytes shows interaction of the intergenic region in threedimensional space with EMSY. siRNA-mediated knockdown of EMSY in skin organoid culture leads to enhanced development of barrier function, measured by water evaporation and dye penetration. Global proteomic analysis of skin organoids with EMSY knockdown shows increased expression of structural and functional proteins, confirmed by histological and ultrastructural features. Lipid analysis shows an increase in ceramides known to be reduced in AD. Conversely, over-expression of EMSY in primary human keratinocytes leads to a reduction in biomarkers of barrier formation. Finally, skin biopsy samples from patients with AD show greater EMSY staining in the nucleus, consistent with increased functional effect of this DNAbinding protein. Together our findings demonstrate an important role for EMSY in transcriptional regulation and skin barrier formation, supporting EMSY inhibition as a therapeutic approach for AD.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen organotypic epidermal samples were ground on dry ice, solubilised in 200µl of Cellular and Organelle Membrane Solubilizing Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich), 7.0 M urea, 2.0 M thiourea, 40 mM Trizma® base (Sigma Aldrich) and 1.0% C7BzO, pH 10.4 buffer with protease inhibitors. The lysate was then acetone precipitated for 1 hour at -20o C and spun for 20 minutes at 2o C at 15,000RPM. The pellet was re-suspended in 200µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. 100µl was taken for in-solution digest. 22µl of dithiothreitol was added and samples heated to 50o C for 15mins. 24µl of iodoacetamide was added and the samples incubated at 22o C for 30 minutes. 1µl of rapigest was added, followed by 2.5µl of trypsin, for a 12-hour digest. A further 1µl trypsin was added for an additional 4-hour digest. The peptide samples were then fractionated into 24 fractions with high pH Reversed Phase C18 chromatography, run on a Q Exactive Classic or Plus for 160 minutes and the top 15 ions selected for sequencing. MS resolution was 70,000 and MS/MS resolution 17,500. Data were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.13) and Human UniProt Database (Dec 2017) with a protein and peptide false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Data Protocol
Proteins identified as contaminants (trypsin and other lab originating proteins) and contained within the MaxQuant database (http://www.maxquant.org/maxquant/) were removed; cytokeratins were retained in this analysis because of their experimental relevance. To account for the background of keratin identification as a contaminant, we analysed the blank runs for keratin peptide intensity and subtracted this from the measured keratin intensities. A reversed database (i.e. scrambled protein sequences) was used to identify false positives and these were also removed. The total intensities of the samples were normalised to total protein abundance, with adjustment to the lowest total protein yield. All samples were run in quadruplicate to test reproducibility; the Pearson correlations were 0.86-0.92

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Proteomics, Organotypic culture, Skin

### Affiliations
The Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression
Skin Research Group, Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK.

### Submitter
Sara ten Have

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Brown
Skin Research Group, Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK.


