### Accession
PXD016158

### Title
Quantification of exercise-regulated ubiquitin-signalling

### Description
The maintenance of muscle function is extremely important for whole body health and exercise is essential to this process. The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is required for muscle adaptation following exercise but little is known about acute post-translational regulation and proteome remodelling during exercise. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to study ubiquitin-signalling dynamics in human skeletal muscle biopsies from healthy males before, during and after a single bout of high-intensity exercise. Exercise resulted in a marked depletion of protein ubiquitylation consistent with proteasome activation. This was also associated with acute post-translational modification of protein abundance via a network of proteases.

### Sample Protocol
Human subjects and sample collection Six healthy male untrained volunteers abstained from strenuous exercise for 2 days prior to the experiment. They reported to the laboratory in the overnight fasted state and rested in the supine position for 30 min. Two biopsies were extracted at rest with a 5mm Bergstrom needle with suction and were immediately flushed out of the needle with ice cold saline, quickly blotted dry and then frozen in liquid nitrogen. Subjects underwent a single bout of cycle exercise. Following warm up for 2 min, subjects underwent cycle exercise for 6 min at 77% of individual Wmax and then to exhaustion at 87-88% of Wmax, which occurred after 9-11 min total exercise time following warm up. Blood samples and a second biopsy were collected in the last minute of exercise followed by two additional samples taken at 2 and 5 h post-exercise. Post-exercise, subjects lay fasted in the supine position with access only to water. The study was approved by the regional ethics committee in Denmark (Journal number: H-1-2012-006) and carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki II. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject.  Human muscle peptide preparation, isobaric labeling and immunoprecipitation Frozen tissue was homogenised in 6 M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1% SDS, 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.9 containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche; 11873580001) by tip-probe sonication and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Lysates were precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C. Protein pellets were centrifuged at 10,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, pH 7.9 and quantified by Qubit fluorescence (Thermo Fisher; Q33212). Concentrations were normalized and 600 µg of protein reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at 25ºC followed by alkylation with 40 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 25ºC in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM dithiothreitol and digested with lysyl endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Industries; 125-05061) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 2 h at 25ºC. The mixture was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (Promega; V5111) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 16 h at 30ºC. The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic lipophilic balance – solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) (Waters; 186000128) and eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. The purified peptides were aliquoted (95% for diGly immunoprecipitation analysis and 5% for total proteome analysis) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides for diGly immunoprecipitation were resuspended in IP buffer (50 mM MOPs, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl2, pH 7.2) and incubated with agarose-conjugated anti-diGly antibody (Cell Signalling Technologies) overnight at 4℃ with rotation. The beads were washed four times with IP buffer followed by water and eluted with 0.2% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were resuspended in 100mM HEPEs, pH 7.6 and labelled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) for 1.5 hours at room temperature followed by de-acylation with 0.25% hydroxylamine for 15 min and quenching with 0.1% TFA. Peptides from each 10-plex experiment were pooled and desalted using HLB-SPE and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were fractionated on an in-house packed TSKgel amide-80 HILIC column.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18AQ particles (Dr Maisch GmbH HPLC) using Dionex nanoUHPLC. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5 – 30% Buffer B over 120 min at 300 nl/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). The column was maintained at 50ºC using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive Plus or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (MS). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z (350 – 1550 m/z; 100 ms injection time; 3e6 [QEplus] or 4e5 [Fusion] AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 20 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (1.2 m/z isolation; 32 [QEplus] or 35 [Fusion] normalized collision energy; 35,000 resolution; 120 ms injection time).   Data analysis Mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and searched with Sequest HT against the human UniProt database (May 2016; 88,767 entries). The data were searched with a maximum of 3 miss-cleavages and methionine oxidation, lysine TMT and lysine diGly-TMT set to variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and peptide N-terminus TMT was set as a fixed modification. The precursor-ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and product-ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. All results were filtered to 1% peptide spectral matches false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator [PMID: 17952086] and total proteomic data filtered to 1% FDR using Protein Validator in Proteome Discoverer. Localisation of modification sites was performed with PTM-RS [PMID: 22073976]. All data were normalized to the median of each subject. To determine significantly regulated diGly-modified peptides and proteins relative to pre-exercise levels, moderated t-tests were performed with LIMMA [PMID: 16646809]. Linear models were fit to the data and empirical Bayes was used for variance shrinkage in order to determine regulated sites and p-values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini and Hochberg method [PMID: 11682119]. Additional statistical analysis was performed with ANOVA with correction for multiple testing using permuation-based FDR. Pathway and network analysis was performed with Metascape [PMID: 30944313]. Analysis of protein structures was performed in PyMOL.

### Publication Abstract
The maintenance of muscle function is extremely important for whole body health and exercise is essential to this process. The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is required for muscle adaptation following exercise but little is known about acute posttranslational regulation and proteome remodeling during and after high-intensity exercise. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to study ubiquitin signaling dynamics in human skeletal muscle biopsies from healthy males before, during, and after a single bout of high-intensity exercise. Exercise resulted in a marked depletion of protein ubiquitylation in the vastus lateralis muscle consistent with proteasome activation. This was also associated with acute posttranslational modification of protein abundance. Integration of these data with phosphoproteomics identified co-regulated proximal modifications suggesting a cross talk between phosphorylation and ubiquitylation. We also identified additional protein modification cross talk and showed acute activation of protein NEDDylation. In vitro experiments revealed that cAMP-dependent activation of the proteasome requires NEDD8, an ubiquitin-like protein involved in protein NEDDylation, to maintain cellular protein ubiquitylation levels. Our data reveal the complexity of ubiquitin signaling and proteome remodeling in muscle during and after high-intensity exercise. We propose a model whereby exercise and the resulting cAMP signaling activate both the proteasome and ubiquitylation via NEDDylation to rapidly remove potentially damaged proteins.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Exercise, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne and University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne and University of Sydney


