### Accession
PXD004562

### Title
Temporal Analysis of Cell Protein Ubiquitination during Epstein-Barr Virus Reactivation by BCR Cross-linking

### Description
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) reactivation in latently infected B cells is essential for persistent infection and B cell receptor (BCR) activation is a physiologically relevant stimulus for EBV reactivation. Post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation and ubiquitination, are known to be regulated by antigen binding to BCR within minutes. However, a detailed understanding of the signaling alterations at later time when EBV is being actively replicated remains elusive. To gain insights into BCR activation-mediated reprogramming of the cellular environment in both Akata-BX1 (EBV+) and Akata-4E3 (EBV-) B cells, we utilized a 3-plex stable isotope labeling by amino acid in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomic approach to monitor the dynamic changes of protein ubiquitination during the course of immunoglobulin G (IgG) cross-linking of BCRs. We observed temporal alterations in the level of ubiquitination on approximately 150 sites in both Akata-BX1 (EBV+) and Akata-4E3 (EBV-) B cells post-IgG cross-linking compared with no cross-linking controls, with the majority of protein ubiquitination down-regulated. Our analysis revealed that IgG cross-linking plays a major role in the regulation of protein ubiquitination in both EBV+ and EBV- B cells. Bioinformatic analyses of up-regulated ubiquitination events revealed significant enrichment of proteins involved in RNA processing. Among the down-regulated ubiquitination events are proteins enriched in apoptosis and the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The comparative and quantitative studies provide a foundation for further understanding how BCR activation regulates cellular protein ubiquitination and how EBV utilizes or subverts BCR engagement-mediated changes to facilitate viral replication.

### Sample Protocol
The untreated and IgG treated cells (5x108 cells each condition) were harvested by centrifugation at 400  ×g for 5 min. Pellets were washed twice by re-suspending in 250 ml of pre-chilled Dulbecco’s PBS (Cat# 10010–049, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cell pellets were re-suspended in 20 ml freshly prepared Urea Lysis Buffer [20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea and protease inhibitors (Cat# 05892791001, Roche) for sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 10 min at 18°C. The supernatant was stored in -80 °C for proteomics analysis. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Cat# 23227, Pierce). Peptides were prepared by an in-solution tryptic digestion protocol [19]. Briefly, equal amount of lysate (in Urea Lysis Buffer) from untreated and IgG treated cells was mixed, reduced with 4.5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. For tryptic digestion, protein extracts were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin (Cat# LS003744, Worthington Biochemical) with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:30 (w/w) at 25 °C overnight. Trypsin digestion efficiency was assessed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining prior to further processing. Protein digests were acidified by 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000 × g at 25 °C for 5 min. The supernatant of the protein digests was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 column (Cat# WAT051910, Waters, Columbia, MD) equilibrated with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Columns were washed with 6 ml of 0.1% (v/v) TFA twice and peptides were eluted in 2 ml of 40% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% (v/v) TFA three times. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to enrichment for ubiquitinated peptides by immunoprecipitation using anti-K--GG antibody conjugated beads (Cat#5562, Cell Signaling Tech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, anti-K-ε-GG antibody beads were washed 4 times with 1 ml of the ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer (IAP) (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl). For each of the biological replicates, 15 mg lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1.5 ml IAP buffer and incubated for 2 hrs with the anti-K-ε-GG antibody beads on a rotator at 4 °C. Anti-K-ε-GG antibody beads were washed 3 times with 1 ml of cold IAP buffer and twice with 1 ml of cold H2O prior to elution with 65μl of 0.15% TFA solution twice. Eluted peptide supernatants were desalted using C18 STAGE tips. STAGE tips were packed with a C18 Empore disk (Cat# 2315, 3M, St. Paul, MN) and conditioned with 50μl of 100% ACN and two applications of 50 μl of 0.1% TFA before the peptide solution was loaded. Peptides were washed twice with 50μl of 0.1% TFA and eluted with 3 times 20μl of 50% ACN (0.1% TFA). Desalted peptides were dried and kept at −80 °C in a freezer until LC-MS/MS analysis. The enriched peptides were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC II nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptide digests were reconstituted in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a trap column (75 μm x 2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 μm x 50 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient of 10-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% ACN) over 85 min. The total run time including sample loading and column reconditioning was 120 min. Data dependent acquisition with full scans in 350-1700 m/z range was carried out using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z. The fifteen most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher energy collisional associated dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 37% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z.  Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1x106 for MS and 5x104 ions for MS/MS with a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window. Internal calibration was carried out using lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) using ambient air.

### Data Protocol
The MS derived data were screened using MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against a human RefSeq database (version 59) using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). The search parameters for both algorithms included: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation at methionine, GlyGly addition to lysine and SILAC labeling 13C615N2-K,12C614N2-K, 12C6 14N4-R and 13C615N4-Ras variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was specified as the protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The data were screened against a target decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. The SILAC ratio for each peptide-spectrum match (PSM) was calculated by the quantitation node. The wrongly assigned ubiquitination sites (the c-terminal lysine in the peptide) were manually corrected. Peptides with ratios greater than 2.0-fold change were considered as regulated and used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a human &#x3b3;-herpesvirus associated with cancer, including Burkitt lymphoma, nasopharyngeal, and gastric carcinoma. EBV reactivation in latently infected B cells is essential for persistent infection whereby B cell receptor (BCR) activation is a physiologically relevant stimulus. Yet, a global view of BCR activation-regulated protein ubiquitination is lacking when EBV is actively replicating. We report here, for the first time, the long-term effects of IgG cross-linking-regulated protein ubiquitination and offer a basis for dissecting the cellular environment during the course of EBV lytic replication. Using the Akata-BX1 (EBV<sup>+</sup>) and Akata-4E3 (EBV<sup>-</sup>) Burkitt lymphoma cells, we monitored the dynamic changes in protein ubiquitination using quantitative proteomics. We observed temporal alterations in the level of ubiquitination at &#x223c;150 sites in both EBV<sup>+</sup> and EBV<sup>-</sup> B cells post-IgG cross-linking, compared with controls with no cross-linking. The majority of protein ubiquitination was downregulated. The upregulated ubiquitination events were associated with proteins involved in RNA processing. Among the downregulated ubiquitination events were proteins involved in apoptosis, ubiquitination, and DNA repair. These comparative and quantitative proteomic observations represent the first analysis on the effects of IgG cross-linking at later time points when the majority of EBV genes are expressed and the viral genome is actively being replicated. In all, these data enhance our understanding of mechanistic linkages connecting protein ubiquitination, RNA processing, apoptosis, and the EBV life cycle.

### Keywords
Bcr, Epstein barr virus; ubiquitination; reactivation; silac; proteomics; apoptosis

### Affiliations
Philips Institute for Oral Health Research, VCU School of Dentistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA
School of Dentistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298 USA

### Submitter
Renfeng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Renfeng Li
Philips Institute for Oral Health Research, VCU School of Dentistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA


