### Accession
PXD020817

### Title
Structural analysis of the regulatory GAF domains of cGMP phosphodiesterase elucidates the allosteric communication pathway

### Description
Regulation of photoreceptor phosphodiesterase (PDE6) activity is responsible for the speed, sensitivity, and recovery of the photoresponse during visual signaling in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. It is hypothesized that the physiological differences in the light responsiveness of rods and cones may result in part from differences in the structure and regulation of the distinct isoforms of rod and cone PDE6. Although rod and cone PDE6 catalytic subunits share a similar domain organization consisting of tandem GAF domains (GAFa and GAFb) and a catalytic domain, cone PDE6 is a homodimer whereas rod PDE6 consists of two homologous catalytic subunits. Here we provide the x-ray crystal structure of cone GAFab regulatory domain solved at 3.3 Å resolution, in conjunction with chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometric analysis of conformational changes to GAFab induced upon binding of cGMP and the PDE6 inhibitory γ-subunit (Pγ). Ligand-induced changes in cross-linked residues implicate multiple conformational changes in the GAFa and GAFb domains in forming an allosteric communication network that communicates with the PDE6 catalytic domains. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of cone GAFab revealed asymmetry in the two GAFab subunits forming the homodimer and allosteric perturbations on cGMP binding. Cross-linking of Pγ to GAFab in conjunction with solution NMR spectroscopy of isotopically labeled Pγ identified the central polycationic region of Pγ interacting with the GAFb domain. These results provide a mechanistic basis for developing allosteric activators of PDE6 with therapeutic implications for halting the progression of several retinal degenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Bands representing cross-linked proteins were in-gel digested and analyzed by LC-MS and LC-MS/MS essentially as described previously9,11. Briefly, protein bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel, washed with 25 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile, treated with 10 mM DTT; sulfhydryl group were then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Dried gel pieces were treated with trypsin and asp-N (Promega) and the digested peptides sequentially extracted with 50% acetonitrile, 20% formic acid, and finally 100% acetonitrile; the samples were then concentrated to ~7 µl. One µl aliquots were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC system (Dionex Corporation Sunnyvale, CA) as previously described11. The eluant was introduced into the nano-electrospray ionization source of an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA), and LC-MS data acquired in an information-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 315-2000) with a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. The five most intense ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap for MS/MS data acquisition59

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were created using PAVA for input into Protein Prospector. Data were initially searched against the full Swiss-Prot database to verify the proteins, and then the search was restricted to cone PDE6 subunits. In experiments where mutant or truncated proteins were used, all protein sequences were input as user-defined proteins. Cross-linked peptides were identified using an integrated module in Protein Prospector, based on a bioinformatic strategy described previously59-61

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of photoreceptor phosphodiesterase (PDE6) activity is responsible for the speed, sensitivity, and recovery of the photoresponse during visual signaling in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. It is hypothesized that physiological differences in the light responsiveness of rods and cones may result in part from differences in the structure and regulation of the distinct isoforms of rod and cone PDE6. Although rod and cone PDE6 catalytic subunits share a similar domain organization consisting of tandem GAF domains (GAFa and GAFb) and a catalytic domain, cone PDE6 is a homodimer whereas rod PDE6 consists of two homologous catalytic subunits. Here we provide the x-ray crystal structure of cone GAFab regulatory domain solved at 3.3&#x202f;&#xc5; resolution, in conjunction with chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometric analysis of conformational changes to GAFab induced upon binding of cGMP and the PDE6 inhibitory &#x3b3;-subunit (P&#x3b3;). Ligand-induced changes in cross-linked residues implicate multiple conformational changes in the GAFa and GAFb domains in forming an allosteric communication network. Molecular dynamics simulations of cone GAFab revealed differences in conformational dynamics of the two subunits forming the homodimer and allosteric perturbations on cGMP binding. Cross-linking of P&#x3b3; to GAFab in conjunction with solution NMR spectroscopy of isotopically labeled P&#x3b3; identified the central polycationic region of P&#x3b3; interacting with the GAFb domain. These results provide a mechanistic basis for developing allosteric activators of PDE6 with therapeutic implications for halting the progression of several retinal degenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Pde6, Chemical cross-linking, X-ray crystallography, Allosteric regulation, Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Integrative structural modeling, Mass spectrometry, Structural biology

### Affiliations
University of New Hampshire
Molecular, Cellular, and Biomedical Sciences, University of New Hampshire, NH, USA

### Submitter
Richa Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Rick Cote
Molecular, Cellular, and Biomedical Sciences, University of New Hampshire, NH, USA


