### Accession
PXD036749

### Title
A Simple Method to Isolate and Characterize a Bacterial Outer Membrane Proteome by Bottom-Up Mass Spectrometry

### Description
The outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria plays a critical role in protecting the cell against external stressors, including antibiotics. Given its importance to the resistance mechanisms, the outer membrane is a prime target for antimicrobial drug discovery. To facilitate discovery efforts, however, a precise characterization of the outer membrane protein content – or the "outer membrane proteome" - and possible variations during bacterial resistance, is important. This information is necessary to understand how bacteria interact with their host organism during infection. However, proteomic-based investigations of the bacterial outer membrane remain technically challenging, given this cell compartment's lower abundance and high hydrophobicity.  We report here a simple but efficacious enrichment of the bacterial outer membrane proteome for downstream characterization by mass spectrometry. We start with a dual detergent approach to preferentially solubilize the outer membrane, followed by reconstitution in peptidisc library to isolate and purify the entire outer membrane proteome at once. Our method identifies 71 outer membrane proteins (OMPs), including 26 integral -barrels and 26 lipoproteins; many of which are present with high-intensity and peptide number values, indicative of a high abundance in the library sample. Given this enrichment, the method may be useful for comparing outer membrane proteomes. We also show that the library can also be employed for downstream protein binding assays.

### Sample Protocol
An E. coli cell pellet (from 1 L culture; strain W3110) was resuspended by douncing in Buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 100 mM NaCl) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF. Cells were lysed on a Microfluidizer (3 passes, 12000 psi). After removing unbroken cells by centrifugation (3,000 x g, 10 minutes), cellular membranes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation (100,000 x g, 45 minutes) in a Ti-70 rotor. The membrane pellet was resuspended in Buffer A. To deplete inner membrane proteins, membranes (~4 mg) were initially solubilized with 1% Triton-X-100 at room temperature for 1 hour in a 2 mL volume. The sample was then ultracentrifuged at 186,000 x g (45 min) in a TLA-55 rotor. The Triton-solubilized fraction - containing mainly inner membrane proteins - was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in 2 mL Buffer A and solubilized overnight at 4 ℃ with 1% N,N-Dimethyl-n-dodecylamine (LDAO).    After ultracentrifugation (186,000 x g for 45 minutes), the LDAO-solubilized material was mixed with a 4:1 mass excess of biotinylated peptidiscs in a 15 mL 100 kDa-cutoff Amicon centrifugal filter. To form a peptidisc library, the mixture was diluted with Buffer A in 1 mL increments up to 15 mL and concentrated to ~500 µL by centrifugation (3,000 xg) at 4℃. The sample was once again diluted to 15 mL with Buffer A and concentrated to ~1 mL, forming the sample "LDAO starting library".   Immediately after the reconstitution step, an aliquot of each library was purified via Streptavidin Mutein Matrix. Briefly, 1 mL of each library (at ~1 mg/mL) was incubated with 200 μL Streptavidin Mutein Matrix at 4 °C with gentle shaking. Unbound material was collected as flowthrough. The resin was washed three times with Buffer A (1 mL per wash) before the reconstituted membrane protein libraries were eluted with 200 μL Buffer A supplemented with 5 mM biotin. The purified library samples were stored at -80 until digestion and STAGE tipping.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0. The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from the source organism (E. coli K12) plus common contaminants using the following parameters: peptide mass accuracy < 5 parts per million; fragment mass accuracy 0.006 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity, fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl, variable modifications - methionine oxidation, deamidated N, Q and N-acetyl peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria plays a critical role in protecting the cell against external stressors, including antibiotics, and therefore is a prime target for antimicrobial discovery. To facilitate the discovery efforts, a precise knowledge of the outer membrane proteome, and possible variations during pathogenesis, is important. Characterization of the bacterial outer membrane remain challenging, however, and low throughput, due to the high hydrophobicity and relatively low abundance of this cell compartment. Here we adapt our peptidisc-based method to selectively isolate the outer membrane proteome before analysis by mass spectrometry. Using a dual detergent membrane solubilization approach, followed by protein purification in peptidiscs, we capture over 70 outer membrane proteins, including 26 integral &#x3b2;-barrels and 26 lipoproteins. Many of these proteins are present at high peptide intensities, indicative of a high abundance in the library sample. We further show that the isolated outer membrane proteome can be employed in downstream ligand-binding assays. This peptidisc library made of outer membrane proteins may therefore be useful to systematically survey other bacterial outer membrane proteomes, but also as a nanoparticle format able to support the discovery of next-generation antimicrobials. Data are available via ProteomeXchange identifier PXD036749.

### Keywords
Peptidiscs, Antibiotic resistance, Outer membrane proteome, E. coli

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Canada, V6T 1Z3.

### Submitter
John Young

### Lab Head
Dr Franck Duong
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Canada, V6T 1Z3.


