### Accession
PXD018814

### Title
Expression profiling of Arabidopsis leaf, flower and fruit development

### Description
With the quantitative profiling of consecutive tissue growth stages, we provide a global overview of expression changes of individual genes that play a role in dynamic cellular processes and developmental changes. We used tandem mass tag-based mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing to generate proteomic, phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic expression profiles for rosette leaf, flower and fruit tissue samples of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. In doing so, we have generated a multi-omics dataset of progressive changes during the development of three important plant organ types that can be used to study the underlying molecular mechanisms from different angles.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana wild type (Col-0) plants were grown on soil under continuous light. Tissue samples of rosette leaf, flower and seed growth stages were homogenized and digested with trypsin. Peptides were chemically labeled with TMT, pooled for each tissue type and subsequently divided into full proteome and phosphoproteome samples using IMAC enrichment Off-line fractionation was performed using hydrophilic strong anion exchange chromatography (full proteome: 48 fractions) and basic reversed-phase chromatography (phosphoproteome: 6 fractions), respectively. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (1.5.3.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome (Araport11; www.araport.org) supplemented with common contaminants and a library of phospho spike-in peptides. Search parameters were adjusted according to TMT10plex/6plex settings (PIF > 0.75, batch correction factors). Trypsin/P was set as protease, up to two allowed missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. (Phospho)proteome samples were searched together as two parameter groups with phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine added as variable modification for the phosphoproteome group. Other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
Plant growth and development are regulated by a tightly controlled interplay between cell division, cell expansion and cell differentiation during the entire plant life cycle from seed germination to maturity and seed propagation. To explore some of the underlying molecular mechanisms in more detail, we selected different aerial tissue types of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, namely rosette leaf, flower and silique/seed and performed proteomic, phosphoproteomic and transcriptomic analyses of sequential growth stages using tandem mass tag-based mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing. With this exploratory multi-omics dataset, development dynamics of photosynthetic tissues can be investigated from different angles. As expected, we found progressive global expression changes between growth stages for all three omics types and often but not always corresponding expression patterns for individual genes on transcript, protein and phosphorylation site level. The biggest difference between proteomic- and transcriptomic-based expression information could be observed for seed samples. Proteomic and transcriptomic data is available via ProteomeXchange and ArrayExpress with the respective identifiers PXD018814 and E-MTAB-7978.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Proteomics, Phospho, Development

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Julia Mergner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
TUM


