### Accession
PXD032378

### Title
A palmitoyl transferase chemical genetic system to map ZDHHC-specific S-acylation

### Description
ZDHHC S-acyltransferases catalyze the transfer of fatty acyl groups, primarily palmitate, to cysteine residues of substrate proteins in all eukaryotes. The 23 human ZDHHCs are known to S-acylate an extensive network of proteins essential to normal physiology, including many which are dysregulated in disease. Current technologies for whole proteome analyses of S-acylation do not directly associate a specific ZDHHC with its substrates, making it difficult to link a ZDHHC to specific mechanisms or disease phenotypes. Here, we present a solution to this challenge through development and validation of the first ZDHHC chemical genetic systems. Intact cells expressing a ZDHHC engineered to carry a ‘hole’ mutation in the lipid binding domain were metabolically labeled with a synthetic, chemically-tagged fatty acid probe carrying a matching ‘bump’, resulting in selective fatty acid probe transfer to substrates of the mutant ZDHHC.  ZDHHC/probe pairs were exemplified for efficient and selective transfer to ZDHHCs 3, 7, 11, 15 and 20, and adapted to chemical proteomic analysis for ZDHHCs 7, 15 and 20, generating the first de novo substrate profiles for these ZDHHC isozymes across three different cell lines. These data reveal extensive ZDHHC-specific substrate sets across more than 300 total identified substrates, in addition to substrates common between cell lines and between ZDHHCs, and several functionally diverse ZDHHC20 substrates were validated in targeted assays and the sites of S-acylation determined. The chemical genetic platform described here offers a novel and versatile approach to explore ZDHHC substrates and S-acylation biology, with the potential to encompass ZDHHCs across a wide range of eukaryotic organisms. This submission contains data relating to the determination of changes in S-acylated proteins using YnPal and DHHC20 CRISPR Cas9 KO cells, alongside determining the interactome of ZDHHC20 using TurboID.

### Sample Protocol
YnPal protocol In triplicate, HEK293T and CRISPR Cas9 treated HEK293T cells were seeded in 10 cm plates and allowed to grow for 24 h, then were incubated with the 15 µM YnPal or Palmitic acid for 8 hours. Cells were then washed twice with PBS and lysed by scraping in 400 μL ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% SDS, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche, 11873580001) and 0.05 U/ul benzonase (Sigma E1014)). Insoluble material was separated by centrifugation (17000 g, 20 min, 4 ºC) and the supernatant was stored at -20 ºC until further analysis. Samples were thawed on ice-slush and protein concentrations were determined (Pierce BCA). Lysates were adjusted to 2 mg/mL, using 2 mg per condition, then subjected to a click reaction using biotin-PEG3-azide (Sigma). Lysates were incubated with premixed CuAAC ligation reagents (100 μM Az-Peg3-Biotin (AzB), 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP and 100 μM TBTA) while vortexing for 1 h at RT. After quenching with 5 mM EDTA, proteins were precipitated (MeOH:CHCl3:H2O at 4:1:2), the pellet washed with cold MeOH, air-dried and resuspended in 1% (w/v) SDS PBSA (pH 7.4) at 5 mg/mL protein then diluted to 0.2% SDS, PBSA (pH 7.4) for pulldown. Enrichment of AzB-labelled proteins was carried out dimethylated NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (Pierce, 29201 modified as described in Goya Grocin et al. 2019) as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018). Samples were digested first with LysC (Promega, VA1170), alkylated with CAA then with Trypsin (Promega, V5111). The samples were then prepared for MS-based proteomics of lipid analogue labelled proteins and analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Thermo Q-Exactive instrument as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018).  TurboID protocol HEK293T cells stably expressing TurboGFP clones 1 and 2 and ZDHHC20 clones with C- or N-terminally fused TurboID were plated in duplicate in 10 cm dishes. After reaching 80% confluency, cells were treated with 500 μM biotin for 3 h, cooled on ice, harvested and lysed buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% SDS, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche, 11873580001) and 0.05 U/ul benzonase (Sigma E1014)) in preparation for the mass spectrometry workflow. Two 1 mg portions of each lysate (n = 4 for each cell line. Proteins were precipitated (MeOH:CHCl3:H2O at 4:1:2), the pellet washed with cold MeOH, air-dried and resuspended in 1% (w/v) SDS PBSA (pH 7.4) at 5 mg/mL protein then diluted to 0.2% SDS PBSA (pH 7.4) for pulldowns. Enrichment of biotin labelled proteins was carried out dimethylated NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (Pierce, 29201 modified as described in Goya Grocin et al. 2019) and performed as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018). Samples were digested first with LysC (Promega, VA1170) then with Trypsin (Promega, V5111). The samples were then prepared for MS-based proteomics of labelled proteins and analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Thermo Q-Exactive instrument as described previously (Wright et al, 2014; Wright et al, 2016; Mousnier et al, 2018).  Peptides were labelled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90111). with 5-fold fractionation using SCX.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2014). Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra by searching against the human reference with isoforms proteome database (UniProt, accessed October 2019). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications.  ‘LysC/P’ and ‘Trypsin/P’ was chosen as digestion mode enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages were allowed. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ were used for protein quantification. YnPal samples were processed using LFQ methods and TurboID using TMT (note: see experimental file for isotope adjustments). Processed data were further analysed using Perseus version 1.6.2.1, Microsoft Office Excel 365, and GraphPad Prism 5.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zdhhc20, Zdhhc, Click chemistry, S-acylation, Turboid, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Research Science Hub, 80 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom.  The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
James Sipthorp

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Molecular Research Science Hub, 80 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom.  The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom.


