### Accession
PXD020376

### Title
Genome- and proteome-wide analysis of lysine acetylation in Vibrio vulnificus Vv180806 reveals its regulatory roles in virulence and antibiotic resistance

### Description
V. vulnificus is an emergent pathogen and causes deadly septicemia in human. Protein acetylation regulates many important biological processes in bacteria. In this study, we identified the first lysine acetylome of V. vulnificus based on the whole-genome sequence of a cefoxitin-resistant strain isolated from a mortality case in China. A total of 6,626 acetylation sites at 1,924 acetylated proteins were uncovered, which to our knowledge represented the largest acetylated protein number that has been identified in bacteria. The presence of acetylation sites in virulence- and antibiotic resistance-related proteins further indicated the important role of acetylated modification on bacterial virulence and antibiotic resistance. Further investigation on the regulatory mechanisms will provide a better understanding of pathogen-host interactions in this increasingly pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
V. vulnificus Vv180806 was inoculated in fresh LB medium, 3% alkaline peptone water medium, and artificial seawater, respectively. After an overnight incubation at 37 °C, the cells from different media were harvested at an OD600 of 0.6 by centrifugation at 10,000g for 10 min at 4 °C and combined into two biological replicates for protein exaction.   The harvested cells were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   For digestion, the protein extracts were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.   To enrich acetylated peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed pan-anti-acetyl lysine antibody beads (PTM Bio, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the total protein sequences of V. vulnificus Vv180806 concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and lysine acetylation and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 0.01 and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Only proteins that were detected to be acetylated in both replicates were selected for subsequent bioinformatics analysis.   Motif-X was used for analyzing the models of protein sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the acetylated modification site). GO enrichment analysis was performed in Blast2GO with Fisher's exact test of FDR < 0.05. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test (adjusted P value < 0.05). For protein-protein interaction network analysis of acetylated VFs and antibiotic resistance genes, interaction data (score > 0.4) from the STRING database (https://string-db.org/cgi/input.pl?sessionId) was retrieved and visualized with Cytoscape (version 3.5.1).

### Publication Abstract
Infection with <i>Vibrio vulnificus</i> is notorious for its atypical clinical manifestations and irreversible disease progression. Lysine acetylation is a conserved post-translational modification (PTM) that plays a critical regulatory role in diverse cellular processes. However, little is known about the role of lysine acetylation on the pathogenesis of <i>V. vulnificus</i>. Here, we report the complete genome sequence and a global profile for protein lysine acetylation of <i>V. vulnificus</i> Vv180806, a highly cefoxitin resistant strain isolated from a mortality case. The assembled genome comprised two circular chromosomes and one circular plasmid; it contained 4,770 protein-coding genes and 153 RNA genes. Phylogenetic analysis revealed genetic homology of this strain with other <i>V. vulnificus</i> strains from food sources. Of all the proteins in this strain, 1,924 (40.34%) were identified to be acetylated at 6,626 sites. The acetylated proteins were enriched in metabolic processes, binding functions, cytoplasm, and multiple central metabolic pathways. Moreover, the acetylation was found in most identified virulence factors of this strain, suggesting its potentially important role in bacterial virulence. Our work provides insights into the genomic and acetylomic features responsible for the virulence and antibiotic resistance of <i>V. vulnificus</i>, which will facilitate future investigations on the pathogenesis of this bacterium.

### Keywords
Vibrio vulnificus; whole genome sequencing; acetylome; virulence; antibiotic resistance

### Affiliations
Guangdong Institute of Microbiology, Guangdong Academy of Sciences
Guangdong Institute of Microbiology

### Submitter
Rui Pang

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Pang
Guangdong Institute of Microbiology, Guangdong Academy of Sciences


