### Accession
PXD047128

### Title
Neat urine proteome during menstrual cycle

### Description
Progress and advancement in assisted reproductive technologies (ART) and its outcomes are limited by the importance of research of endometrial receptivity being overlooked. Due to endometrial biopsy being invasive and in vitro studies lacking reproducibility in vivo, urine is an appealing alternative biofluid source for biomarker research as it can be collected in large quantities non-invasively. The discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in urine (uEVs), has also opened a new avenue in this biomarker research, with these EVs harbouring thousands of proteins that hold promise for biomarker development. In this study urine was collected from human female volunteers and samples representing the different phases of the menstrual cycle were subjected to EV isolation via differential centrifugation and size exclusion chromatography. The resulting uEVs were analysed via Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) to examine the different concentration and size of particles and proteomic analysis performed using shotgun label-free mass spectrometry on the uEV samples and neat urine samples. Our results showed that uEVs were found in numbers depending on the menstrual cycle phase but uEV size was not statistically altered during different stages of the menstrual cycle. Proteomics showed 50% of proteins detected in the neat urine were also present in the uEV samples with 813 proteins were unique in the uEV samples. Proteomics analysis also showed that the menstrual cycle phase affect the uEVs proteomic profile, with some proteins shown to be significantly upregulated and downregulated during the window of implantation phase of the cycle compared to the other non-receptive periods. This data highlights that uEVs characteristics are altered depending on the menstrual cycle phase suggesting the potential of uEVs being used as biomarkers for improving fertility.In this dataset we have the neat urine results.

### Sample Protocol
First void urine was collected from 3 female volunteers every day for 30 days. Urine was centrifuged to pellet cells and debris before freezing and stored at -80 prior to analysis. Aliquots of the urine were analysed retrospectively for hormone markers to determine the individual’s hormone profile across the cycle. After determining and selecting the samples that represented the different phases of the menstrual cycle (proliferative, ovulation and window of implantation). After removing cells via centrifugation, the selected urine samples were analysed via Label-free liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry to compare the EV proteomic profile of the different phases. 100µL urine samples samples  were transported to the Proteomic Core Facility, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia on dry ice for proteomic analysis. 1 µg of protein was injected to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). The sample was eluted at 250 nl/min from the trap to a 75 µm ID x 50 cm emitter-column (New Objective) packed with C18 material (3 µm, 300 Å particles, Dr Maisch). The separating gradient was 2-35% B 60 min and 40-100% B 5 min (A: 0.1% formic acid (FA), B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were sprayed to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) using nano-electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV (applied through liquid-junction). The MS was operated with a top-5 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R=70 000 at 200 m/z was followed by five higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of 5 most intense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R=17 500. MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3e6 and 5e4 with 50 ms injection time. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (versions 1.6.15.0 and 2.0.3.0). Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was enabled with LFQ and protein minimum ratio count set to 1. Search was performed against Homo sapiens, Bos taurus reference proteomes, using the tryptic digestion rule. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were set to default. Protein-coding of significant altered proteins (SAPs) in Ev’s were identified based on a fold change cut-off of 1 and a p-value cut-off of 0.05. An analysis of SAPs was performed in R studio (version 4.2.1) using the Bioconductor “DEP” package (version 3.1.5). Identified duplicates and contaminants were excluded from the list of each sample, and only proteins detected in at least two of the replicates were considered. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses were performed by the “clusterProfiler” R package (Version 4.4.4). Volcano plots, GO terms, and KEGG pathways were visualized by the “ggplot2” R packages (version 3.3.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Implantation, Proteome

### Affiliations
The university of sheffield
Division of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine and Population Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

### Submitter
Amber Hart

### Lab Head
Dr Alireza Fazeli
Division of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine and Population Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK


