### Accession
PXD045270

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomics reveals the protective mechanism of Tenuigenin after experimental intracerebral hemorrhage in mice

### Description
Tenuigenin (TNG), an extract obtained from Polygalae Radix, possesses anti-inflammatory,anti-oxidant, neuro-protective properties. However, the potential mechanism of TNG on intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) has not been well studied. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to identify the prospective mechanism of TNG in treating ICH with the help of TMT-based quantitative proteomics. Our results showed that the optimal dose of TNG was 16mg/kg, which could markedly improve neurological functions, reduce cerebral edema, hematoma volume and hemoglobin level 72h after ICH. Furthermore,our proteomic results identified that a total of 404 DEPs (353 up and 51 down regulated) were identified in ICH+vehicle vs Sham group, while 342 DEPs (306 up and 36 down regulated) and 76 DEPs (28 up and 48 down regulated) were quantified in TNG vs Sham group and TNG vs ICH+vehicle group respectively. In addition, a total of 26 DEPs were selected out according to strict criteria. Complement and coagulation cascades was the most significantly enriched pathway and two proteins (MBL-C and Car1) were further validated as hub molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysate buffer (8M urea, 1%SDS, and protease inhibitor) was added into the frozen brain tissues. The mixture was ultrasonicated for 2min at 4°C, and then fully reacted for 30min. After centrifugating at 12000g at 4°C for 30min to remove the residual debris, supernatant protein concentration of all samples was measured by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Thermo, USA). In addition, 100μg samples were mixed with TEAB(Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer), leading to the 100mM final concentration, followed by TCEP(tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) to react for 60min at 37°C. IAM (Iodoacetamide) were added into the mixture for 40min under dark conditions. Pre-cooled acetone (acetone: sample v/v = 6:1) was mixed with each mixture for 4h at -20°C. After 20min contrifugation at 10000g, 100µl 100mM TEAB solution was blended into the collected sediment to dissolve it. Ultimately, the mixture was digested with Trypsin (1:50 trypsin-to-protein) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were processed in accordance with the standard protocol for TMT labeling with TMT kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Next, all labeled samples were pooled and vacuum-dried. Samples including mixed TMT-labelled peptides were disintegrated into fractions by Vanquish Flex UPLC (Thermo Scientific, USA) through ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column. Finally, twenty eight fractions were gathered from each sample, which were subsequently pooled, leading to fourteen total fractions per sample.Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Evosep One combined with Obitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer) (LC-MS/MS) were used for two-dimensional analysis, according to the standard protocols by Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co. Ltd(Shanghai, China)

### Data Protocol
The RAW data were processed with ProteomeDiscoverer (Thermo Scientific, Version 2.4) against UniProt database. The search parameters were precursor Mass Tolorance of 20ppm and Fragment Mass Tolorance of 0.02Da and false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification ≤ 0.01. The screening threshold of DEPs as p <0.05 and fold change >1.2 or <0.83. Annotation of all identified DEPs was carried out through Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). GO and KEGG enrichment analysis were performed in order to further explore the functions of DEPs. The significance of GO or KEGG enrichment was defined as p < 0.05. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was conducted by the String v11.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mice;tenuigenin ;intracerebral hemorrhage

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,China; NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment on Brain Functional Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,Chongqing,China
Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Peng Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Xie
Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,China; NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment on Brain Functional Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,Chongqing,China


