### Accession
PXD023056

### Title
Rapid and high coverage profile of human cysteineome-Figure 1

### Description
Cysteines play important roles in many biological activities, including protein folding, aging, signaling and etc. To identify and quantitatively profile the oxidation and reactivity of cysteines, cysteine-reactive compounds have been applied to covalently label and enrich the cysteines. And with mass spectrometry (MS), thousands of cysteines can be profiled at the same time with decoration of functional groups. However, with all the technology and methods developed to characterize cysteines, current datasets have only uncovered about 5% of the total cysteinome. Here we show a comprehensive and high coverage profile of more than 30,000 cysteines. With incorporation of new techniques - single-pot, solid phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) and High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS), we have successfully identified as many as 14,306 cystienes in a single-shot experiment. With cysteine profiles in different cell lines, proteases and fractionations, our results have successfully expanded the cysteine library to a great extent.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates are first treated with iodoacetamide alkyne to label all the cysteiens, then, with CUAAC click chemistry, biotin group is attached to cysteines with biotin azide. After SP3 clean up and digestion on beads, samples are eluted and enriched with neutravidin beads. Afterwards, cysteine peptides are eluted and sent to LC-MS/MS for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected by LC-MS/MS were searched with MSFragger (version 3.1.1) {ref}. Proteomic workflow of FragPipe and its collection of tools was set as default. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set as 50 ppm and 600 ppm respectively. Missed cleavages were allowed up to 1. Peptide length was set 7 - 50 and peptide mass range was set 500 - 5000. Cysteine residues were searched with a static modification for carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146) and a differential modification at cysteine residues, which is +406.21509  for cysteine enrichment and +80.0626 for IA-alkyne labeling.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics has enabled the rapid and proteome-wide discovery of functional, redox-sensitive, and ligandable cysteine residues. Despite widespread adoption and considerable advances in both sample-preparation workflows and MS instrumentation, chemoproteomics experiments still typically only identify a small fraction of all cysteines encoded by the human genome. Here, we develop an optimized sample-preparation workflow that combines enhanced peptide labeling with single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) to improve the recovery of biotinylated peptides, even from small sample sizes. By combining this improved workflow with on-line high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation of labeled peptides, we achieve unprecedented coverage of &gt;14000 unique cysteines in a single-shot 70&#x2005;min experiment. Showcasing the wide utility of the SP3-FAIMS chemoproteomic method, we find that it is also compatible with competitive small-molecule screening by isotopic tandem orthogonal proteolysis-activity-based protein profiling (isoTOP-ABPP). In aggregate, our analysis of 18 samples from seven cell lines identified 34225 unique cysteines using only &#x223c;28&#x2005;h of instrument time. The comprehensive spectral library and improved coverage provided by the SP3-FAIMS chemoproteomics method will provide the technical foundation for future studies aimed at deciphering the functions and druggability of the human cysteineome.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Sp3, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Faims

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA
Biological Chemistry Department David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA

### Submitter
Tianyang Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Keriann M. Backus
Biological Chemistry Department David Geffen School of Medicine UCLA


