### Accession
PXD001903

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the effect of deletion of PUF3 on yeast via LC-MSMS.

### Description
The Puf family of RNA-binding proteins regulate the expression of genes by controlling protein synthesis or stimulating RNA decay.  Puf3p is one of six Puf-family members in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Puf3p has been characterised previously as regulating mRNA decay of nuclear mRNAs that encode for mitochondrial proteins.  We undertook a series of genome wide approaches to identify an expanded set of Puf3p target mRNAs and to quantitatively assess the impact of loss of PUF3 on the expression control in actively growing wild type and puf3Δ strains. Here we report our quantifications of relative protein levels. The data suggest that loss of Puf3p only impacts on a small proportion of the proteins encoded by its mRNA targets.

### Sample Protocol
Quintuplicate repeats of the wild-type and knock-out strains were grown in SCD medium to exponential phase. Cultures were harvested, washed in 3% glucose with 2x amino acids and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed using the 6870 freezer mill (Spex) into 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche). Ground samples were defrosted, cleared by centrifugation at 4°C (15,000g for 10 minutes), and 100 μg of cleared lysate was diluted to a final volume of 160 µl containing 1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters Corporation). Samples were incubated at 80°C for 10 minutes, reduced using a final concentration of 3.5 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 60°C for 10 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, in order to uniformly modify cysteine residues, and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were treated by two subsequent trypsin digestions (0.01 µg/µl trypsin in 10 mM acetic acid), initially for 4.5 h, and then overnight at 37°C. Hydrochloric acid was added to a final concentration of 13 mM in between the two digestions to maximise trypsin digestion.  RapiGest was removed from the samples with the following steps: 1) 0.5 µl of trifluoroacetic acid was added and incubated at 37°C for 2h; 2) 7.5 µl of acetonitrile:water (2:1) was added and incubated at 4°C for 2h; and, 3) samples were centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 minutes.  Supernatant was removed and desalted using OLIGO™ R3 reversed-phase media on a microplate system. Peptides were eluted in three cycles of 50% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted to 10 µL with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 mM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data from five replicates of the five conditions were analysed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times in each sample were aligned using one LC-MS run as a reference, then the “Automatic Alignment” algorithm was used to create maximal overlay of the two-dimensional feature maps. Features with charges ≥ +5 were masked and excluded from further analyses, as were features with less than 3 isotope peaks. The resulting peak lists were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, version 3rd February 2011) using Mascot v2.2.06 (Matrix Science). Search parameters included a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set to variable. The Mascot results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS for annotation of peptide peaks. Subsequently, protein abundances were compared using Progenesis statistics tools, and the p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg correction implemented in R. We accepted a 5% False Discovery Rate in the differential analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The PUF family of RNA-binding proteins regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. Saccharomyces cerevisiae Puf3p is characterised as binding nuclear-encoded mRNAs specifying mitochondrial proteins. Extensive studies of its regulation of COX17 demonstrate its role in mRNA decay. Using integrated genome-wide approaches we define an expanded set of Puf3p target mRNAs and quantitatively assessed the global impact of loss of PUF3 on gene expression using mRNA and polysome profiling and quantitative proteomics. In agreement with prior studies, our sequencing of affinity-purified Puf3-TAP associated mRNAs (RIP-seq) identified mRNAs encoding mitochondrially-targeted proteins. Additionally, we also found 720 new mRNA targets that predominantly encode proteins that enter the nucleus. Comparing transcript levels in wild-type and puf3&#x2206; cells revealed that only a small fraction of mRNA levels alter, suggesting Puf3p determines mRNA stability for only a limited subset of its target mRNAs. Finally, proteomic and translatomic studies suggest that loss of Puf3p has widespread, but modest, impact on mRNA translation. Taken together our integrated multi-omics data point to multiple classes of Puf3p targets, which display coherent post-transcriptional regulatory properties and suggest Puf3p plays a broad, but nuanced, role in the fine-tuning of gene expression.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Talavera

### Lab Head
Dr Graham Pavitt
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom


