### Accession
PXD007063

### Title
Simmondsia chinensis leaf under cold stress, ITRAQ

### Description
Jojoba (Simmondsia chinensis) is a new semi- arid, oil- producing industrial crop that has attracted much attention in recent years. Low temperature is one of the major environmental stress that impairs plant growth and development. To better understand the molecular mechanisms of cold stress adaptation and acclimation of jojoba plants, a quantitative proteomic analysis using iTRAQ technology was conducted to detect the effects of cold stress on protein expression profiles in jojoba seedlings. Our work provided useful infomation for understanding the cold stress response and cold acclimation in jojoba.

### Sample Protocol
1. Plant growth and cold  stress treatment Female Jojoba (Simmondsia chinensis) seedlings were randomly divided into three groups, and all of these seedling have similar height and 7-8 pairs of true leaves. The first group was still grown in tissue culture room and served as the control group. The second and third groups were transferred to the cold-stress conditions. After cold treatment, leaves in the both groups were collected and frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at −80°C until further processing. Three individual plants were pooled for each sample, and each group had at least two biological replicates.  2 Protein Extraction and Digestion Leaf samples from cold-treated plants and control plants were ground into fine powder with liquid nitrogen. The power was suspended in an acetone solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 65 mM DTT in a 50 ml tube. After thoroughly mixed by vortexing, proteins were precipitated at  -20℃ for 1 hour. Proteins were then collected by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm (Eppendorf 5430R; Eppendorf Ltd., Hamburg, Germany) at 4°C for 45 min. The resulting supernatant was discarded and the protein pellet was washed twice with cold acetone and dried by lyophilization. The pellet was then suspended in STD buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and mixed thoroughly by vortexing. After 5 min incubation in boiling water, the suspensions were dispersed by ultrasonication (80 w: 10 times for 10 s each, with 15 s intervals). After incubated in a boiling water bath for 5 min, the final protein pellets were obtained by centrifugation. The protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Beyotime, China). The quality of the protein samples were checked by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis.  3 Protein digestion and ITRAQ labeling Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewki et al. and Zhong et al. The peptide content was determined by spectra density using UV absorption at 280 nm. The resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX) (113 to 115 tags for the three biological replicates of control group, 116 to 118 tags for the three biological replicates of cold stress-treated group, 119 and 121 for another cold stress-treated group) and vacuum dried.  4 Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography and LC–MS/MS   All the iTRAQ labeled peptides were combined and further fractionated according to the procedure described previously [ii] with the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare) by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. The collected fractions (33 fractions) were finally combined into 15 pools and desalted on C18 Cartridges (66872-U, Sigma, USA).    Peptides separation was conducted with an automated Easy-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, USA). The peptides were loaded onto a Thermos scientific EASY columm (2 cm × 100 μm, 5μm-C18) equilibrated with 95% Buffer A (Buffer A, 0.1% formic acid), and then the peptides were loaded and separated on a C18 columm (75 × 250 mm, 3μm-C18) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The peptides were eluted with a gradient of 0%-55% buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) by applying a linear gradient from 0 to 35% buffer B in 50 min, followed by a gradient to 100% B in 8 min and then maintained for 2 min.   The Q-Exactive (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer was used to acquire data in the positive ion mode, with a selected mass range of 300–1800 mass/charge (m/z). Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set as 17,500 at m/z 200. The data-dependent top 10 MS/MS were selected by dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD). Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0s. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the under-fill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum-fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were interpreted with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using the search engine Mascot (Version 2.2, Matrix Science, UK) against the protein database of Caryophyllales (uniprot_Caryophyllales_78995_20170303.fasta)  and the decoy database. The Mascot parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; mass values, monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance, ±20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.1 Da; max missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); variable modifications, Oxidation (M). The decoy database pattern was set as the reverse of the target database. False discovery rate (FDR) of both proteins and peptides identification was set as: FDR ≤ 1%. Protein identification was supported by a minimum of one unique peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
Jojoba (<i>Simmondsia chinensis</i>) is a semi-arid, oil-producing industrial crop that have been widely cultivated in tropical arid region. Low temperature is one of the major environmental stress that impair jojoba's growth, development and yield and limit introduction of jojoba in the vast temperate arid areas. To get insight into the molecular mechanisms of the cold stress response of jojoba, a combined physiological and quantitative proteomic analysis was conducted. Under cold stress, the photosynthesis was repressed, the level of malondialdehyde (MDA), relative electrolyte leakage (REL), soluble sugars, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) were increased in jojoba leaves. Of the 2821 proteins whose abundance were determined, a total of 109 differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) were found and quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of the coding genes for 7 randomly selected DAPs were performed for validation. The identified DAPs were involved in various physiological processes. Functional classification analysis revealed that photosynthesis, adjustment of cytoskeleton and cell wall, lipid metabolism and transport, reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging and carbohydrate metabolism were closely associated with the cold stress response. Some cold-induced proteins, such as cold-regulated 47 (COR47), staurosporin and temperature sensitive 3-like a (STT3a), phytyl ester synthase 1 (PES1) and copper/zinc superoxide dismutase 1, might play important roles in cold acclimation in jojoba seedlings. Our work provided important data to understand the plant response to the cold stress in tropical woody crops.

### Keywords
Cold stress, Leaf, Itraq, Simmondsia chinensis

### Affiliations
Minzu University  of China
College of life and environmental sciences, Minzu University of China

### Submitter
Fei Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Fei Gao
College of life and environmental sciences, Minzu University of China


