### Accession
PXD019507

### Title
Expanding the cross-link coverage of a dihydrazide-based carboxyl-group specific chemical cross-linking strategy - Dataset 2: Bovine 20S proteasome

### Description
The conditions for chemical protein-protein cross-linking using the reagents pimelic dihydrazide (PDH) and 4-(4,6-Dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium (DMTMM) chloride were optimized using a set of five model proteins and two large complexes, the 20S proteasome and the 70S ribosome. This dataset contains data from the bovine 20S proteasome only.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed with different reagent concentrations and relative ratios (for details, see the accompanying publication). Cross-linked proteins were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, and the digests were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system after fractionation by size exclusion chromatography. Duplicate injections for each SEC fraction were performed for precursors with a charge state of 3 and above. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of the proteasome subunits and identified contaminant proteins and shuffled decoy sequences; the database is provided. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = -3 to +2 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. All results were further manually validated for correct cross-link site assignment as detailed in the accompanying publication. Results are provided in three separate tables corresponding to the three different experimental conditions tested. Each table contains data for PDH and DMTMM identifications in separate tabs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; pdh; dmtmm; 20s proteasome; method optimization

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


