### Accession
PXD000240

### Title
Host-centric proteomics of stool

### Description
Soluble extra-cellular proteins and peptides from human and mouse stool were fractionated on a C-4 solid phase extraction cartidge, trypsin digested, C-18 clean up and identified with MS/MS on a LTQ-Velos Orbitrap. Data processing: The readRAW program was used to generate peak lists from the original data. All protein sequences were reversed and concatenated to the original forward-oriented proteins. Spectra were assigned to peptides using a semi-specific enzyme specificity with the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3.01) using static carbamidomethylation of cysteines, differential oxidized methionines, 50ppm precursor mass tolerance, 2 miscleavages and 0.8Da fragment ion tolerance. Searched against a mouse or human database.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The diverse community of microbes that inhabits the human bowel is vitally important to human health. Host-expressed proteins are essential for maintaining this mutualistic relationship and serve as reporters on the status of host-microbiota interaction. Therefore, unbiased and sensitive methods focused on host proteome characterization are needed. Herein we describe a novel method for applying shotgun proteomics to the analysis of feces, focusing on the secreted host proteome. We have conducted the most complete analysis of the extracellular mouse gut proteome to date by employing a gnotobiotic mouse model. Using mice colonized with defined microbial communities of increasing complexity or a complete human microbiota ('humanized'), we show that the complexity of the host stool proteome mirrors the complexity of microbiota composition. We further show that host responses exhibit signatures specific to the different colonization states. We demonstrate feasibility of this approach in human stool samples and provide evidence for a "core" stool proteome as well as personalized host response features. Our method provides a new avenue for noninvasive monitoring of host-microbiota interaction dynamics via host-produced proteins in stool.

### Keywords
Host response, Proteomics, Ms/ms, Gut microbiome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Stanford University, School of Medicine

### Submitter
Joshua Lichtman

### Lab Head


