### Accession
PXD043643

### Title
Natural compounds from freshwater mussels disrupt fungal virulence and overcome fluconazole resistance in Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
Cryptococcus neoformans is a human fungal pathogen responsible for fatal infections, especially in patients with a depressed immune system. Overexposure to antifungal drugs due to prolonged treatment regimens and structure-similar applications in agriculture have weakened the efficacy of current antifungals in the clinic. The rapid evolution of antifungal resistance urges the discovery of new compounds that inhibit fungal virulence factors, rather than directly killing the pathogen as alternative strategies to overcome disease and reduce selective pressure towards resistance. Recent studies, including our own, have highlighted the antimicrobial properties of natural sources, such as invertebrates, against human fungal pathogens, including C. neoformans, through virulence factor impairment. Here, we evaluated the efficacy of freshwater mussel extracts (crude and clarified) against virulence factor production (i.e., thermotolerance, melanin, capsule, and biofilm) in C. neoformans. Similarly, we demonstrated the critical potential of these extracts to increase the susceptibility of the pathogen to fluconazole across resistant strains, overcoming a globally devastating problem. Additionally, we measured the inhibitory activity of the extracts against peptidases related to fungal virulence and drug resistance. Furthermore, we integrated these phenotypic findings with quantitative proteomics profiling to define distinct signatures of each treatment and validated a new mechanism of anti-virulence action for a selected extract. By understanding the mechanisms driving the antifungal activity of mussels, we may develop innovative treatments for fungal infections lacking susceptibility to conventional drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Profiling of the mussel extracts was performed as previously described for secretome samples (40). Briefly, 100 µg of crude and clarified mussel extracts were enzymatically digested using a trypsin/Lys-C mixture, followed by desalting and purification using STop And Go Extraction (STAGE)-tips (41).  Samples were measured on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an in-line 75-mm by 50-cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2-mm C18 reverse-phase silica beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separated peptides were electro-sprayed into the mass spectrometer with a linear gradient of 3% to 20% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) over a 60 min gradient, followed by a wash with 100% buffer B with a 250-nL/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition model and switched between one full scan and MS/MS scans of abundant peaks. Full scans (m/z 400 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry raw data files was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26) (42). Given that these mussel species do not have complete proteomes annotated, the search was performed using the incorporated Andromeda (43)search engine against the proteins of the Unionida group (24205 sequences; 20 February 2023) for L. costata and, D. polymorpha proteins (265287 sequences; 20 February 2023) for D. polymorpha from UniProt (44) and NCBI (45). The following parameters were included: trypsin enzyme specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, fixed modifications, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications, including, methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins and split by taxonomic ID. Peptide spectral matches were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled and the MaxLFQ algorithm used a minimum ratio count of 1 (46).  Statistical analysis and data visualization of the proteomics data were performed using Perseus (version 2.0.6.0) (47). Data were prepared by filtering for reverse database matches, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site, followed by log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. Filtering for valid values (three of four replicates in at least one group) was performed, missing values were imputed from the normal distribution (width, 0.3; downshift, 1.8 standard deviations), and group values were averaged. Significant differences were evaluated by a Student’s t-test (p-value ≤ 0.05) with multiple-hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg (FDR = 0.05 with S0 = 1) (48). Proteomics profiling was performed in quadruplicate.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i> is a human fungal pathogen responsible for fatal infections, especially in patients with a depressed immune system. Overexposure to antifungal drugs due to prolonged treatment regimens and structure-similar applications in agriculture have weakened the efficacy of current antifungals in the clinic. The rapid evolution of antifungal resistance urges the discovery of new compounds that inhibit fungal virulence determinants, rather than directly killing the pathogen, as alternative strategies to overcome disease and reduce selective pressure toward resistance. Here, we evaluated the efficacy of freshwater mussel extracts (crude and clarified) against the production of well-defined virulence determinants (i.e., thermotolerance, melanin, capsule, and biofilm) and fluconazole resistance in <i>C. neoformans</i>. We demonstrated the extracts' influence on fungal thermotolerance, capsule production, and biofilm formation, as well as susceptibility to fluconazole in the presence of macrophages. Additionally, we measured the inhibitory activity of extracts against commercial peptidases (family representatives of cryptococcal orthologs) related to fungal virulence determinants and fluconazole resistance, and integrated these phenotypic findings with quantitative proteomics profiling. Our approach defined distinct signatures of each treatment and validated a new mechanism of anti-virulence action toward the polysaccharide capsule from a selected extract following fractionation. By understanding the mechanisms driving the antifungal activity of mussels, we may develop innovative treatment options to overcome fungal infections and promote susceptibility to fluconazole in resistant strains.IMPORTANCEAs the prevalence and severity of global fungal infections rise, along with an increasing incidence of antifungal resistance, new strategies to combat fungal pathogens and overcome resistance are urgently needed. Critically, our current methods to overcome fungal infections are limited and drive the evolution of resistance forward; however, an anti-virulence approach to disarm virulence factors of the pathogen and promote host cell clearance is promising. Here, we explore the efficacy of natural compounds derived from freshwater mussels against classical fungal virulence determinants, including thermotolerance, capsule production, stress response, and biofilm formation. We integrate our phenotypic discoveries with state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify mechanistic drivers of these antifungal properties and propose innovative avenues to reduce infection and support the treatment of resistant strains.

### Keywords
Antifungals, Extracts, One health, Quantitative proteomics, Cryptococcus neoformans, Mussels, Virulence factors, Invertebrates, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Davier Gutierrez-Gongora

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada


