### Accession
PXD035024

### Title
Biomarkers of hepatocellular synthesis predict mortality in patients with decompensated cirrhosis

### Description
Background & Aims: Since liver hepatocytes produce the majority of serum proteins, liver cirrhosis displays a massive alteration in serum proteome. The aim of the current study was to characterize these alterations and to study the prognostic usefulness of hepatocellular proteins available in routine clinical testing. Methods: Sera from 29 healthy controls and 43 cirrhotic subjects were subjected to untargeted proteomic analysis. The data were analyzed by Perseus program, R and unsupervised hierarchical clustering. The prognostic usefulness potential of selected biomarkers was tested in 61 controls and 285 cirrhotic individuals. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was employed to determine the upstream regulators that were further validated in 9 control and 9 cirrhotic livers. Results: Proteomics uncovered 65 down- and 16 upregulated hepatocellular serum proteins that are significantly down- respectively upregulated in cirrhotic subjects versus controls. Hierarchical clustering revealed two main clusters and 6 subclusters, while IPA identified HNF4α and IL6 as the two major upstream regulators that were confirmed in gene expression analyses. Pseudocholinesterase (AUROC 0.618; P=0.002), transferrin (AUROC 0.594; P=0.013), and transthyretin (TTR; AUROC 0.586; P=0.023) but not albumin serum levels discriminated between 90 days transplant-free survivors vs. non-survivors. Tree learning decision algorithm identified transthyretin as a biomarker that improved the prediction of death or transplant in the subset of patients with acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF). TTR≤58 mg/dl conferred an increased risk in both univariate (HR 1.75; 95% CI 1.14-2.67; P=0.01) and multivariable analysis (aHR 1.59; 95% CI 1.04-2.24; P=0.033). Conclusion: Our study uncovers the changes in hepatocellular serum proteins as well as the underlying transcriptional factors and suggest that transthyretin may constitute an useful prognostic adjunct in ACLF subjects.

### Sample Protocol
In total, frozen serum samples from 285 patients with acute decompensation (AD) of cirrhosis and from 61 self-identified healthy individuals were used for this study. Of these, sera from 21 patients with acute chronic liver failure (ACLF) or pre-ACLF and from 22 patients with stable decompensated cirrhosis (SDC) as well as from 29 healthy individuals were randomly selected for proteomic analysis. 1 µl of each non-depleted serum was separated on SDS-PAGE gradient gels (4-20%; Serva) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue: 5 gel slices were excised from each lane and the proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin.  The resulting peptides were then desalted using homemade C18 tips and dried in a speed vac. Prior to mass-spectrometry analysis the samples were resuspended in 15 μl 3% formic acid (FA)/5% acetonitril (ACN) and then loaded onto an LC-system (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific).  Mass spectrometry analysis was in principle carried out as described in a previous study (PMID: 33950315). The peptides were first trapped on a C18 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm i.d. × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) using buffer A (0.1% FA) and then separated on an C18 analytical column (Easyspray (ES902): 2 μm particle size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 45°C column oven temperature, 2 kV; Thermo Scientific Thermo Scientific) coupled with the Easyspray (Thermo Scientific) source using a 70 minute minute gradient. The settings were: 0–10 minutes, 5% buffer B (80% ACN/0.1% FA); 10–42 minutes, 5%–35% B; 42–47 minutes, 35%–99% B; 47-52 minutes, 99% B; 52–55 minutes, 99%–5% B; 55–70 minutes, 5% B. The mass spectrometry analysis was done on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific) in using the data-dependent mode. Full MS Q Exactive settings: resolution: 70000; AGC target: 3e6; maximum injection time: 100 milliseconds; scan range, 300–1650 m/z. dd-MS2 settings: resolution: 17500 ; AGC target: 2e5; maximum injection time: 110 milliseconds; precursor fragmentation: top 10; isolation window: 1.8 m/z; collision energy: 27. dd settings: minimum AGC: 5e2; dynamic exclusion: 10s; only 2+ to 5+ peptides allowed.

### Data Protocol
In total, frozen serum samples from 285 patients with acute decompensation (AD) of cirrhosis and from 61 self-identified healthy individuals were used for this study. Of these, sera from 21 patients with acute chronic liver failure (ACLF) or pre-ACLF and from 22 patients with stable decompensated cirrhosis (SDC) as well as from 29 healthy individuals were randomly selected for proteomic analysis. 1 µl of each non-depleted serum was separated on SDS-PAGE gradient gels (4-20%; Serva) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue: 5 gel slices were excised from each lane and the proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin.  The resulting peptides were then desalted using homemade C18 tips and dried in a speed vac. Prior to mass-spectrometry analysis the samples were resuspended in 15 μl 3% formic acid (FA)/5% acetonitril (ACN) and then loaded onto an LC-system (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific).  Mass spectrometry analysis was in principle carried out as described in a previous study (PMID: 33950315). The peptides were first trapped on a C18 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm i.d. × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) using buffer A (0.1% FA) and then separated on an C18 analytical column (Easyspray (ES902): 2 μm particle size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 45°C column oven temperature, 2 kV; Thermo Scientific Thermo Scientific) coupled with the Easyspray (Thermo Scientific) source using a 70 minute minute gradient. The settings were: 0–10 minutes, 5% buffer B (80% ACN/0.1% FA); 10–42 minutes, 5%–35% B; 42–47 minutes, 35%–99% B; 47-52 minutes, 99% B; 52–55 minutes, 99%–5% B; 55–70 minutes, 5% B. The mass spectrometry analysis was done on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific) in using the data-dependent mode. Full MS Q Exactive settings: resolution: 70000; AGC target: 3e6; maximum injection time: 100 milliseconds; scan range, 300–1650 m/z. dd-MS2 settings: resolution: 17500 ; AGC target: 2e5; maximum injection time: 110 milliseconds; precursor fragmentation: top 10; isolation window: 1.8 m/z; collision energy: 27. dd settings: minimum AGC: 5e2; dynamic exclusion: 10s; only 2+ to 5+ peptides allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cirrhosis, Biomarker, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Medical Department III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic diseases and Intensive Care, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Strnad
Medical Department III, Gastroenterology, Metabolic diseases and Intensive Care, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany


