### Accession
PXD022763

### Title
Conserved function of UPF0016 manganese transporter across human, plant and bacteria

### Description
The Uncharacterized Protein Family 0016 (UPF0016) is conserved throughout evolution. In humans, the member TMEM165 is a putative Golgi localized Ca2+ and/or Mn2+ transporter. Genes encoding UPF0016 proteins are also present in many bacteria, including the cyanobacteria Synechocystis (MNX/SynPAM71), where it has been described as Mn2+ exporter. In Arabidopsis, two members of this family are embedded in the chloroplast membranes; the CMT1 protein is localized in the inner envelope membrane and the PAM71 protein is localized in the thylakoid membrane, and both cooperate to transport Mn2+ to the oxygen evolving complex of photosystem II. We used the pam71 mutant of Arabidopsis as a platform to perform intra- and inter-species complementation assays. The N-terminus of PAM71 was fused in front of TMEM165, CMT1 and MNX to direct them into chloroplast membranes. We performed LC-MS/MS experiments to assess their sub-plastidial localization.

### Sample Protocol
Leaf samples (12 g fresh weight) were homogenized in 0.4 M sorbitol, 20 mM tricine-NaOH (pH 8.4), 10 mM EDTA, 0.1% (w/v) BSA, 5 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MnCl2. The extract was filtered through two layers of Miracloth and centrifuged for 5 min at 1500 g. The pellet was resuspended in 80 mM sorbitol, 4 mM tricine-NaOH (pH 8.4), 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgCl2 and then layered onto a discontinuous 40% (w/v) / 80% (w/v) Percoll gradient. After centrifugation for 15 min at 7000 g, intact chloroplasts were isolated from the interphase and lysed in 10 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.6) and 5 mM MgCl2 by incubation on ice for 10 min. The mixture was layered onto a discontinuous sucrose gradient consisting of 1.2 M, 1.0 M and 0.46 M sucrose and centrifuged at 58000 g for 2 h. The stroma in the top fraction was discarded, the envelopes were collected from the middle fraction, and the thylakoids were collected as a pellet. The envelope fraction was further concentrated by centrifugation at 135 200 g for 1 h at 4 °C. Thylakoid and envelope fractions were resuspended in 200 µl of guanidine-HCl, and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min. After sonication, samples were centrifuged at 10 000 g for 15 minutes to remove cell debris, and subsequently loaded onto a Microcon-30kDa filter. On-column reduction, alkylation and digestion were performed as previously described (Janowski et al., 2018). After elution, the peptide mixtures were acidified to pH ≤ 3 using formic acid and desalted with home-made C18 stage tip. LC-MS/MS was performed on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled online to an Impact II Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight. The nano-LC system was operated in a two-column setup with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). The columns were kept at 50°C throughout the run. The peptide mixtures were separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl / min, using a linear gradient 3-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 60 minutes, followed by a linear increase 30-45 % solvent B within 15 minutes. Full MS scans in the mass range 200–2000 m/z were acquired at 3 Hz, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS2 analysis using an intensity dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16 Hz. To minimize repeated sequencing, dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.12.0). Peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome (Uniprot, version April 2019) using the built‐in Andromeda search engine. The search parameters were set as follow: Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N‐termini as variable modifications. The specific digestion enzyme was set to trypsin, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The false discovery rate at the protein and PSM level was set to 1%. The match between runs option was disabled, whereas the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Upf0016, Arabidopsis, Impactii, Thylakoid, Chloroplast, Mn transporter

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Schneider
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


