### Accession
PXD024428

### Title
Stage-specific, morphological and molecular markers of encystation in Giardia lamblia

### Description
Differentiation into environmentally resistant cysts is required for transmission of the ubiquitous intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia. Encystation in Giardia requires the production, processing and transport of Cyst Wall Proteins (CWPs) in stage induced Golgi-like Encystation Specific Vesicles (ESVs). While progress of this trafficking pathway can be followed by tracking CWPs, there is no recognized system to distinguish stages of this process that takes varied lengths of time to complete depending on the encystation method used. Here we propose a staging system for encysting Giardia based on the morphology of CWP1-stained ESVs. The molecular distinctiveness of ESVs at these stages were demonstrated by following Giardia Rabs through encystation. We previously demonstrated that Giardia’s sole Rho family GTPase, GlRac, associates with ESVs and has a role in regulating CWP1 maturation and secretion. As a proof of principle, we delineated the relationship among GlRac and ESV stages and through proteomic studies identified putative interactors of GlRac that could be used as additional ESV Stage-specific markers. We propose that this staging system provides a common descriptor of ESV maturation regardless of the source of encysting cells and the identified set of molecular markers for different ESV stages will be a powerful tool for characterizing trafficking mutants that impair typical ESV maturation and morphology.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification Affinity purification of OneStrep-GlRac was done according to a previously used protocol (Paredez et al., 2014) Note that two-step encystation protocol was followed during culturing for the 8 h p.i.e. experiments. The resulting elutes were analyzed with Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry. Samples were prepared using the FASP method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the samples were concentrated in an Amicon Ultra 10K filter, washed twice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), and the disulfides reduced using 10 mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for one hour at 37OC.  The resulting thiols were alkylated with 12 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min prior to spinning out the liquid. The proteins were washed twice with 100 ul 50 mM ABC. Digestion occurred after addition of 1 ug trypsin (Promega sequencing grade) in 200 ul 50 mM ABC, and overnight incubation at 37 C.  The peptides were spun out of the filter and dried using a vacuum centrifuge.  Mass Spectrometry All mass spectrometry was performed on a Velos Pro (Thermo) with an EasyLC HPLC and autosampler (Thermo). The dried pulldowns were solubilized in 25 ul of loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water), and 6 ul was injected via the autosampler onto a 150-μm Kasil fritted trap packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3-μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) to a bed length of 2 cm at a flow rate of 2 ul/min. After loading and desalting using a total volume of 8 ul of loading buffer, the trap was brought on-line with a pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-μm i.d.) packed to a length of 25 cm with the same Dr. Maisch beads. Peptides were eluted off the column using a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 min, followed by 35-60% acetonitrile over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using electrospray ionization (2 kV) with the heated transfer tube at 25OC using data dependent acquisition (DDA), whereby a mass spectrum (m/z 400-1600, normal scan rate) was acquired with up to 15 MS/MS spectra (rapid scan rate) of the most intense precursors found in the MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the protein sequence database GiardiaDB-3.1_GintestinalisAssemblageA_AnnotatedProteinsPlusCrap.fasta (**I got this from you guys and I don’t know how it was assembled**) using the computer program Comet (1).  Iodoacetamide was a fixed modification of cysteine, and oxidized methionine was treated as a variable modification.  Precursor mass tolerance was 2 Da, and fragment ion tolerance was +/- 0.5 Da.  Discrimination of correct and decoy spectra was performed using Percolator (2) with a 1% q-value cutoff. Proteins that had more than one unique peptide and significantly higher values for normalized total spectral counts (as determined by Fisher Exact Test with a Bonferroni multiple testing correction with an alpha of 0.01) in the OneStrep-GlRac pulldown sample compared to its counterpart WT control sample, were noted to be hits.

### Publication Abstract
Differentiation into environmentally resistant cysts is required for transmission of the ubiquitous intestinal parasite <i>Giardia lamblia</i>. Encystation in <i>Giardia</i> requires the production, processing and transport of Cyst Wall Proteins (CWPs) in developmentally induced, Golgi-like, Encystation Specific Vesicles (ESVs). Progress through this trafficking pathway can be followed by tracking CWP localization over time. However, there is no recognized system to distinguish the advancing stages of this process which can complete at variable rates depending on how encystation is induced. Here, we propose a staging system for encysting <i>Giardia</i> based on the morphology of CWP1-stained ESVs. We demonstrate the molecular distinctiveness of maturing ESVs at these stages by following <i>Gl</i>Rab GTPases through encystation. Previously, we established that <i>Giardia</i>'s sole Rho family GTPase, <i>Gl</i>Rac, associates with ESVs and has a role in regulating their maturation and the secretion of their cargo. As a proof of principle, we delineate the relationship between <i>Gl</i>Rac and ESV stages. Through proteomic studies, we identify putative interactors of <i>Gl</i>Rac that could be used as additional ESV stage markers. This staging system provides a common descriptor of ESV maturation regardless of the source of encysting cells. Furthermore, the identified set of molecular markers for ESV stages will be a powerful tool for characterizing trafficking mutants that impair ESV maturation and morphology.

### Keywords
Rho gtpase, Rac, Encystation, Membrane trafficking, Giardia

### Affiliations
Tsinghua university, Department of Chemistry
Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Qingyun Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Lie Liu
Tsinghua university, Department of Chemistry


