### Accession
PXD034108

### Title
A Multiplexed Parallel Reaction Monitoring Assay to monitor bovine Pregnancy-Associated Glycoproteins throughout pregnancy and after gestation - PRM Data

### Description
Bovine pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (boPAGs) are extensively glycosylated secretory proteins of trophoblast cells. Roughly 20 different boPAG members are known but their distribution patterns and degree of glycosylation during pregnancy are not well characterized. The objective of the present study was the development of a parallel reaction monitoring-based assay for the profiling of different boPAGs during pregnancy and after gestation. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of N-glycosylation on our analytical results. BoPAGs were purified from cotyledons of four different pregnancy stages. The assay detects 25 proteotypic peptides from 18 boPAGs in a single run. The highest abundances were found for boPAG 1 in both, glycosylated and deglycosylated samples. Strongest effects of glycosylation were detected during mid and late pregnancy as well as in afterbirth samples. Furthermore, we identified different boPAG-clusters based on the observed relative protein abundances between glycosylated and deglycosylated samples. A linkage between the impact of glycosylation and potential N-glycosylation sites or phylogenetic relation was not detected. In conclusion, the newly developed parallel reaction monitoring-based assay enables for the first time a comprehensive semi-quantitative profiling of 18 different boPAGs during pregnancy and post-partum on protein level, thereby investigating the influence of glycosylation. The results of this study provide new and important starting points to address further research on boPAGs to better understand their physiological role during pregnancy and for the development of new pregnancy detection tests.

### Sample Protocol
Both glycosylated samples from chromatography and deglycosylated samples from PNGaseF digestion were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (EC 3.4.21.4). Therefore, all samples were diluted to a final concentration of 10 µg protein/lane in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer 4x, NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent 10x (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and H2O, followed by incubation for 10 min at 70 °C prior to loading. Gel electrophoresis was performed on a NuPAGE 4-12 % Bis-Tris 1.0 mm gradient gel in an 8x8 cm vertical unit (Bio-Rad, USA) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue for visualization. For an initial shotgun analysis to determine sample purity and detect PRM peptide candidates, gels were run full distance and cut into 15 equidistant slices irrespective of staining. For the final PRM assays sample were run ~1 cm into the gel for purification purposes only and excised as a single band. Gel slices were washed 5 min at room temperature under shaking. Afterwards, the supernatant was discarded and 100 % acetonitrile (Merck, Germany) added to the gel pieces. After incubation for 15 min at room temperature on a shaker (750 rpm), the supernatant was again discarded and the gel pieces were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac Savant SPD111V, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  Reduction was performed by incubation with dithiothreitol (10 mM C4H10O2S2 in 100 mM NH4HCO3, 50 min, 56 °C). Following centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and the gel pieces dried using 100 % acetonitrile again. Alkylation was then achieved with iodoacetamide (55 mM C2H4INO in 100mM NH4HCO3, 20 min, RT, darkness). After removal of the supernatant, gel pieces were washed again with 100 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were dried using 100 % acetonitrile again twice, and the gel pieces dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Endoprotease lysis was performed overnight at 37 °C using modified porcine trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, USA) in digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 5 mM CaCl2) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were extracted from the gel by incubation with water (20 µl, 15 min, 37 °C). 80 µl neat acetonitrile were added and further incubated 15 min at 37 °C. The supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, the gel pieces incubated again with 5 % aqueous formic acid (65 µl, 15 min, 37 °C), centrifuged, and incubated again after addition of 65 µl neat acetonitrile. Subsequently, the gel pieces were centrifuged and the supernatants pooled with supernatants from the first extraction. Resulting peptide solutions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 °C until further use.  Prior to MS analysis, peptide mixtures were reconstituted in loading buffer (1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % CH2O2 in H2O) to a nominal concentration of 100 fmol/µl, and spiked with 100 fmol/µl Escherichia coli ß-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.23) tryptic digest to avoid adsorption effects [32] and 100 fmol/µl of pepstatin A (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) to inhibit proteolytic activity of boPAGs [13,14,33] during analysis.  For PRM assays, samples were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex, Germany). Peptides dissolved in loading buffer were enriched on a micro pillar array trapping column (µPac 1 cm, 5 µm, PharmaFluidics, Belgium) and separated on an analytical micro pillar array column (µPac 50 cm, 2.5 µm, PharmaFluidics, Belgium) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl/min. Targeted LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top12 parallel reaction monitoring acquisition consisting of a MS survey scan of m/z 350–1250 accumulated for 150 ms at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM, and up to 12 MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 accumulated for 150 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.1 s. Precursors were chosen from a retention-time encoded list of peptide m/z values of interest, which were selected for MS/MS in a time window of RT±4 min above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer's default rolling collision energy settings. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
PRM data were analyzed using Skyline version 20.1.0.76 (University of Washington, USA) [37]. In Skyline, all peaks were automatically integrated and the 6 most intense transitions (y and b ions) for each precursor were selected. Furthermore, all peaks were manually inspected and the peak boundaries were adjusted to avoid interferences and to confirm correct detection. Afterwards the Total Area Fragment data from each peptide was exported from Skyline and further analyzed using R 3.6.1 (R Development Core Team, Austria). PRM for qualitative measurements of boPAGs in the protein digests were performed targeting at least one prototypic peptide for each boPAG (Table 1). Selected peptides were verified to be unique to the protein of interest by an online BLAST analysis (Program: NCBI BLASTP, database: NCBI Protein Reference Sequences database, Organism: Bos Taurus (taxid:9913), 2020/06/22). Peptides containing potential missed cleavage sites, methionine or cysteine were excluded; doubly charged precursor ions were favored. Furthermore, the selected peptides must have a length between 8 and 25 amino acids and m/z values between 450 and 800.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Cattle, Parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics


