### Accession
PXD021322

### Title
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Proteomics of APPPS1 mice

### Description
Here, we took advantage of well-defined mouse models for β-amyloidosis (APPPS1)  to explore proteome changes in the cerebrospinal fluid which are related to these distinct proteopathic lesions. Non-targeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry revealed that the majority of proteins that undergo age- and disease-related changes in either mouse model was linked to microglia, and more specifically to previously described disease state-specific microglia transcriptomic signatures. The finding that such transcriptomic changes translate into corresponding protein changes in cerebrospinal fluid is of high clinical relevance, supporting efforts to identify bodily fluid biomarkers that reflect the various functional states of microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
5 µL of CSF were diluted with 45 µL of denaturation buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8). Proteins were reduced by adding 5 µL of a 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution and incubation for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Cysteines were alkylated by adding 5 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) solution and incubated for 20 min at RT in the dark. Excess of IAA was removed by addition of 5 µL of 10 mM DTT. Samples were digested subsequently with LysC (0.1 µg per sample) and trypsin (0.1 µg per sample). After adding LysC, samples were incubated 4 hours at RT. Afterwards, samples were diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added and samples were incubated for 16 hours at RT. Peptides were desalted and enriched using self-prepared C18 STAGE Tips (3M, USA). Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. For LC-MS/MS measurements, peptide samples were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid. two technical replicates were separated and a prolonged gradient was applied (0 min., 2% B; 5 min., 5% B; 185 min., 25% B; 230 min, 35% B; 250 min, 60% B; 255 min, 95% B; 270 min, 95% B) using an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, USA). The nanoLC was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Scientific, US) or via an Easy spray (Scientific, US) electrospray ion source to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US), respectively. Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z range: 300–1400). The top 10 peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 2×104 were chosen for collision-induced dissociation. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion of 60 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data was analyzed with the software Maxquant (version 1.5.3.12). The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical FASTA database of Mus musculus from UniProt (download: August 26th 2015, 16725 entries) supplemented with a contaminants database as well as the transgenes. Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option ‘first search’ was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search, peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term, as well as oxidation of methionine, was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy approach (concatenated forward/reverse database). Label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Normalization of the LFQ algorithm was disabled to account for age and genotype dependent CSF protein abundance differences.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell transcriptomics has revealed specific glial activation states associated with the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer&#x2019;s and Parkinson&#x2019;s disease. While these findings may eventually lead to new therapeutic opportunities, little is known about how these glial responses are reflected by biomarker changes in bodily fluids. Such knowledge, however, appears crucial for patient stratification, as well as monitoring disease progression and treatment responses in clinical trials. Here, we took advantage of well-described mouse models of &#x3b2;-amyloidosis and &#x3b1;-synucleinopathy to explore cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteome changes related to their respective proteopathic lesions. Nontargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry revealed that the majority of proteins that undergo age-related changes in CSF of either mouse model were linked to microglia and astrocytes. Specifically, we identified a panel of more than 20 glial-derived proteins that were increased in CSF of aged &#x3b2;-amyloid precursor protein- and &#x3b1;-synuclein-transgenic mice and largely overlap with previously described disease-associated glial genes identified by single-cell transcriptomics. Our results also show that enhanced shedding is responsible for the increase of several of the identified glial CSF proteins as exemplified for TREM2. Notably, the vast majority of these proteins can also be quantified in human CSF and reveal changes in Alzheimer&#x2019;s disease cohorts. The finding that cellular transcriptome changes translate into corresponding changes of CSF proteins is of clinical relevance, supporting efforts to identify fluid biomarkers that reflect the various functional states of glial responses in cerebral proteopathies, such as Alzheimer&#x2019;s and Parkinson&#x2019;s disease.

### Keywords
Amyloid beta, Mouse, Appps1, Alzheimer

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 D-81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 D-81377 Munich Germany


