### Accession
PXD017172

### Title
Identification of osteolineage cell-derived extracellular vesicle cargo implicated in hematopoietic support

### Description
Osteolineage cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) play a regulatory role in hematopoiesis and have been shown to promote the ex vivo expansion of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs). Here, we demonstrate that EVs from different human osteolineage sources do not have the same HSPC expansion promoting potential. Comparison of stimulatory and non-stimulatory osteolineage EVs by next-generation sequencing and mass spectrometry analyses revealed distinct microRNA and protein signatures identifying EV-derived candidate regulators of ex vivo HSPC expansion. Accordingly, the treatment of umbilical cord blood-derived CD34+ HSPCs with stimulatory EVs altered HSPC transcriptome, including genes with known roles in cell proliferation. An integrative bioinformatics approach, which connects the HSPC gene expression data with the candidate cargo in stimulatory EVs, delineated the potentially targeted biological functions and pathways during hematopoietic cell expansion and development. In conclusion, our study gives novel insights into the complex biological role of EVs in osteolineage cell-HSPC crosstalk and promotes the utility of EVs and their cargo as therapeutic agents in regenerative medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were prepared according to the method described by Kulak et al. with some adjustments. Briefly, EVs were lysed in 2x concentrated (2%) SDC lysis buffer (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), 20 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific), 80 mM ChloroAcetamide (Sigma Aldrich) and 200 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 (Life Technologies, UK), boiled at 95° for 5 minutes and sonicated for 10 cycles of 30 seconds on/ off in a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Belgium). After an overnight digestion with 100 ng Trypsin-LysC (Promega, USA) at room temperature, samples were acidified with 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific) and loaded on in-house prepared SDB-RPS STAGEtips (Empore, USA). The tips were washed with ethyl acetate (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific) and then the peptides were eluted in three fractions by increasing concentrations (100 mM and 150 mM) of ammonium formate (VWR Chemicals, Belgium) or 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (Merck Millipore, Germany) and acetonitrile (40% ,60% and 80% v/v) (BioSolve, France). Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 10 μl. 3 μl of each sample was injected for MS analysis.Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired with Xcalibur 4.1 software. The raw mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.3.30. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded March 2017). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and only unique peptides for quantification were selected. The data was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ using Perseus 1.6.5.0 (33). The proteins were filtered for three valid values in at least one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. A volcano plot from a double-sided t-test (FDR 0.05 and S0 of 2) was used to determine significant differences between the sEV and hEV samples. PANTHER 14.1 classification system and FunRich were used to categorize the proteins into overrepresented processes.

### Publication Abstract
Osteolineage cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) play a regulatory role in hematopoiesis and have been shown to promote the ex vivo expansion of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs). Here, we demonstrate that EVs from different human osteolineage sources do not have the same HSPC expansion promoting potential. Comparison of stimulatory and non-stimulatory osteolineage EVs by next-generation sequencing and mass spectrometry analyses revealed distinct microRNA and protein signatures identifying EV-derived candidate regulators of ex vivo HSPC expansion. Accordingly, the treatment of umbilical cord blood-derived CD34<sup>+</sup> HSPCs with stimulatory EVs-altered HSPC transcriptome, including genes with known roles in cell proliferation. An integrative bioinformatics approach, which connects the HSPC gene expression data with the candidate cargo in stimulatory EVs, delineated the potentially targeted biological functions and pathways during hematopoietic cell expansion and development. In conclusion, our study gives novel insights into the complex biological role of EVs in osteolineage cell-HSPC crosstalk and promotes the utility of EVs and their cargo as therapeutic agents in regenerative medicine.

### Keywords
Hematopoietic niche, Bone, Intercellular communication, Hematopoietic expansion

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Sander Meijer
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.


