### Accession
PXD032394

### Title
Comparison of performances of automatic versus manual liquid handling in density-based separation of extracellular vesicles from plasma and urine

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) in body fluids are extensively studied as potential biomarkers for numerous diseases. Major impediments of EV-based biomarker discovery include the manual labor, and the specificity and reproducibility of EV sample preparation. To tackle this, we present an automated liquid handling workstation for the density-based separation of EV from human body fluids and compare its performance to manual handling by (in)experienced researchers. To validate automated density-based separation of EVs from human body fluids, including blood plasma and urine, we assess variation, yield and purity by mass spectrometry-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
EV extracts were obtained from blood plasma from breast cancer patients and urine from healthy donors. EV were separated from blood plasma by a combination of size-exclusion chromatography, density gradient centrifugation, as previously described (Tulkens et al., Nature protocols, 2019), and from urine by density gradient centrifugation, as previously described (Dhondt, JEV, 2020). Density gradient preparation was performed by (in)experienced operators or the automated liquid handler. For both blood plasma and urine, EV-enriched density fractions 9 and 10 were separately collected, pelleted by ultracentrifugation. The EV-pellets were re-suspended in SDT lysis buffer and FASP'ed (Wiśniewski et al, Nature methods, 2009). Collected peptides were acidified with 1 % trifluoroacetic acid to a pH of 2-3, followed by desalting with Peptide Cleanup C18 Spin Tubes (Aligent, Santa Clara, CA, USA).   Desalted peptides were vacuum dried, dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Equal amounts of peptides of each sample were loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy- nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nano‐electrospray ionization source. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.1 % formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were separated with a 40 min gradient from 8 to 35 % of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Full MS scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300-1750 with a resolution of 120,000, followed by data dependent acquisition with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was performed. The top 12 ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 % and scanned over the m/z range of 200-2000 with a resolution of 15,000. After the MS2 scan for each of the top 12 ions had been obtained, a new full mass spectrum scan was acquired and the process repeated until the end of the 50 min run. Three repeated runs per sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) against a database containing reviewed sequences of homo sapiens of UniProtKB release 2019_11. Peptide-spectrum-match- and protein-level false discovery rates were set at 0.01. Carbamidomethyl (C), as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications were included. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The LC-MS profiles were aligned, and the identifications were transferred to non-sequenced or non-identified MS features in other LC-MS runs (matching between runs). The protein was determined as detected in the sample if its identification had been derived from at least two unique peptide identifications. Filtering for contaminating proteins, reverse identification and identification by site was used. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Plasma, Automatic liquid handling, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier De Wever
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


