### Accession
PXD038606

### Title
Glycosylation Profiling of Neoplastic Biomarker Alpha Fetoprotein Through Intact Mass Protein Analysis

### Description
Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is a circulating cancer biomarker implicated in multiple neoplastic malignancies, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).  AFP glycoforms with core fucosylation structure (AFP-L3) are used clinically as a biomarker, to predict risk of developing HCC and to monitor its recurrence. Mature AFP has a single glycosylation site, while there is a high degree of structural variation in AFP-glycan modifications.  Because AFP has single glycosylation site, masses of intact AFP proteoforms can be used to differentiate and identify PTM in their native states. We developed a method for intact AFP glycoform analysis that utilizes AFP-specific immune-enrichment, followed by LC-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) analysis to differentiate and quantitate the relative abundance of AFP glycoforms and evaluated the method’s performance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed as follows, to 500 µL of serum sample, 500 µL of HEPES buffer and 5 µL of anti-AFP antibody were added, the samples were incubated with mixing for 1 hour; after the incubation, 5 µL of magnetic beads coated with anti-rabbit IgG antibody were added to the samples and the samples were incubated with mixing. After incubation, the magnetic beads were washed, AFP was eluted, and the samples were analyzed   using Q-TOF 6550 mass spectrometer, equipped with 1290 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies). Data acquisition on the Q-TOF instrument was performed using high resolution, profile mode (4GHz); the mass range was m/z 1,000-3,200. HPLC separation was performed using a PLRP column (2.1 mm x 50 mm, Agilent).

### Data Protocol
Multiple charge envelopes corresponding to chromatographic peaks at the retention time (RT) of AFP and human albumin were selected for deconvolution using the maximum entropy algorithm in BioConfirmTM software 10.1 (Agilent Technologies). For AFP, the deconvolution was performed with target mass range between 68,000-80,000 Da using 7 Da mass step size. Deconvoluted masses at the expected AFP retention time were then matched to AFP full length sequence without its signal peptide (P02771|19-609) and with 16 disulfide bonds. The variable modifications included known AFP glycan modifications and a maximum of six sites of phosphorylation.

### Publication Abstract
Elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) can be observed in liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The glycosylation patterns of AFP have been shown to differentiate these conditions, with AFP glycoforms with core fucosylation (AFP-L3) serving as a malignancy risk predictor for HCC. We have developed a method to detect endogenously present AFP proteoforms and to quantify the relative abundance of AFP-L3 glycoforms (AFP-L3%) in serum samples. This method consists of immune enrichment of endogenous AFP, followed by liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) intact protein analysis of AFP. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD038606. Based on the AFP profiles in authentic patient serum samples, we have identified that the frequently observed AFP glycoforms without core fucosylation (AFP-L1) are G2S2 and G2S1, and common AFP-L3 glycoforms are G2FS1 and G2FS2. The intensities of glycoforms in the deconvoluted spectrum are used to quantify AFP-L3% in each sample. The method evaluation included reproducibility, specificity, dilution integrity, and comparison of AFP-L3% with a lectin-binding gel shift electrophoresis (GSE) assay. The AFP-L1 and AFP-L3 proteoforms were reproducibly identified in multiple patient serum samples, resulting in reproducible AFP-L3% quantification. There was considerable agreement between the developed LC-HRMS and commercial GSE methods when quantifying AFP-L3% (Pearson <i>r</i> = 0.63) with a proportional bias.

### Keywords
Intact protein analysis, Core fucose, Fucosylation, High-resolution mass spectrometry, Afp-l3 proteforms

### Affiliations
ARUP Institute for Clinical & Experimental Pathology
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Mark Kushnir

### Lab Head
Dr Yifei Yang
Mayo Clinic


