### Accession
PXD009578

### Title
Serum autoantibodies to the glutamate receptor delta 2 in paediatric opsoclonus myoclonus ataxia syndrome

### Description
Abstract Objective: To identify neuronal surface antibodies in opsoclonus myoclonus ataxia syndrome (OMAS) with contemporary antigen discovery methodology. Methods: OMAS patient serum IgG immunohistochemistry using age-equivalent rat cerebellar tissue was followed by immunoprecipitation, gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry generated a list of potential neuronal surface cerebellar autoantigens. Live cell-based assays (CBA) were used to confirm membrane-surface antigens and adsorb antigen-specific IgGs. The serological results were compared to the clinical data. Results: Four of the six OMAS sera tested bound rat cerebellar sections. Two of these sera with similar immunoreactivities against rat cerebellar sections were used in immunoprecipitation experiments using cerebellum from postnatal rat pups (P18). Mass spectrometry identified 12 cell-surface proteins, of which glutamate receptor delta 2 (GluD2), a predominately cerebellar-expressed protein, was found at a threefold higher concentration than the other 11 proteins.  Antibodies to GluD2 were identified in 14/16 (87%) OMAS samples, compared with 5/139 (5%) pediatric and 1/38 (2.6%) adult serum controls (p<0.0001), and in  2/4 sera from patients with neuroblastoma without neurological features. Adsorption of positive OMAS sera against GluD2-transfected cells substantially reduced but did not eliminate, reactivity towards cerebellar sections.  Conclusion: Autoantibodies to GluD2 are frequent in patients with OMAS, bind to surface determinants and are potentially pathogenic.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS by pooling 200μL of the Laemmli sample buffer (LSB) eluted immunoprecipitation (IP) fractions (total volume = 600μL) and chloroform methanol precipitating fractions. Briefly, each pooled sample was split into 3 x 200 μL fractions;  methanol (450 μL) and chloroform (150 μL) added, vortexed before addition of water (400 μL),   and centrifuged (20,000 x g for 1 minute). The top aqueous layer was removed and discarded without disturbing the precipitated proteins at the interface. Methanol (450μL) was added and after vortexing, centrifuged (20,000 x g, 2 minutes). The supernatant was discarded and the pellet re-suspended in iodoacetamide (IAA; 50 μL 100mM) and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. The IAA was then removed by repeating the chloroform/methanol precipitation. The pellets were resuspended in 6M urea in Tris HCl pH7.4 and sonicated for 10 minutes. The urea was then diluted out by addition of 250μL water and 5μL of 0.2 μg/μL sequencing grade modified trypsin and incubated overnight (20 hours) at 37oC with agitation.  The peptides were enriched and desalted by C18 SepPak light [Waters, WAT023501], washed with  10mL 2% acetonitrile in water (containing 0.1% formic acid) and eluted with 2 x 600μL 65% acetonitrile: water (65:35). The eluted peptides digest was concentrated and the acetonitrile was removed by evaporation using a rotary evaporator (30oC for 4 to 6 hours until dry). The dried peptides were re-suspended into 20μL 2% acetonitrile:98% water containing 0.1% formic acid. The concentration of the peptides was determined by peptide quantitation assay (Thermo Scientific, 23275). Peptides (50ng) were subjected to C18 column chromatography and analysed by data-dependant MS/MS on a ThermoFisher Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples were desalted online (PepMAP C18, 300µm x5mm, 5 µm particle, Thermo) for 1 minute at a flow rate of 20 µl/min and separated on a nEASY column (PepMAP C18, 75 µm x 500mm, 2 µm particle, Thermo) over 60 minutes using a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid at 250nl/min. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200m/z and the 15 most abundant precursors were selected for HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peak list files were generated with MSConvert (Proteowizard V3.0.5211) using the 200 most abundant peaks/spectrum. Mascot (V2.3, Matrix Science), PEAKS (V7, Bioinformatics Solutions), all at a false discovery rate of 1%, mass deviation of 10ppm for MS1 and 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. All database searches (Swissprot; rat, human and mouse) were performed using MS+/- 10ppm, MSMS +/-0.5Da, 2 missed cleavages (as we are looking for a membrane protein), oxidation (M) deamidation (N) as variable modifications, iodacetamide (C) as a fixed modification. According to the pre-defined criteria for identification of a potential novel auto-antigenic target, the data was extracted from the CBRG Pipeline SINQ analysis1 software and the proteins identified with more than 2 unique peptides identified in the Ratus Ratus database were manually validated and the proteins sorted using GeneOntology2 sequentially to include only proteins which were manually validated and the proteins sorted using GeneOntology sequentially to include proteins which show neuronal specificity and cell membrane location. The remaining proteins are summarised in table 1. Final selection of proteins for further study concentrated on proteins that were found in a cerebellar location.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmune; cerebellum; encephalitis; glud2; immunotherapy; opsoclonus myoclonus ataxia syndrome (omas); neuroblastoma; paraneoplastic;

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Georgina Berridge

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB, University of Oxford


