### Accession
PXD010923

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of rice hypoxic germination

### Description
Post-transcriptional mechanisms, including alternative splicing (AS) and alternative translation initiation (ATI), have been used to explain the protein diversity involved in plant developmental processes and stress responses. Rice germination under hypoxia conditions is a classical model system for the study of low oxygen stress. It is known that there is transcriptional regulation during rice hypoxic germination, but the potential roles of AS and ATI in this process are not well understood. In this study, a proteogenomic approach was used to integrate the data from RNA sequencing, qualitative and quantitative proteomics to discover new players or pathways in the response to hypoxia stress. The improved analytical pipeline of proteogenomics led to the identification of 10,253 intron-containing genes, 1,729 of which were not present in the current annotation. Approximately 1,741 differentially expressed AS (DAS) events from 811 genes were identified in hypoxia-treated seeds in comparison to controls. Over 95% of these were not present in the list of differentially expressed genes (DEG). In particular, regulatory pathways such as spliceosome, ribosome, ER protein processing and export, proteasome, phagosome, oxidative phosphorylation and mRNA surveillance showed substantial AS changes under hypoxia, suggesting that AS responses are largely independent of traditional transcriptional regulation. Massive AS changes were identified, including the preference usage of certain non-conventional splice sites and enrichment of splicing factors in the DAS datasets. In addition, using self-constructed protein libraries by 6-frame translation, thousands of novel proteins/peptides contributed by ATI were identified. In summary, these results provide deeper insights towards understanding the underlying mechanisms of AS and ATI during rice hypoxic germination.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extraction, digestion and qualitative identification Total protein of rice seeds was extracted and digested as described previously (Chen et al., 2014) with minor modifications. In general, approximately 5 g of rice seed tissues of each sample were ground in liquid nitrogen for subsequent proteomic analysis. The precipitated protein pellets were digested by trypsin and desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters). The resulting peptides were then separated and characterized in a TripleTOF 5600+ (AB SCIEX) splitless Ultra 1D Plus (Eksigent) system (Andrews et al., 2011). Peptide dimethyl labelling and quantitative proteomics The quantitative proteomics was conducted as described previously with minor modifications (Zhou et al., 2015). Digested peptides were dissolved with 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH≈6, best below 6) (i.e., 500 μg peptides per 0.25 mL sodium acetate). Either 4% formaldehyde or formaldehyde-d2 (40 μL per 500 μg peptides) were added and mixed. Then, 40 μL / 500 μg peptides of 0.6 M NaBH3(CN) were added. The solution mixture was shaken for 0.5 h. Furthermore, 160 μL / 500 μg peptides of 1% NH4OH, was added and mixed for 5 min. Then, 5% formic acid (160 μL per 500 μg peptides) was added and mixed. The solution was placed in 4°C for at least 1 h. The light and heavy dimethyl labelling peptides were combined in a 1:1 ratio and desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters). Mixed peptides were subsequently fractionated by using a C18-ST column (2.0 mm × 150 mm, 5 μm particle size) (TechMate) on the Agilent 1260 system (Agilent Technologies). An elution gradient of 60 min was used for peptide separation with 20 mM ammonium formate in H2O (adjusted to pH 10 by 25% NH3.H2O) as solvent A and 20 mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN (adjust pH to 10 by 25% NH3.H2O) as solvent B. The gradient elution profile was composed of 5%-25% B for 20 min, 25-45% B for 15 min, 45-90% B for 1 min, then maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by 10-95% A for 1 min, and ending with 95% A for 14 min. The flow rate was 0.2 mL/min. UV absorbance was monitored at 216 nm. A total of 60 0.2 mL fractions were collected, then concatenated and mixed to obtain 20 fractions. Fractions were dried via speed-vacuum and desalted by the StageTip C18 method. RPLC-ESI-MS/MS was used to detect the sample. LC-MS/MS detection was carried out on a hybrid quadrupole-TOF LC/MS/MS mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, AB Sciex) equipped with a nanospray source. Peptides were first loaded onto a C18 trap column (5 µm, 5 x 0.3 mm, Agilent Technologies) and then eluted into a C18 analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Eksigent). Mobile phase A (3% DMSO, 97% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (3% DMSO, 97% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used to establish a 100 min gradient, which consisted of 0 min of 5% B, 65 min of 5-23% B, 20 min of 23-52% B, 1 min of 52–80% B, and the gradient was maintained in 80% B for 4 min, followed by 0.1 min of 80–85% B, and a final step in 5% B for 10 min. A constant flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. MS scans were conducted from 350 to 1500 amu, with a 250 ms time span. For MS/MS analysis, each scan cycle consisted of one full-scan mass spectrum (with m/z ranging from 350 to 1500 and charge states from 2 to 5) followed by 40 MS/MS events. The threshold count was set to 120 to activate MS/MS accumulation, and former target ion exclusion was set for 18 s.

### Data Protocol
Library construction and mass spectrometry database searching An AS junction library (576,570 entries) was constructed as described previously (Sheynkman et al., 2013; Castellana et al., 2014; Walley and Briggs, 2015) with minor modifications. In brief, six-frame translations, including 3 frames on the forward strand and 3 frames on the reverse complement strand, were used construct the AS junction library. Additionally, a frame library was constructed using all transcripts annotated in the reference annotation file by 6 frames. The redundant sequences were then removed from translated sequences at the first step. Peptide sequences longer than 6 amino acids were attached to the UniProt rice japonica database for subsequent database search. Raw spectrum data generated from both qualitative and quantitative proteomics were searched with the ProteinPilot software (v5.0, AB SCIEX) using preset parameters. All data were filtered at 1% FDR with at least 1 peptide at 95% confidence level calculated automatically by the ProteinPilot software (Zhu et al., 2017). For quantitative proteomics, data were searched against UniProt and self-constructed databases using the following parameters: sample type, dimethyl (0, +4) quantitation; cys alkylation, iodoacetamide, digestion, trypsin. The search effort was set to rapid ID. For DEP analysis, proteins with a fold change of >1.2 or <0.8 (P value <0.05) are considered as DEP in this study.

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional mechanisms (PTMs), including alternative splicing (AS) and alternative translation initiation (ATI), may explain the diversity of proteins involved in plant development and stress responses. Transcriptional regulation is important during the hypoxic germination of rice seeds, but the potential roles of PTMs in this process have not been characterized. We used a combination of proteomics and RNA sequencing to discover how AS and ATI contribute to plant responses to hypoxia. In total, 10 253 intron-containing genes were identified. Of these, ~1741 differentially expressed AS (DAS) events from 811 genes were identified in hypoxia-treated seeds compared with controls. Over 95% of these were not present in the list of differentially expressed genes. In particular, regulatory pathways such as the spliceosome, ribosome, endoplasmic reticulum protein processing and export, proteasome, phagosome, oxidative phosphorylation, and mRNA surveillance showed substantial AS changes under hypoxia, suggesting that AS responses are largely independent of transcriptional regulation. Considerable AS changes were identified, including the preferential usage of some non-conventional splice sites and enrichment of splicing factors in the DAS data sets. Taken together, these results not only demonstrate that AS and ATI function during hypoxic germination but they have also allowed the identification of numerous novel proteins/peptides produced via ATI.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Alternative splicing, Proteogenomics, Translation initiation, Hypoxia, Splicing factor, Seed germination

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong Baptist University

### Submitter
Moxian Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Zhang
Hong Kong Baptist University


