### Accession
PXD039829

### Title
Urinary Glycosylated IGF2 peptides in association with CKD

### Description
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is prevalent in 10% of world’s adult population, with Estimated Glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and albuminuria employed in diagnosis. Role of protein glycosylation in causal mechanisms of CKD progression is largely unknown. Aim of this study was to identify urinary O-linked glycopeptides in association to CKD for better characterization of CKD molecular manifestations. Urine samples from 2 healthy and 8 CKD subjects were analyzed by CE-MS/MS and glycopeptide analysis using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Distribution of identi-fied glycopeptides and correlation with Age, eGFR and Albuminuria were evaluated in 3810 da-tasets. In total, 17 O-linked glycopeptides from 7 different proteins were identified, derived primarily from Insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF2). Glycosylation occurred at the surface ex-posed IGF2 Threonine 96 position. Three glycopeptides (DVStPPTVLPDNFPRYPVGKF, DVStPPTVLPDNFPRYPVG and DVStPPTVLPDNFPRYP) exhibited positive correlation with Age. Glycopeptide (tPPTVLPDNFPRYP) showed strong negative association with eGFR. These results suggest that with aging and deteriorating kidney function, alterations in IGF2 proteoforms take place; which may reflect changes in mature IGF2 protein. Our results corroborate this hypothesis as IGF2 increased plasma levels were observed in CKD patients. Protease predictions, consider-ing also available transcriptomics data, suggest activation of cathepsin S with CKD, meriting further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Study population – urine samples For identification of naturally occurring intact urinary glycopeptides, urine samples from two healthy volunteers and eight CKD patients were analysed under the ethics re-view board of the Hannover Medical School, Ref. No 3115-2016. Sample preparation Standard operating procedures (SOPs) were followed for urine sample collection storage and further processing. Briefly, 700 µL of an aqueous solution consisting of 2 M urea, 10 mM NH4OH and 0.02% sodium do-decyl sulfate (SDS) was used to dilute 700 µL of thawed urine sample. To discard high molecular weight proteins, the sample was subjected to ultrafiltration using a Centristat (20 kDa molecular mass cut-off) centrifugal device (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) and centrifugation speed was set to 3000 rcf, to obtain approximately 1.1 ml filtrate. To elimi-nate urea, salts and electrolytes from the filtrate, a desalting process was carried out uti-lising a PD-10 column gel (GE Healthcare Bio Sciences, Uppasala, Sweden) which was pre-equilibrated with 0.01% NH4OH in HPLC-grade water. The processed urine samples were then lyophilized and stored at 4°C. Prior to the CE-MS/MS analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 10 µL of HPLC-grade water.     CE-MS/MS analysis The CE-MS/MS instrumental set up comprised of a P/ACE MDQ capillary electro-phoresis system (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap Velos Fourier Transform (FT) MS (Thermo Finnigan, Bremen, Germany). The protocol for CE-MS/MS analysis and peptide sequencing based on data-dependent high (40%) energy collision dissociation (HCD) for the top 20 ions, has been previously described [PMID: 24254231; DOI: 10.1002/elps.201300327]. Briefly, Proxeon nano spray fitted with Agilent ESI sprayer (operated in positive ion mode) was utilized to ionise 230 µL-aliquot (1:50) of processed urine sample. The ionization occurred at a voltage of 3.4 kV with 275°C as the capillary temperature. Operating conditions were set to MS/MS mode that scanned from 350 to 1500 amu and triggered sequencing at a set threshold of 5000 counts. Ion resolution was 60000 for MS1 and 7500 for MS2, with a de-tection limit of 0.05–0.2 fmol. Finally, full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the range of 300-2000 m/z, depicting the sequentially isolated fragmentation ions.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide analysis Identification of glycopeptides was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The SEQUEST search engine was applied for analysis of CE-MS/MS raw files against the entire reviewed non-redundant human database downloaded as FASTA from UniProt. The search parameters were set to no enzyme, HCD as the activation type, precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.02 Da. In ad-dition, only 2 maximum missed cleavage sites were allowed along with the peptide length set to 6-144 amino acids. There were no fixed modifications selected, while the variable modifications included oxidation of proline (+15.995 Da), Hex(1)HexNAc(1)NeuAc(1) of serine, threonine (+656.228 Da) and Hex(1)HexNAc(1)NeuAc(2) of serine, threonine (+947.323 Da). The latter two accounts for the most commonly occurring structures of O-linked glycans. Three dynamic modifications per peptide and a false discovery rate of 1% for peptide identifications were allowed. To eliminate false-positive associations, selection process based upon correlation between the experimental and theoretically predicted CE-migration time at the working pH of 2.2 of the identified peptides was ap-plied. Each of the MS/MS fragment spectra of the resulting glycopeptide peaks were further analysed manually, including a comparison of the theo-retical and observed isotopic distributions. Statistical analysis Statistical analysis and results presented in this manuscript are based on R pro-gramming (R version 3.6.0 with IDE: R Studio Version 1.2.5, Boston, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is prevalent in 10% of world's adult population. The role of protein glycosylation in causal mechanisms of CKD progression is largely unknown. The aim of this study was to identify urinary O-linked glycopeptides in association to CKD for better characterization of CKD molecular manifestations. Urine samples from eight CKD and two healthy subjects were analyzed by CE-MS/MS and glycopeptides were identified by a specific software followed by manual inspection of the spectra. Distribution of the identified glycopeptides and their correlation with Age, eGFR and Albuminuria were evaluated in 3810 existing datasets. In total, 17 O-linked glycopeptides from 7 different proteins were identified, derived primarily from Insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF2). Glycosylation occurred at the surface exposed IGF2 Threonine 96 position. Three glycopeptides (DVStPPTVLPDNFPRYPVGKF, DVStPPTVLPDNFPRYPVG and DVStPPTVLPDNFPRYP) exhibited positive correlation with Age. The IGF2 glycopeptide (tPPTVLPDNFPRYP) showed a strong negative association with eGFR. These results suggest that with aging and deteriorating kidney function, alterations in IGF2 proteoforms take place, which may reflect changes in mature IGF2 protein. Further experiments corroborated this hypothesis as IGF2 increased plasma levels were observed in CKD patients. Protease predictions, considering also available transcriptomics data, suggest activation of cathepsin S with CKD, meriting further investigation.

### Keywords
Ckd; egfr; post translational modifications; ptms; glycosylation; urine; peptidomics; glyco-peptide; igf2

### Affiliations
Staff Research Scientist - Professor Level Center of Systems Biology Proteomics Laboratory  Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens

### Submitter
Sonnal Lohia

### Lab Head
Dr Antonia Vlahou
Staff Research Scientist - Professor Level Center of Systems Biology Proteomics Laboratory  Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens


