### Accession
PXD032215

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of whole protein in three melanoma samples of 92.1, 92.1-A and 92.1-B

### Description
A total of 6081 proteins were identified in this study, of which 5267 proteins contained quantitative information. If taking 1.2 times as the change threshold and t-test p-value < 0.05 as the standard, the expression of 335 proteins in 92.1-a / 92.1 comparison group was up-regulated and 302 proteins were down regulated; In the 92.1-b / 92.1 comparison group, 129 proteins were up-regulated and 160 proteins were down regulated. Based on the above data, we conducted a systematic bioinformatics analysis of proteins containing quantitative information, including protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment and cluster analysis based on functional enrichment. It provides a comprehensive reference for the downstream proteome research.

### Sample Protocol
1 Protein Extraction Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2 Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 3 TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 4 HPLC Fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5 LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 32; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold intensity greater than 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1550. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
1 Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Search parameter setting: search the human library Swissprot human (20130 sequences), mouse library Swissprot mouse (16839 sequences) and their combined library respectively. Each search adds an anti library to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and adds a common contaminated library to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. 2 Bioinformatics Methods Annotation Methods GO Annotation The Gene Ontology is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species.  Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Domain Annotation A protein domain is a conserved part of a given protein sequence and structure that can evolve, function and exist independently of the rest of the protein chain. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services.  KEGG Pathway Annotation KEGG connects known information on molecular interaction networks. KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Subcellular Localization The cells of eukaryotic organisms are elaborately subdivided into functionally distinct membrane bound compartments. There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. 3 Functional Enrichment Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins.  Protein domains with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. 4 Enrichment-based Clustering For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orthotopic and ectopic transplantation models of uveal melanoma, 92.1 cells, P62 protein, 92.1-a and 92.1-b cells, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
suzhou kowloon hospital,Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine
Department of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 118 Wanshen Street, Suzhou, China.

### Submitter
Xifeng Fei

### Lab Head
Dr Zhimin Wang
Department of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 118 Wanshen Street, Suzhou, China.


