### Accession
PXD017866

### Title
Aurora kinase B-dependent phosphorylation regulates caspase-2 activity and function

### Description
Mitotic catastrophe (MC) is an important mechanism to remove cells that become polyploid or aneuploid, as an oncosuppressive mechanism. Previous studies have demonstrated that the activation and catalytic function of caspase-2 is a key step in MC, to trigger apoptosis and/or cell cycle arrest of such defective cells. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate caspase-2 activation and its function are unclear. Here we show that Aurora kinase B (AURKB), a key mitotic kinase, phosphorylates caspase-2 at a highly conserved residue S384 and inhibits its catalytic activity and function. We identified six new phosphorylation sites in caspase-2 and further demonstrated that phosphorylation at S384 blocks caspase-2 catalytic activity and apoptosis function in response to mitotic insults, without affecting caspase-2 dimerisation. Moreover, molecular modelling suggests that phosphorylation at S384 may affect substrate binding by caspase-2. We propose that caspase-2 S384 phosphorylation by AURKB is a key mechanism that controls caspase-2 activation during mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were resuspended in 6M Urea, 100 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.0 and subjected to protein digestion using FASP (filter aided sample preparation)38. Peptides were collected and acidified with formic acid (FA) to a 1% final concentration. Solvent was removed in a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco) and peptides were resuspended in MilliQ water containing 1% acetonitrile (ACN) and 1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were directly loaded onto a 250 mm column with 75µm inner diameter (nanoAcquity UPLC 1.7µm BEH130 C18) on a 120 minute linear gradient from 1% to 35% buffer B (A: 99.9% Milli-Q water, 0.1% FA; B: 99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a 400nl/min constant flow rate. The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant peaks. The instrument was controlled using Exactive series version 2.6 and Xcalibur 3.0. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 10000 ions and an isolation width of 3 m/z and fragmented using HCD with normalized collision energy of 27 and stepped collision energy of 15%. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50ms for full MS scan and 200ms for MS/MS. Underfill ratio was set to 2% and dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3), The database search was performed using mouse protein sequences obtained from Uniprot including isoforms with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of S/T/Y and GlyGly on lysine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Mitotic catastrophe (MC) is an important oncosuppressive mechanism that serves to eliminate cells that become polyploid or aneuploid due to aberrant mitosis. Previous studies have demonstrated that the activation and catalytic function of caspase-2 are key steps in MC to trigger apoptosis and/or cell cycle arrest of mitotically defective cells. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate caspase-2 activation and its function are unclear. Here, we identify six new phosphorylation sites in caspase-2 and show that a key mitotic kinase, Aurora B&#xa0;kinase (AURKB), phosphorylates caspase-2 at the highly conserved residue S384. We demonstrate that phosphorylation at S384 blocks caspase-2 catalytic activity and apoptosis function in response to mitotic insults, without affecting caspase-2 dimerisation. Moreover, molecular modelling suggests that phosphorylation at S384 may affect substrate binding by caspase-2. We propose that caspase-2 S384 phosphorylation by AURKB is a key mechanism that controls caspase-2 activation during mitosis.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Caspase 2, Aurorka kinase

### Affiliations
WEHI
The Centre for Cancer Biology

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Sharad Kumar
The Centre for Cancer Biology


