### Accession
PXD026669

### Title
Mechanisms Regulating the Function of Spliceosome-Associated Factor Nrl1 of the Fission Yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Description
Pre-mRNA splicing is a key process in the regulation of gene expression as reflected by its disruption in various diseases. Previously, we have demonstrated that the spliceosome-associated factor Nrl1 of the fission yeast S. pombe, except of its role in suppression of accumulation of genome-threatening R-loops, also affects splicing and expression of several genes and non-coding RNAs. To uncover the molecular mechanisms regulating the function of Nrl1, we performed here the systematic analysis of its protein-protein interactions at the domain level. We found that N-terminal region of Nrl1 secures the interaction of Nrl1 with ATP-dependent RNA helicase Mtl1 but is incapable of docking of Nrl1 into the spliceosome. Contrary, the C-terminal region of Nrl1 was found to be critical for the interactions of Nrl1 with other splicing factors and the stable binding of Nrl1 into the spliceosome. Importantly, we showed that splicing function of Nrl1 depends on its phosphorylation. Additionally, we identified two amino acid residues of Nrl1, namely S122 and S131, which are directly phosphorylated by Cka1 protein kinase. Together, our results indicate the novel features involved in the regulation of spliceosome-associated factor Nrl1, defined by its domain-dependent interactions and by the CKII-dependent phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The IP samples were reduced in the presence of 5 mM DTT (30 min, 60°C), alkylated by addition of 15 mM iodoacetamide (20 min, RT/in dark) and the alkylation reaction was quenched by additional 5 mM DTT. 0,5 µg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega), 1mM calcium chloride and 1 mM phosphatase inhibitor mix (β-glycerophosphate, sodium orthovanadate, potassium fluoride, disodium diphosphate) was added to the protein mixture, and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction mixture was acidified by addition of 0.5% TFA, the peptides were purified by microtip C18 SPE and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  For LC-MS analysis, the set of nanotrap column (PepMap100 C18, 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm, 5 µm particle, size, Dionex, CA, USA) and nanoseparation column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 μm x 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) attached to UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, CA, USA) were used. The peptides were separated in 1 h gradient from 3% to 43% B with two mobile phases used: 0.1% FA (v/v) (A) and 80% ACN (v/v) with 0.1% FA (B). Spectral datasets were collected by Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, MA, USA) operating in the data-dependent mode using Top15 strategy for the selection of precursor ions for the HCD or CID fragmentation. Each of the samples was analyzed in two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Obtained datasets were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) with built-in Andromeda search engine using carbamidomethylation (C) as permanent modification and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. The search was performed against the S. pombe protein database (UniProt, downloaded 9.7.2019).

### Publication Abstract
Pre-mRNA splicing is a key process in the regulation of gene expression. In the fission yeast <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i>, Nrl1 regulates splicing and expression of several genes and non-coding RNAs, and also suppresses the accumulation of R-loops. Here, we report analysis of interactions between Nrl1 and selected RNA-processing proteins and regulation of Nrl1 function by phosphorylation. Bacterial two-hybrid system (BACTH) assays revealed that the N-terminal region of Nrl1 is important for the interaction with ATP-dependent RNA helicase Mtl1 while the C-terminal region of Nrl1 is important for interactions with spliceosome components Ctr1, Ntr2, and Syf3. Consistent with this result, tandem affinity purification showed that Mtl1, but not Ctr1, Ntr2, or Syf3, co-purifies with the N-terminal region of Nrl1. Interestingly, mass-spectrometry analysis revealed that in addition to previously identified phosphorylation sites, Nrl1 is also phosphorylated on serines 86 and 112, and that Nrl1-TAP co-purifies with Cka1, the catalytic subunit of casein kinase 2. In vitro assay showed that Cka1 can phosphorylate bacterially expressed Nrl1 fragments. An analysis of non-phosphorylatable <i>nrl1</i> mutants revealed defects in gene expression and splicing consistent with the notion that phosphorylation is an important regulator of Nrl1 function. Taken together, our results provide insights into two mechanisms that are involved in the regulation of the spliceosome-associated factor Nrl1, namely domain-specific interactions between Nrl1 and RNA-processing proteins and post-translational modification of Nrl1 by phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Nrl1; pre-mrna splicing; protein-protein interactions; phosphorylation; cka1; fission yeast

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Peter Barath

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barath
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences


