### Accession
PXD024115

### Title
Comparison of preservation and storage methods for metaproteomics of intestinal microbiome samples

### Description
The aim of this study was to develop a suitable method to preserve fecal samples for metaproteomics analyses when flash-freezing is not an option. Fecal samples were collected from conventional adult C57BL/6 mice and combined into a fecal master mix. The fecal master mix was then split into 48 subsamples that were subjected to different preservation treatments. The following six preservation methods were tested: flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen followed by storage at -80°C, immersion in RNAlater® and storage at room temperature, immersion in RNAlater® and immediate storage at -80°C, immersion in 95% ethanol and storage at room temperature, immersion in a RNAlater-like buffer “NAP buffer” and storage at room temperature, and immersion in an autoclaved RNAlater-like buffer “Autoclaved NAP buffer” and storage at room temperature. Proteins were extracted from the samples after being stored for 1 and 4 weeks. There were 4 replicates per treatment and time-point. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and the data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer against a large database of mouse microbiota protein sequences.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction and peptide preparation We removed the storage solutions from the samples by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min. We resuspended the samples in 400 μl of SDT lysis buffer [4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT]. Cells were lysed by bead-beating in lysing matrix E tubes (MP Biomedicals) with a Bead Ruptor Elite (Omni International) for 5 cycles of 45 sec at 6.45 m/s with 1 min dwell time between cycles; followed by heating at 95°C for 10 min. The lysates were centrifuged for 5 min at 21,000 x g to remove cell debris. We prepared peptides according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by (Wiśniewski et al. 2009, Nature Methods, volume 6). All centrifugations mentioned below were performed at 14,000 x g. Samples were loaded onto 10 kDa MWCO 500 μl centrifugal filters (VWR International) by combining 60 μl of lysate with 400 μl of Urea solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuging for 30 min. This step was repeated twice, until reaching filter capacity. Filters were washed twice by applying 200 μl of urea solution followed by 40 min of centrifugation to remove any remaining SDS. 100 μl IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in Urea solution) was then added to filters for a 20 min incubation followed by centrifugation for 20 min. The filters were washed three times with 100 uL of urea solution and 20 min centrifugations, followed by a buffer exchange to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate). Buffer exchange was accomplished by adding 100 μl of ABC and centrifuging three times followed by centrifugation for 20 min. Tryptic digestion was performed by adding 0.85 μg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 μl of ABC to the filters which and incubating for 16 hours in a wet chamber at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were eluted by adding 50 μl of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifuging for 20 min. Peptide concentrations were determined with the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. LC-MS/MS Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS as described in Speare et al. (2020, mBio, volume 11) with small modifications mentioned below. The samples were blocked and randomized according to Oberg and Vitek (2009, Journal of Proteome Research, volume 8), to control for batch effect. For each sample, 600 ng of tryptic peptides were loaded with an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in loading solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column and desalted (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then separated on a 75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material, (Thermo Fisher Scientific); heated to 60 °C via the integrated column heater at a flow rate of 300 nl  min‑1 using a 140 min gradient going from 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 31% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) in 102 min, then to 50% B in 18 min, to 99% B in 1 min and ending with 99% B. Carryover was reduced by wash runs (injection of 20 µl acetonitrile with 99% eluent buffer B) between samples.  The analytical column was connected to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Eluting peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization (ESI). MS1 spectra were acquired by performing a full MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 on a 380 to 1600 m/z window. MS2 spectra were acquired using a data dependent approach by selecting for fragmentation the 15 most abundant ions from the precursor MS1 spectra. A normalized collision energy of 25 was applied in the HCD cell to generate the peptide fragments for MS2 spectra. Other settings of the data-dependent acquisition included: a maximum injection time of 100 ms, a dynamic exclusion of 25 sec and exclusion of ions of +1 charge state from fragmentation. About 60,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
1. Protein Identification Database  We constructed a protein sequence database for protein identification containing protein sequences of the four main components of the samples: the host, wheat (main component of the mice’s chow), the microbiota, and potential contaminants. Protein sequences of the mouse host, Mus musculus were downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589). Protein sequences of wheat, Triticum aestivum, were downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000019116 ). For the microbiota sequences, we used a public database constructed by Xiao et al. (2015, Nature Biotechnology, volume 33), which we downloaded from http://gigadb.org/dataset/view/id/100114/token/mZlMYJIF04LshpgP. The taxonomy (available as a separate file) was integrated into the string of the sequence descriptions using the join command in Linux. Initial analyses suggested the presence of sequences which were too similar for adequate discrimination in the downstream workflow so the protein sequences were clustered with an identity threshold of 95% using the CD-HIT tool (Li and Godzik 2006, Bioinformatics, volume 22). Lastly, we included sequences of common laboratory contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The database contains a total of 2,396,591 protein sequences and is included with this submission in fasta format.  2. Protein Identification For peptide and protein identification, we searched the MS data against the above described  database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following parameters: digestion with trypsin (Full), maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.1 Da fragment mass tolerance and maximum 3 equal dynamic modifications per peptide. We considered the following dynamic modifications: oxidation on M (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethyl on C (+57.021 Da) and acetyl on the protein N terminus (+42.011 Da). Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer and only peptides identified at a 5% FDR were retained for protein identification. Proteins were inferred from peptide identifications using the Protein-FDR Validator node in Proteome Discoverer with a target FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
A critical step in studies of the intestinal microbiome using meta-omics approaches is the preservation of samples before analysis. Preservation is essential for approaches that measure gene expression, such as metaproteomics, which is used to identify and quantify proteins in microbiomes. Intestinal microbiome samples are typically stored by flash-freezing and storage at -80&#xb0;C, but some experimental setups do not allow for immediate freezing of samples. In this study, we evaluated methods to preserve fecal microbiome samples for metaproteomics analyses when flash-freezing is not possible. We collected fecal samples from C57BL/6 mice and stored them for 1 and 4&#x2009;weeks using the following methods: flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen, immersion in RNA<i>later</i>, immersion in 95% ethanol, immersion in a RNA<i>later</i>-like buffer, and combinations of these methods. After storage, we extracted protein and prepared peptides for liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to identify and quantify peptides and proteins. All samples produced highly similar metaproteomes, except for ethanol-preserved samples that were distinct from all other samples in terms of protein identifications and protein abundance profiles. Flash-freezing and RNA<i>later</i> (or RNA<i>later</i>-like treatments) produced metaproteomes that differed only slightly, with less than 0.7% of identified proteins differing in abundance. In contrast, ethanol preservation resulted in an average of 9.5% of the identified proteins differing in abundance between ethanol and the other treatments. Our results suggest that preservation at room temperature in RNA<i>later</i> or an RNA<i>later</i>-like solution performs as well as freezing for the preservation of intestinal microbiome samples before metaproteomics analyses. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Metaproteomics is a powerful tool to study the intestinal microbiome. By identifying and quantifying a large number of microbial, dietary, and host proteins in microbiome samples, metaproteomics provides direct evidence of the activities and functions of microbial community members. A critical step for metaproteomics workflows is preserving samples before analysis because protein profiles are susceptible to fast changes in response to changes in environmental conditions (air exposure, temperature changes, etc.). This study evaluated the effects of different preservation treatments on the metaproteomes of intestinal microbiome samples. In contrast to prior work on preservation of fecal samples for metaproteomics analyses, we ensured that all steps of sample preservation were identical so that all differences could be attributed to the preservation method.

### Keywords
1d-lc; mass spectrometry; ms/ms; metaproteomics; metaproteome; microbiota; microbiome; gut; intestinal; fecal; mouse; storage; preservation.

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University

### Submitter
Angie Mordant

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
North Carolina State University


