### Accession
PXD005761

### Title
Comprehensive identification of proteins binding to RNA G-quadruplex motifs in the 5’ UTR of tumor-associated mRNAs

### Description
G-quadruplex structures in the 5’ UTR of mRNAs are widely considered to suppress translation without affecting transcription. The current study describes the comprehensive analysis of proteins binding to four different G-quadruplex motifs located in mRNAs of the cancer-related genes Bcl-2, NRAS, MMP16, and ARPC2. Following metabolic labeling (Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture, SILAC) of proteins in the human cell line HEK293, G-quadruplex binding proteins were enriched by pull-down assays and identified by LC-orbitrap mass spectrometry. We found different patterns of interactions for the G-quadruplex motifs under investigation. While the G-quadruplexes in the mRNAs of NRAS and MMP16 specifically interacted with a small number of proteins, the Bcl-2 and ARPC2 G-quadruplexes exhibited a broad range of proteinaceous interaction partners with 99 and 82 candidate proteins identified in at least two replicates, respectively. Among the interaction partners were many proteins known to bind to RNA, including multiple heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs). The identified ribosomal proteins are likely to reflect stalling of the ribosome by RNA G-quadruplex structures. In addition, several proteins were identified that have not previously been described to interact with RNA. Gene ontology analysis of the set of candidate proteins revealed that many interaction partners are known to be tumor related. The majority of the identified RNA G-quadruplex interacting proteins are thought to be involved in post-transcriptional processes, particularly in splicing. These findings indicate that protein-G-quadruplex interactions may be relevant to the regulation of mRNA maturation and may play an important role in tumor biology.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins that specifically bind to one of the RNA oligonucleotides (Bcl-2 GQwt, NRAS GQwt, MMP16 GQwt, ARPC2 GQwt and their respective mutants), three independent biological replicate experiments, including one label swapped experiment, were compared using SILAC, pull-down assays and LC-orbitrap mass spectrometry. All eight eluted protein extracts labeled with light amino acids (L samples) were pooled and used as the standard. Equal amounts of the each of the protein extracts labeled with heavy amino acids (H sample) and the standard were mixed to identify proteins binding to the respective RNA G-quadruplex motifs. The protein samples were subsequently run on a polyacrylamide gel for a short time to concentrate the proteins and stained with Coomassie Blue. Coomassie stained gel bands were excised and the proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (39). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as previously described (40). Peptides were eluted in 20 μl of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 4 µl by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μl by 0.1% TFA. MS-analyses were performed on a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column with a self-assembled particle frit (41) and C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) was packed into a spray emitter (75-μm ID, 8-μm opening, 300-mm length; New Objective) using an air-pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used was 220 min. The peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.5 μl min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μl min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 180 min, then to 95% in 16 min. FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution and the top 10 most abundant peaks with charge ≥ 2 and isolation window of 2.0 Thomson were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation  with normalized collision energy of 25. The maximum ion injection time for the MS and MS2 scans was set to 20 and 60 ms respectively and the AGC target was set to 1 E6 for the MS scan and to 5 E4 for the MS2 scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform  version 1.5.2.8 was used to process the raw files and a search was conducted against Human complete/reference proteome set of UniProt database (released on 12/05/2014), using the Andromeda search engine. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge was set to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2 and for heavy labels Arginine 6 and Lysine 8 were selected. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
G-quadruplex structures in the 5' UTR of mRNAs are widely considered to suppress translation without affecting transcription. The current study describes the comprehensive analysis of proteins binding to four different G-quadruplex motifs located in mRNAs of the cancer-related genes Bcl-2, NRAS, MMP16, and ARPC2. Following metabolic labeling (Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture, SILAC) of proteins in the human cell line HEK293, G-quadruplex binding proteins were enriched by pull-down assays and identified by LC-orbitrap mass spectrometry. We found different patterns of interactions for the G-quadruplex motifs under investigation. While the G-quadruplexes in the mRNAs of NRAS and MMP16 specifically interacted with a small number of proteins, the Bcl-2 and ARPC2 G-quadruplexes exhibited a broad range of proteinaceous interaction partners with 99 and 82 candidate proteins identified in at least two replicates, respectively. The use of a control composed of samples from all G-quadruplex-forming sequences and their mutated controls ensured that the identified proteins are specific for RNA G-quadruplex structures and are not general RNA-binding proteins. Independent validation experiments based on pull-down assays and Western blotting confirmed the MS data. Among the interaction partners were many proteins known to bind to RNA, including multiple heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs). Several of the candidate proteins are likely to reflect stalling of the ribosome by RNA G-quadruplex structures. Interestingly, additional proteins were identified that have not previously been described to interact with RNA. Gene ontology analysis of the candidate proteins revealed that many interaction partners are known to be tumor related. The majority of the identified RNA G-quadruplex interacting proteins are thought to be involved in post-transcriptional processes, particularly in splicing. These findings indicate that protein-G-quadruplex interactions are not only important for the fine-tuning of translation but are also relevant to the regulation of mRNA maturation and may play an important role in tumor biology. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005761.

### Keywords
Bcl-2, Nras, Rna, G-quadruplexes, Mmp16, Rbps, Arpc2, Post-transcriptional regulation, Silac, Shotgun proteomics, Translational regulation, Cancer

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Jens Kurreck

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Kurreck
Technische Universität Berlin


