### Accession
PXD014709

### Title
Pharmacological induction of selective endoplasmic reticulum retention as a novel strategy for cancer therapy

### Description
We analysed the difference in the  surface proteome of human cells that were either subjected to ER stress (induced by thapsigargin (Tg)) only or were additionally treated with a pharmacological inhibitor against the eIF2α kinase PERK, which is localized in the endoplasmic reticulum. Compared to single ER stress, several important plasma-membrane associated kinases, showed a significant downregulation under PERK inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were treated with either thapsigargin (Tg) or Tg in combination with the PERK inhibitor GSK414. Subsequently, cell surface protein isolation was carried out using a biotin labeling approach. Isolated proteins (three biological replicates each) were separated by SDS-PAGE. Three gel slices were cut out per gel lane and the proteins were then proteolytically digested using trypsin. The extracted peptides were desalted using homemade STAGE-tips and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive plus system using 140 min gradients.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analysed using MaxQuant (1.6.3.3) and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database version 01/2019 (reviewed entries and canonical sequences only) Quantification was performed using the label-free quantification option in MaxQuant (LFQ). The search settings for MaxQuant were: Trypsin as the protease, two missed cleavages carbamidomethylation (Cys) as the fixed modification; oxidation (Met) Lysine modification (plus cleaved Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin): + 87.998 (H(4) O C(3) S) and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. FDR 0.01% on protein, peptide and PTM level. The resulting data was filtered (min 2 peptides per protein, min 1 unique peptide), no “reverse” hits, no ”only identified by site” hits. Proteins were required to be quantified in all three experiments of at least one condition to be included in the final list.

### Publication Abstract
The integrated stress response (ISR) converges on eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation to regulate protein synthesis. ISR is activated by several stress conditions, including endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, executed by&#xa0;protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK). We report that ER stress combined with ISR inhibition causes an impaired maturation of several tyrosine kinase receptors (RTKs), consistent with a partial block of their trafficking from the ER to the Golgi. Other proteins mature or are secreted normally, indicating selective retention in the ER (sERr). sERr is relieved upon protein synthesis attenuation and is accompanied by the generation of large mixed disulfide bonded complexes, including ERp44. sERr was pharmacologically recapitulated by combining the HIV-protease inhibitor nelfinavir with ISRIB, an experimental drug that inhibits ISR. Nelfinavir/ISRIB combination is highly effective to inhibit the growth of RTK-addicted cell lines and hepatocellular (HCC) cells in vitro and in vivo. Thus, pharmacological sERr can be utilized as a modality for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Plasma membrane

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
The School of Pharmacy The Hebrew University of Jerusalem POB 12065 Jerusalem 9112002, Israel

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Boaz Tirosh
The School of Pharmacy The Hebrew University of Jerusalem POB 12065 Jerusalem 9112002, Israel


