### Accession
PXD032734

### Title
Serum proteomic analysis by tandem mass tags-based quantitative proteomics in pediatric obstructive sleep apnea

### Description
Pediatric obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a frequent respiratory disorder with an estimated prevalence of 3–6% in the general population. However, the underlying pathophysiology of OSA remains unclear. Recently, proteomic analysis using high-resolution and high-throughput mass spectrometry has been widely used in the field of medical sciences. In the present study, tandem mass tags (TMT)-based proteomic analysis was performed in the serum of patients with OSA.

### Sample Protocol
Abundant serum proteins were depleted using High Select Top 14 spin columns (Thermo #A36370) following the manufacturer provided protocol. Briefly, 10 μl of serum was applied to each column and incubated for 10 min with end-over-end rotation. Depleted samples were collected by centrifugation at 2000 g for 2 min. Ice-cold 100% trichloroacetic acid was added to 20% final concentration. Proteins were allowed to precipitate on ice for 60 min and then pelleted for 10 min at 20000 g at 4°C. Pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and allowed to dry at room temperature. Dry protein pellets were re-suspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ambic). The proteins were quantified with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). This was followed by SDS-page gel electrophoresis and Coomassie bright blue staining to compare and analyze the protein expression consistency among samples. Proteins were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to 100 mM and incubating at boiled water bath for 30 min. Samples were then mixed with 200 µL UA buffer (8 M Urea with 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) followed by centrifugation at 12000 g for 15 min.  After discarding the supernatant, the samples were incubated with 100 µL IAA (50 mM IAA in UA) with agitation for 1 min, followed by incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. After that, the samples were centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min. After discarding the supernatant, the samples were mixed with 100 µL UA buffer followed by centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 min. After that, the samples were mixed with 100 µL TEAB buffer followed by 14000 g centrifugation for 10 min. After that, the samples were mixed with 40 µl Trypsin buffer with 1 min agitation, followed by 18 h incubation at 37 oC. After centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 min, digested samples were acidified by the addition of proper amount of 0.1% TFA and were desalted C18 Cartridge. Eluted peptides were dried in a centrifugal evaporator. After drying, the peptide samples was suspended on ice in 200 µL lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 150 mM Tris-HCl, and 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), pH 7.8). Tissue was disrupted with agitation by a homogenizer and then immediately boiled for 5 min. The samples were further ultrasonicated and boiled again for another 5 min. Undissolved cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 rpm for 15 min.  TMT labeling of peptides and high pH reverse phase fractionation (HPRP) TMT reagents were used for labeling of peptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each aliquot (50 µg of peptide equivalent) was reacted with one tube of TMT reagent. Sample labeling was as follows: Group A1, 128C; Group A2, 129N; Group A3, 129C; Group B1, 130C, Group B2, 130C; Group B3, 121N; Group C1, 131C, Group C2, 127N, Group C3, 132C; Group D1, 133N, Group D2, 133C, Group D3, 134N. Equal amounts of TMT labeling peptides were mixed in each group, and then, HPRP (Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, USA) was used to fractionate peptides after drying. Samples were eventually collected into 10 components. Each component of the peptides was stored at -80 oC for LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS Analysis The redissolved peptide solution was taken for LC-MS/MS analysis, and each fractional component of the sample was injected once for a total of 10 times for mass spectrometry analysis. The HPLC liquid phase system Easy-nLC 1200 was used for separation. Buffer solutions: A, 0.1% formic acid solution; and B, 80% acetonitrile solution. The chromatographic column was balanced with 100% A solution. The sample was loaded onto the chromatographic column, i.e., Trap column (20 mm × 100 µm, 5 µm-C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Then, C-18 column (75 µm × 150 mm, 5 µm-C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH) was used for separation and the velocity was at 300 nL/min. The relative liquid gradient was as follows: linear gradient of liquid B, 2–5% for 0–2 min; linear gradient of liquid B, 5–28% for 2–71 min; linear gradient of liquid B, 28–40% for 71-79 min; linear gradient of liquid B, 40–100% for 79–81 min; liquid B maintained at 90% for 81-90 min. After chromatographic separation, the peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) with the following parameters: analysis duration, 90 min; detection method, positive ion; scanning range of parent ion, 300–1800 m/z. Mass charge ratios of polypeptides and polypeptide fragments were collected as follows: 20 fragment profiles (MS2 scan, HCD) were collected after each full scan. The resolution of the first-level mass spectrometry was 60,000 at m/z 200, AGC target was 3e6, and the first-level Maximum IT was 50 ms. The resolution of the second-level mass spectrometry was 45,000 at m/z 200, AGC target was 1e5, and the second-level Maximum IT was 50 ms. The MS2 activation type was HCD; the Isolation Window was 1.6 m/z; normalized collision energy was 30.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searching and analysis The raw files produced from LC-MS/MS were imported into Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4). The protein database (192367 proteins) was sourced from uniport-uniprot-homo-192367-20200629.fasta. The search parameters were set as follows: Type, Reporter ion MS2; isobaric labels, TMTpro 16plex; Enzyme, Trypsin; Reporter mass tolerance, 0.005 Da; Max Missed cleavages, 2; Peptide Tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS Tolerance, 0.02 Da; Fix modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (N,Q), TMTpro (K), TMTpro (N-term); Database, uniport-uniprot-homo-192367-20200629.fasta; Database pattern: Target-Reverse; Percolator (FDR) ≤0.01; Razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Pediatric obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a frequent respiratory disorder with an estimated prevalence of 3-6% in the general population. However, the underlying pathophysiology of OSA remains unclear. Recently, proteomic analysis using high-resolution and high-throughput mass spectrometry has been widely used in the field of medical sciences. In the present study, tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic analysis was performed in the serum of patients with OSA. The proteomic analysis revealed a set of differentially expressed proteins that may be associated with the pathophysiology of OSA. The differentially expressed proteins in patients with OSA were enriched in pathways including phagosome and glycan synthesis/degradation, immune response, and the hedgehog signaling pathway, indicating that such functions are key targets of OSA. Moreover, the experimental validation studies revealed that four proteins including ANTXR1, COLEC10, NCAM1, and VNN1 were reduced in the serum from patients with moderate and severe OSA, while MAN1A1 and CSPG4 protein levels were elevated in the serum from patients with severe OSA. The protein levels of ANTXR1, COLEC10, NCAM1, and VNN1 were inversely correlated with apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) in the recruited subjects, while the protein level of MAN1A1 was positively correlated with AHI, and no significant correlation was detected between CSPG4 protein and AHI. In summary, the present study for the first time identified differentially expressed proteins in the serum from OSA patients with different severities by using TMT-based proteomic analysis. The functional enrichment studies suggested that several signaling pathways may be associated with the pathophysiology of OSA. The experimental validation results indicated that six proteins including ANTXR1, COLEC10, NCAM1, VNN1, CGPG4, and MAN1A1 may play important roles in the pathophysiology of OSA, which requires further mechanistic investigation.

### Keywords
Obstructive sleep apnea; proteomic analysis; tandem mass tags; differentially expressed proteins; serum; experimental validation

### Affiliations
Longgang ENT Hospital, Institute of ENT and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of ENT
Longgang ENT Hospital, Institute of ENT and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of ENT, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, China

### Submitter
Dongcai Li

### Lab Head
Dr Dongcai Li
Longgang ENT Hospital, Institute of ENT and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of ENT, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, China


