### Accession
PXD002884

### Title
The pathogenesis of Guillain-Barre syndrome: peptidomic profiling of physiological fluids

### Description
Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) - one of the forms of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) - is a rare and severe disorder of the peripheral nervous system that also has an unknown etiology. One of the hallmarks of AIDP pathogenesis is a significantly elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein level in comparison with the peptidome/proteome profile of a representative number of CSF samples obtained from AIDP and multiple sclerosis (MS) patients and control patients. In total, 2355 peptide fragments related to 795 proteins were found in CSF samples from AIDP patients, 1066 peptide fragments of 253 proteins in samples from MS patients, and 774 peptide fragments of 220 proteins from control patients. Proteomic studies detected 1103 proteins in the control cohort and 1402 proteins in the AIDP cohort. Our dataset suggests that the proteome of the CSF from AIDP and control patients overlaps by as much as 67%, whereas the peptidome is only 21.5% identical. Comparison of the peptidomic and proteomic data revealed that 80% of the peptides in the CSF of AIDP patients correspond to proteins that are not present in proteomic dataset. Importantly, a considerable number of differentially represented peptides are related to the proteins involved in the arrangement of the axonal domains. The observed peptidomic dataset indicates that specific proteins, which participate in the arrangement of the myelin sheath in the nodes of Ranvier, are degraded in the course of AIDP.  Here, we show that the proteins that are overrepresented in the CSF of AIDP patients are partially linked with defensive responses to bacteria and viruses. These observations are in line with the upregulation of CSF cytokines associated with innate immunity, which in turn surprisingly suggests that the destruction of axons is not accompanied by any indications of a distinct adaptive autoimmune process. We believe that the presented proteomic and peptidomic dataset of the CSF from AIDP patients will provide useful information regarding the mechanisms of AIDP pathogenesis in comparison with MS, which is the prolonged but incurable autoimmune degradation of the central nervous system.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples CSF samples were obtained from the GBS and control patients under sterile conditions using standard lumbar puncture techniques. The intervertebral foramen between the third and fourth lumbar vertebrae was chosen. A 0.5% solution of Novocain was used as the local anesthesia. After needle administration and mandrin removal, the cerebrospinal liquid (1 ml) obtained from the middle portion was collected in a dry clean tube without preservatives. The material was taken from the control patients before the administration of the spinal anesthetic. Peptide isolation The peptides from the CSF were isolated using solid-phase extraction using Discovery DSC-18 reversed-phase cartridges (1 ml tubes; 50 mg) (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA). CSF (500 µl) that were heated in boiling water bath for 10 minutes, cooled to room temperature, diluted twice with 0.1% TFA, and applied to a preconditioned SPE cartridge. The cartridge was washed with 0.1% TFA (1 ml) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA (1 ml). The eluate was dried and resolved in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA (20 µl). The samples were treated in an ultrasound bath for 2 minutes before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (AB Sciex, Canada) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). The HPLC system was configured in trap-elute mode. A mixture of 98.9% water, 1% methanol, and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) was used as the sample loading buffer and buffer A. Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded on a Chrom XP C18 trap column (3 120 Å, 350 ×0.5 mmEksigent, Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 3 l/min for 10 min and eluted through a 3C18-CL-120 separation column (3 , 120 Å, 75 ×150 mm; Eksigent, Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The gradient consisted of 5–40% buffer B within 120 minutes. The column and trap column were regenerated between runs by washing with 95% buffer B for 7 minutes and equilibrated with 5% buffer B for 25 minutes. Between different samples, a blank 45-minute run consisting of 5 gradient waves (from 5% to 95% buffer B within 2 minutes; 95% buffer B during 5 minutes; and from 95% to 5% buffer B within 2 minutes) was required to thoroughly wash and trap the column and prevent possible crosstalk. This was followed by column equilibration for 10 minutes with 5% buffer B. Information-dependent mass spectrometry experiments included 1 survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. The MS1 acquisition parameters included the following: the mass range for analysis and subsequent ion selection for MS2 analysis was 300–1250 m/z, and the signal accumulation time was 250 ms. The ions for the MS2 analysis were selected based on the intensity with the threshold of 400 cps and charge state of 2–5. MS2 acquisition parameters included the following: the measurement mass range was 200–1800 m/z; and the optimization of the ion beam focus was set to obtain maximal sensitivity. The signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision-activated dissociation was performed using nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from 25–55 V within the 50-ms signal accumulation time. The analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analyses The peak lists from the MS/MS data were generated and recalibrated using ProteinPilot (version 4.5; ABSciex). The obtained peak lists were searched against the UniProt human Protein knowledgebase (version 2013_03) using MASCOT (version 2.2.07) and X! Tandem (version CYCLONE-2013.2.01) in parallel. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.04 Da, respectively. The database searches for peptidomic experiments included the following parameters: unspecific enzyme and dynamic/flexible methionine oxidation. Validation of the identification results and the meta-analysis were performed using Scaffold 4 (version 4.2.1; (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, USA). To evaluate peptide hits a 5% false discovery rate was used.

### Publication Abstract
Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) - the main form of Guillain-Barre syndrome-is a rare and severe disorder of the peripheral nervous system with an unknown etiology. One of the hallmarks of the AIDP pathogenesis is a significantly elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein level. In this paper CSF peptidome and proteome in AIDP were analyzed and compared with multiple sclerosis and control patients. A total protein concentration increase was shown to be because of even changes in all proteins rather than some specific response, supporting the hypothesis of protein leakage from blood through the blood-nerve barrier. The elevated CSF protein level in AIDP was complemented by activization of protein degradation and much higher peptidome diversity. Because of the studies of the acute motor axonal form, Guillain-Barre syndrome as a whole is thought to be associated with autoimmune response against neurospecific molecules. Thus, in AIDP, autoantibodies against cell adhesion proteins localized at Ranvier's nodes were suggested as possible targets in AIDP. Indeed, AIDP CSF peptidome analysis revealed cell adhesion proteins degradation, however no reliable dependence on the corresponding autoantibodies levels was found. Proteome analysis revealed overrepresentation of Gene Ontology groups related to responses to bacteria and virus infections, which were earlier suggested as possible AIDP triggers. Immunoglobulin blood serum analysis against most common neuronal viruses did not reveal any specific pathogen; however, AIDP patients were more immunopositive in average and often had polyinfections. Cytokine analysis of both AIDP CSF and blood did not show a systemic adaptive immune response or general inflammation, whereas innate immunity cytokines were up-regulated. To supplement the widely-accepted though still unproven autoimmunity-based AIDP mechanism we propose a hypothesis of the primary peripheral nervous system damaging initiated as an innate immunity-associated local inflammation following neurotropic viruses egress, whereas the autoantibody production might be an optional complementary secondary process.

### Keywords
Cerebrospinal fluid, Aidp, Guillain-barre syndrome, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Arapidi
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences


