### Accession
PXD029818

### Title
Proteomic profiling of rabbit eyes

### Description
Rabbits have been widely used for studying ocular physiology and pathology due to their relatively large eye size and similar structures with human eyes. Various rabbit ocular disease models, such as dry eye, age-related macular degeneration, and glaucoma, have been established. Despite the growing application of proteomics in vision research using rabbit ocular models, there is no spectral assay library for rabbit eye proteome publicly available. Here, we generated spectral assay libraries for rabbit eye compartments, including conjunctiva, cornea, iris, retina, sclera, vitreous humor, and tears using fractionated samples and ion mobility separation enabling deep proteome coverage. The rabbit eye spectral assay library includes 9,153 protein groups, and 107,898 peptides. We present the data as a freely available community resource for proteomic studies in the vision field.

### Sample Protocol
Tear samples were added equal volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated at 95 ºC for 5 min. The reduction and alkylation reactions were carried out by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol at 37 ºC for 1 h and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, respectively. Trypsin (1/40, w/w) was then added and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The digested peptides were cleaned up using C18 Ziptips and vacuum dried using a CentriVap (Labconco Corporation, Kansas City, MO). Vitreous humor samples were centrifuged at 15000xg at 4 ºC for 15 min. Then, the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube, added to an equal volume of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The denature, reduction, alkylation, digestion, and clean-up procedures were carried out as above. All other tissue samples (cornea, conjunctiva, iris, retina, and sclera) were cut into small pieces in a biosafety level II cabinet, and collected into clean 1.5 mL tubes. To each tube was added 100 L of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (30% ACN, 8M urea, and 20 mM dithiothreitol). After incubation at 37 ºC for 30 min under mild shaking, the samples were centrifuged at 15,000xg for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a clean tube, and 100 mM iodoacetamide was added. After incubation in the dark for 30 min at room temperature, each sample was added 1 mL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration. The digestion and clean-up procedures were carried out as above.

### Data Protocol
Software Spectronaut v14 (Biosynosis, Switzerland) was used with default settings to generate spectral libraries. The UniProt SwissProt and TrEMBL combined database (Oryctolagus cuniculus, downloaded on 11/14/2019, 23,262 entries) was used to build the spectral library. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was controlled at <1% at peptide spectrum match, peptide, and protein levels. Spectral assay libraries were generated for each rabbit eye tissue type (Table 1). In total, 108 data-dependent acquisition raw mass spectrometry data were used to generate one spectral assay library for rabbit eyes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eye, Rabbit, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Houston
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204

### Submitter
Guoting Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Guoting Qin
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204


