### Accession
PXD045069

### Title
Human liver cell line LO2 LC-MS/MS

### Description
A hyperlipidaemia model of L02 cells was established using free fatty acids (FFA, oleate and palmitate, 2:1; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at a final concentration of 1 mM for 24 h. Cells were allowed to attach overnight prior to HTG-medicated serum for 24 h and then exposed to FFA during drug treatment. After treatment, LO2 cells were harvest and stored at -80 ℃, lactylation proteomics was performed by Jingjie PTM BioLabs (Hangzhou, China).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell samples using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), digested with trypsin, and the tryptic peptides were labelled with their respective TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with prewashed antibody beads (Jingjie PTM BioLabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore, MA, USA) for liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. The tryptic peptides were loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) and separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The separated peptides were analysed using Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with a nano-electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Liver cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Guang'anmen Hospital of China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences
China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Li Min

### Lab Head
Dr Qingyong He
Guang'anmen Hospital of China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences


