### Accession
PXD012486

### Title
Network rewiring of homologous recombination during mitotic proliferation and meiosis

### Description
Homologous recombination is essential for high-fidelity DNA repair during mitotic proliferation and meiosis. Yet, context-specific modifications must tailor the recombination machinery to avoid, or enforce, formation of reciprocal exchanges – crossovers – between recombining chromosomes. To obtain molecular insight into how crossover control is achieved, we affinity-purified the 7 DNA-processing enzymes with known roles in channelling HR intermediates into crossovers, or non-crossovers, from vegetative cells, or cells undergoing meiosis. Using mass spectrometry, we provide the first global characterization of their composition. The resulting mitosis- and meiosis-specific interaction maps reveal intricate changes in enzyme architecture and a concerted rewiring of the interaction networks to support flexible control to the recombination outcome. Moreover, functional analyses of 31 novel interactions uncovered 8 meiosis-specific network components that remodel HR to support crossing-over. Chd1, which transiently associates with Exo1 during meiosis, enables the formation of MutLγ-Exo1-dependent crossovers through its conserved ability to bind and displace nucleosomes.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS on beads digestion. peptide clean-up with C-18 ZipTips

### Data Protocol
The collected DDA spectra were searched against the S.cerevisiae S288C reference proteome Uniprot FASTA database (Version: November 2015) and a list of common protein contaminants (exported from the MaxQuant software proteomics package) using the Sorcerer-SEQUEST database search engine (Thermo Electron). Trypsin was set as the digesting protease with the tolerance of two missed cleavages and not allowing for cleavages of KP and RP peptide bonds. The monoisotopic peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 p.p.m. and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins (+57.021 Da) was defined as a fixed modification and the oxidation of methionines (+15.995) as a variable modification. Protein identifications were statistically analyzed with Percolator and filtered to a cutoff of a false discovery rate of <1% calculated based on a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Homologous recombination (HR) is essential for high-fidelity DNA repair during mitotic proliferation and meiosis. Yet, context-specific modifications must tailor the recombination machinery to avoid (mitosis) or enforce (meiosis) the formation of reciprocal exchanges-crossovers-between recombining chromosomes. To obtain molecular insight into how crossover control is achieved, we affinity purified 7 DNA-processing enzymes that channel HR intermediates into crossovers or noncrossovers from vegetative cells or cells undergoing meiosis. Using mass spectrometry, we provide a global characterization of their composition and reveal mitosis- and meiosis-specific modules in the interaction networks. Functional analyses of meiosis-specific interactors of MutL&#x3b3;-Exo1 identified Rtk1, Caf120, and Chd1 as regulators of crossing-over. Chd1, which transiently associates with Exo1 at the prophase-to-metaphase I transition, enables the formation of MutL&#x3b3;-dependent crossovers through its conserved ability to bind and displace nucleosomes. Thus, rewiring of the HR network, coupled to chromatin remodeling, promotes context-specific control of the recombination outcome.

### Keywords
Sgs1/blm-top3-rmi1, Slx1-slx4(btdb12), Holliday junction, Mlh1-mlh3-exo1, Yen1/gen1, Cell cycle, Mph1/fancm, Dna repair, Crossing-over, Mus81-mms4/eme1, Srs2/rtel1

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Ilaria Piazza

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
ETH Zurich


