### Accession
PXD014843

### Title
A cell cycle switch in TRF2 controls t-loop dynamics and DNA secondary structure resolution across the genome

### Description
Telomere end-protection by the shelterin complex prevents DNA damage signalling and promiscuous repair at chromosome ends. Evidence suggests that the 3’ single-stranded telomere end can assemble into a lasso-like t-loop configuration, which has been proposed to safeguard chromosome ends from being recognized as DNA double strand breaks. Mechanisms must also exist to transiently disassemble t-loops to allow faithful telomere replication and to permit telomerase access to the 3’-end to solve the end replication problem. However, the regulation and physiological importance of t-loops in end-protection remains uncertain. Here, we identify a CDK phosphorylation site in the shelterin subunit, TRF2 (Ser365), whose dephosphorylation in S-phase by the PP6C/R3 phosphatase provides a narrow window during which the helicase RTEL1 is able to transiently access and unwind t-loops to facilitate telomere replication. Re-phosphorylation of TRF2 on Ser365 outside of S-phase is required to release RTEL1 from telomeres, which not only protects t-loops from promiscuous unwinding and inappropriate ATM activation, but also counteracts replication conflicts at DNA secondary structures arising within telomeres and across the genome. Hence, a phospho-switch in TRF2 coordinates assembly and disassembly of t-loops during the cell cycle, which protects telomeres from replication stress and an unscheduled DNA damage response.

### Sample Protocol
293 HEK cells stably expressing Flag-HA RTEL1, N-Flap (Flag-GFP-tagged) RTEL1, or Myc-TRF2 were grown (in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS) asynchronous culture or were synchronized by the double-thymidine block (cells were treated with 2 mM thymidine for 18 hours, thymidine-free media for 9 hours to release the cells, and 2 mM thymidine was added to media for an additional 16 hours to arrest the cells at the G1 to S transition. Cells were washed twice with PBS and then released in fresh complete DMEM). Asynchronous and S phase synchronized cells were lysed in ice-cold NET lysis buffer (50mM Tris (pH 7.2) 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1x EDTA-free Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail and kept to lyse 10 minutes on ice. The cell lysates were then briefly vortexed and passed through a 23G syringe five times. The soluble protein fractions were collected after centrifugation at 16000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. For protein immunoprecipitation, whole-cell extracts were precleared with protein G Sepharose, and two miligrams of precleared extract from 293 HEK expressing Flag-HA RTEL1, N-Flap RTEL1, or Myc-TRF2 were incubated for 1 hour with anti-HA, anti-GFP or anti-Myc antibodies (4 micrograms of abs/reaction), respectively. Immunocomplexes were incubated with protein G Sepharose for 45minutes, washed 3x in NET buffer and subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE.   For phosphatase control samples, whole-cell extracts were prepared as described above except in the absence of phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were incubated with 800 units of λ-phosphatase (New England Biolabs) in NET lysis buffer supplemented with 1mM of MnCl2 along with protease inhibitors for 30 minutes at 30°C. Next, the lysates were incubated on ice for 15 minutes and subjected to immunoprecipitation as detailed above.  Coomassie-stained polyacrylamide gel slices were excised from SDS-PAGE gels using a scalpel and processed for mass spectrometry using the Janus liquid handling system (PerkinElmer). Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in individual wells of a 96-well microtitre plate and destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, the samples were digested with trypsin (Promega), overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 1% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile. Digests were subsequently analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50 cm, 75um I.D. EasySpray C18 LC-MS column over a 30 minute gradient and eluted directly into the LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with the top 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data was processed in MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) for peptide and protein identification, the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Homo Sapiens canonical sequences downloaded from UniProtKB (release 2012_08).

### Publication Abstract
The protection of telomere ends by the shelterin complex prevents DNA damage signalling and promiscuous repair at chromosome ends. Evidence suggests that the 3' single-stranded telomere end can assemble into a lasso-like t-loop configuration<sup>1,2</sup>, which has been proposed to safeguard chromosome ends from being recognized as DNA double-strand breaks<sup>2</sup>. Mechanisms must also exist to transiently disassemble t-loops to allow accurate telomere replication and to permit telomerase access to the 3' end to solve the end-replication problem. However, the regulation and physiological importance of t-loops in the protection of telomere ends remains unknown. Here we identify a CDK phosphorylation site in the shelterin subunit at Ser365 of TRF2, whose dephosphorylation in S&#xa0;phase by the PP6R3 phosphatase provides a narrow window during which the RTEL1 helicase can transiently access and unwind t-loops to facilitate telomere replication. Re-phosphorylation of TRF2 at Ser365 outside of S&#xa0;phase is required to release RTEL1 from telomeres, which not only protects t-loops from promiscuous unwinding and inappropriate activation of ATM, but also counteracts replication conflicts at DNA secondary structures that arise within telomeres and across the genome. Hence, a phospho-switch in TRF2 coordinates the assembly and disassembly of t-loops during the cell cycle, which protects telomeres from replication stress and an unscheduled DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Telomeres, Rtel1, Phosphatases, Genome stability, Shelterin, Cell cycle, Dna replication, Lc-ms/ms, Dna repair, Cdk, Trf2, T-loops

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform The Francis Crick Institute


