### Accession
PXD011010

### Title
Identification of proteins associated with Kv1.2 potassium channels.

### Description
Kv1.2 is a prominent voltage-gated potassium channel that influences action potential generation and propagation in the central nervous system. We explored multi-protein complexes containing Kv1.2 using mass spectrometry of immunoprecipitated samples. Proteins identified as candidate interactors were prioritized based on abundance, and were screened for functional effects on Kv1.2 channels using electrophysiology.

### Sample Protocol
HEK cells were transfected with Kv1.2-1D4 and harvested after 72 hours. To harvest protein, cells were washed with PBS, then incubated for 30 minutes in 250 µM ethylene glycol bis(succinimidyl succinate), a 16 Å long bifunctional crosslinker to link nearby free amines, diluted in PBS. Cells were lysed with 20 mM HEPES, 0.1 M NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 20mM CHAPS, and protease inhibitor at 4o C for 20 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 5 min. Kv1.2 complexes were isolated from samples using sepharose beads coated with 1D4 monoclonal antibody, and eluted with 1D4 peptide. Samples were in-gel digested and post-tryptic peptides from three different conditions (Kv1.2-1D4, Kv1.2-1D4 + 1 mM DTT, untransfected) were labelled with stable isotopic dimethyl labels for quantitation of relative peptide abundance in each sample. Samples were mixed and analyzed by a quadrupole–time of flight mass spectrometer (Impact II; Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an Easy nano LC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30. The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from Uniprot Homo sapiens sequence entries plus common contaminants with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and N-acetylation of the proteins, in addition to the isotopes of dimethyl modifications for quantitation. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified54. The amount of each protein was quantified relative to the others based on the relative abundance of each protein tagged with the three different dimethyl tags.

### Publication Abstract
Kv1.2 is a prominent voltage-gated potassium channel that influences action potential generation and propagation in the central nervous system. We explored multi-protein complexes containing Kv1.2 using mass spectrometry followed by screening for effects on Kv1.2. We report that Slc7a5, a neutral amino acid transporter, has a profound impact on Kv1.2. Co-expression with Slc7a5 reduces total Kv1.2 protein, and dramatically hyperpolarizes the voltage-dependence of activation by -47&#x2009;mV. These effects are attenuated by expression of Slc3a2, a known binding partner of Slc7a5. The profound Slc7a5-mediated current suppression is partly explained by a combination of gating effects including accelerated inactivation and a hyperpolarizing shift of channel activation, causing channels to accumulate in a non-conducting state. Two recently reported Slc7a5 mutations linked to neurodevelopmental delay exhibit a localization defect and have attenuated effects on Kv1.2. In addition, epilepsy-linked gain-of-function Kv1.2 mutants exhibit enhanced sensitivity to Slc7a5.

### Keywords
Human, Lcmsms, Potassium channel, Kv1.2

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Department of Pharmacology, Alberta Diabetes Institute, University of Alberta

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Harley Takatsuna Kurata
Department of Pharmacology, Alberta Diabetes Institute, University of Alberta


