### Accession
PXD018346

### Title
Mapping of ISG15 interaction partners by GST pull down coupled to mass spectrometry

### Description
During infection, interferon production leads to upregulation of the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) which encodes the ubiquitin-like protein ISG15. ISG15 has a profound role in restricting intracellular infection by viral and bacterial pathogens. It can exert its function either as a free intracellular or extracellular molecule, or as an ubiquitin-like conjugate to substrate proteins in a process called ISGylation. Here, we used a viral-like particle trapping (Virotrap) technology and GST pull down, both coupled to mass spectrometry, to screen for intracellular ISG15-binding proteins. As strongest hit, we identified RNF213, a very large interferon-induced protein targeted to lipid droplets and a genetic risk factor for Moyamoya disease, a rare cerebrovascular disorder. We verified binding of ISG15 and RNF213 with biochemical methods and imaging and found that interferon signaling induces ISGylation and oligomerization of RNF213 on the surface of lipid droplets, acting as a binding platform for ISGylated proteins. Moreover, we showed that knockdown of RNF213 promotes in vitro infection by Listeria monocytogenes, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and Coxsackie virus (CV) B3, suggesting a broad antimicrobial activity of RNF213. In contrast, overexpression of RNF213 restricted Listeria infection and was associated with a striking co-localization of RNF213 with intracellular bacteria. Infection experiments in RNF213 deficient mice corroborated these results in vivo, revealing a so far unknown function of RNF213 in the host defense against infection. Together, we report that RNF213 assembles into a binding platform for ISGylated proteins on the surface of lipid droplets, acting as a first step of an antimicrobial cellular pathway that processes ISGylated proteins. Our findings provide novel molecular insights into the ISGylation pathway and point towards an important role of the immune response to infection in the etiology of Moyamoya disease.

### Sample Protocol
Hek293T, HeLa or differentiated THP-1 cells were grown at ~80-90% confluence in 15 cm culture dishes (1 petri dish/sample) and treated with interferon-α/-β at 10 ng/mL for 24h (#11343596, #11343524, Immunotools). Each condition (2 baits, 3 cell lines) was analyzed in triplicate, leading to a total of 18 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Cells were washed three times with PBS with Ca2+ and Mg2+ and scraped in 1 mL lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris.HCl (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 1% triton-x-100 (v/v), 1 mM PMSF and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free tablet, 4693159001). Samples were incubated 60 minutes on ice or 20 minutes under end-over-end agitation at 4°C. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 15 minutes at 16,000 x g at 4°C to remove insoluble components. 15 µL magnetic glutathione beads (Pierce Thermo-fisher) were incubated with 4 µg of purified GST-tagged ISG15 (R&D systems, UL-600-500) or GSTP1 (Sigma-Aldrich, G5663 SIGMA) under agitation. Incubation was performed overnight at 4°C in 500 µL 50 mM Tris.HCl, 150mM NaCl, 1% triton-x-100 (v/v), 1mM DTT after which decorated glutathione beads were blocked by addition of BSA to a final concentration of 2% (w/v) and incubation for an additional hour at 4°C. Then, the cleared lysates were incubated overnight at 4°C with the decorated glutathione beads under agitation to allow binding of proteins to ISG15. The next morning, the beads were precipitated with a magnetic stand, washed once with 1mL wash buffer containing 50mM Tris.HCl (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 1% triton-x-100 (v/v) and subsequently washed three times with 1 mL trypsin digestion buffer containing 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2. Washed beads were re-suspended in 150 µl digestion buffer and incubated for 4 hours with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at 37 ˚C. Beads were removed, another 1 µg of trypsin was added and proteins were further digested overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). For the experiment with HeLa cells, 15 µL of samples was injected while 5µL was injected for the experiment with THP-1 and Hek293T cells. Injection was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A. Peptides were trapped on a 20 mm pre-column (100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) before the peptides were separated on a 500 mm long micro pillar array column (µPAC™, PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality. This column consists of 300 µm wide channels that are filled with 5 µm porous-shell pillars at an inter pillar distance of 2.5 µm. With a depth of 20 µm, this column has a cross section equivalent to an 85 µm inner diameter capillary column. For the experiment with HeLa cells, peptides were eluted from the column by a non-linear gradient from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 60 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10 min in 97% solvent B. Then, the column was re-equilibrated with 98% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 20 min. While in the experiment with THP-1 and Hek293T cells, peptides were eluted from the column by a non-linear gradient from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 90 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 5 min in 97% solvent B. Then, the column was re-equilibrated with 98% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 40 min. In all LC-MS/MS experiments, the column temperature was kept constant at 40°C in a column oven (Sonation COControl). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive and data-dependent mode. In the experiment with HeLa cells, the mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the top 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum while a top 12 was used for the experiment with THP-1 and Hek293T cells. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6 for a maximum of 60 ms. The most intense ions above a threshold value of 1.3E4 were isolated in the trap with an isolation window of 1.5 Da for maximum 80ms to a target AGC value of 1E5 and a minimum AGC value 1,000. Precursor ions with an unassigned, or with a charge state equal to 1 or >7 were excluded. Peptide match was set on “preferred” and isotopes were excluded. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 12 s. Fragmentation were performed at a normalized collision energy of 28 %. MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at fixed first mass 145 m/z at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyzer. The polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the PSM, peptide and protein level. The 32 recorded spectral data files were searched together against all human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2019 containing 20,413 protein sequences (taxonomy ID 9606), downloaded from www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the GAG, VSV-G, and eDHFR protein sequences. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. Only proteins with at least one peptide were retained leading to the identification of 1,214 proteins in all 32 samples. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum of two ratio counts from at least one unique peptide was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) after loading the proteinGroups table from MaxQuant. Hits identified in the reverse database, only identified by modification site and contaminants were removed and protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Replicate samples were grouped, proteins with less than four valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit to compile a list of 613 quantified proteins. On these quantified proteins, for each ISG15 bait a t-test was performed for a pairwise comparison with the eDHFR control to reveal specific ISG15 interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Interactome, Isg15

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
1. Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium 2. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium 3. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Fabien Thery

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
1. Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium 2. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium 3. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, Ghent, Belgium


