### Accession
PXD031337

### Title
Formation of toxic oligomers of polyQ-expanded Huntingtin by prion-mediated cross-seeding

### Description
Manifestation of aggregate pathology in Huntington’s disease is thought to be facilitated by a preferential vulnerability of affected brain cells to age-dependent proteostatic decline. To understand how specific cellular backgrounds may facilitate pathologic aggregation, we utilized the yeast model in which polyQ-expanded Huntingtin forms aggregates only when the endogenous prion-forming protein Rnq1 is in its amyloid-like prion [PIN+] conformation. We employed optogenetic clustering of polyQ protein as an orthogonal method to induce polyQ aggregation in prion-free [pin-] cells. Optogenetic aggregation circumvented the prion requirement for the formation of detergent-resistant polyQ inclusions, but bypassed the formation of toxic polyQ oligomers, which accumulated specifically in [PIN+] cells. Reconstitution of aggregation in vitro suggested that these polyQ oligomers formed through direct templating on Rnq1 prions. These findings shed light on the mechanism of prion-mediated formation of oligomers, which may play a role in triggering polyQ pathology in the patient brain.

### Sample Protocol
For total proteome analysis (3389): Cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 40 mM 2-Cloroacetamide, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine  in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0) by boiling and subsequent sonication using a Bioruptor Plus sonication system (Diogenode). Proteins were digested sequentially by LysC and trypsin. The peptide mixture was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%, followed by purification with home-made SCX stage-tips. Samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in 6 µl 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 at 60 °C. Eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Liquid chromatography with the Easy-nLC 1200 was performed by loading the peptides in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 1.25 ul/min and peptides were separated with a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 2% to 30% over 120 minutes followed by a ramp to 60% over 10 minutes then 95% over the next 5 minutes and finally the percentage of buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3x106 and 1x105 respectively within a maximum injection time of 100 and 25 ms for MS and MS2 scans respectively. For Rnq1-GFP interactome analysis (3455): Cell pellets were resuspended in triton lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100, 5% Glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, EDTA-free) and cells were lysed by vortexing with glass beads using a FastPrep-24 grinder (MP Biomedicals). 2 mg of total protein were mixed with 50 µL anti-GFP µMACS beads (Miltenyi Biotec) and samples were nutated at 4 °C for 1 h. Magnetic beads were separated using µMACS columns. Beads were washed three times with triton lysis buffer and twice with wash buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5). Proteins were digested on the column with trypsin (Hubner et al., JCB, 2010). Reactions were stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% followed by desalting with home-made SCX stage-tips. After elution from the stage-tips, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 6 µl 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 at 60 °C. Eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Liquid chromatography with the Easy-nLC 1200 was performed by loading the peptides in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 1.25 ul/min and peptide were separated with a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 7% to 30% over 60 minutes followed by a ramp to 60% over 15 minutes then 95% over the next 5 minutes and finally the percentage of buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 10 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3x106 and 1x105 respectively within a maximum injection time of 100 and 60 ms for MS and MS2 scans respectively. For 97Q-Opto interactome analysis (3630): Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 5% Glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, EDTA-free) and cells were lysed by vortexing with glass beads using a FastPrep-24 grinder (MP Biomedicals). Samples were split into a TOTAL and a SOLUBLE sample, which was cleared by spinning at 15’000 xg for 15 min at 4 °C. 4 mg of total protein were mixed with 50 µL anti-c-myc µMACS beads (Miltenyi Biotec) and samples were nutated at 4 °C for 1 h. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and twice with wash buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5). The on column trypsin digest, subsequent sample preparation steps and MS analysis were performed as described above for Rnq1-GFP.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.17.0) with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the data base of S. cerivisae with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant generating label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Data analysis was performed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). Enrichment and corresponding p-values were calculated by Student’s t-test for proteins detected in at least four (for total proteome) or three (for interactomes) biological replicates in each (for total proteome) or at least one group (for interactomes).

### Publication Abstract
Manifestation of aggregate pathology in Huntington's disease is thought to be facilitated by a preferential vulnerability of affected brain cells to age-dependent proteostatic decline. To understand how specific cellular backgrounds may facilitate pathologic aggregation, we utilized the yeast model in which polyQ-expanded Huntingtin forms aggregates only when the endogenous prion-forming protein Rnq1 is in its amyloid-like prion [PIN<sup>+</sup>] conformation. We employed optogenetic clustering of polyQ protein as an orthogonal method to induce polyQ aggregation in prion-free [pin<sup>-</sup>] cells. Optogenetic aggregation circumvented the prion requirement for the formation of detergent-resistant polyQ inclusions but bypassed the formation of toxic polyQ oligomers, which accumulated specifically in [PIN<sup>+</sup>] cells. Reconstitution of aggregation in&#xa0;vitro suggested that these polyQ oligomers formed through direct templating on Rnq1 prions. These findings shed light on the mechanism of prion-mediated formation of oligomers, which may play a role in triggering polyQ pathology in the patient brain.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Oligomers, Proteostasis, Yeast, Neurodegeneration, Prions, Huntington’s disease, Rnq1, Optogenetics, Polyq

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Gropp

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. F. Ulrich Hartl
Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


