### Accession
PXD032691

### Title
Secretome analysis of Abortiporus biennis grown on corn stover and xylose

### Description
In the present work, Abortiporus biennis, a white-rot fungus, was studied in regard to its lignocellulolytic enzymatic potential. Secretomics analyses, combined with biochemical methods, were employed to study the enzymatic machinery of the strain, after growth in corn stover cultures and xylose-based defined media. The results revealed the presence of all the necessary enzymatic activities for complete breakdown of the lignocellulosic substrate, while the prominent role of oxidative enzymes in the lignocellulolytic strategy of the strain became evident. Two novel laccases, AbiLac1 and AbiLac2, were isolated from the culture supernatant of this fungus.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  After 14 days of growth in corn stover medium, the mycelia were removed by filtration, and the supernatant was ultrafiltrated and freeze-dried. Cultures of A. biennis in defined medium with xylose as carbon source were used as controls for the differential expression analysis. Protein extracts were dissolved in 5% SDS in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a final concentration of 1 µg µl-1. To remove sugars, an aliquot from each sample containing 100 µg of protein was filtered with a 3 kDa Nanosep filter (Pall) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Proteins retained on the filter membrane were re-dissolved in 300µl 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB and reduced by addition of 15 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55°C followed by alkylation by addition of 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% to lower the pH to 1, followed by addition of 7 volumes of 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB at pH 7.55.  Samples were loaded on mini S-trap columns (Protifi) in aliquots of 400 µl centrifuged each time for 30 seconds at 4000 xg, followed by 3 washing steps with 400 µl 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB.  Then, 1 µg of MS-grade trypsin (Promega) in 125 µl 50 mM TEAB was added onto the filter and incubated overnight at 37°C to digest the proteins. Finally, peptides were eluted from the S-trap columns in 3 centrifugation steps of 1 minute at 4000 xg, first with 80 µl 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 µl 0.2% formic acid (FA) and finally with 80 µl 50% acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were transferred into an MS vial, dried completely by vacuum drying and re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) for an additional purification step on Omix C18 tips (Agilent). The resulting purified peptides were dried completely by vacuum drying. LC−MS/MS Analysis Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and firstly loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Then, they were separated on a 50 cm µPAC™ GEN2 column and eluted by a stepped gradient from 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 135 min up to 50% MS solvent B in 15 min, followed by a 5 min wash reaching 95% solvent B, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.0 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 ×E6  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 50.000 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass). QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS runs of all samples were searched together using MaxQuant v2.0.3.0 against the proteome of Abortiporus biennis CIRM-BRFM 1778 (v1.0, release date 2021-06-21, 11,767 sequences) downloaded from MycoCosm and the MaxQuant common contaminant database. In addition, reversed sequences of all protein entries were concatenated to the database for estimation of false discovery rates (FDR). MaxQuant was run with default search settings, including, a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. In addition, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification.  Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Protein identification and quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ workflow using a minimum ratio count of 2 unique and razor peptides. Downstream processing was performed with Perseus v1.6.15.0 and the pandas Python package. The replicate samples were grouped into ‘xylose’ and ‘corn stover’ groups, LFQ protein intensities were Log2 transformed and only proteins found in at least two biological replicates of one group were kept for further analysis. Next, these proteins were filtered for extracellular proteins only, to exclude intracellular proteins released due to cell lysis during sample preparation. Functional annotations of proteins including CAZymes, peptidases, signal peptides, InterPro domains, and KEGG classifications were downloaded from MycoCosm. Proteins were searched for the presence of transmembrane domains with TMHMM v2 and their subcellular localization was predicted with the DeepLoc algorithm. The extracellular dataset contains proteins classified as extracellular with DeepLoc and proteins that possess signal peptides and have no transmembrane helices in the mature protein. For the comparison of protein abundances between the two groups, proteins detected in at least 2 samples of corn stover and 1 sample of xylose were considered. Their missing LFQ intensities were imputed from a normal distribution with 0.3 spread and 1.8 downshift with Perseus. Protein LFQ intensities were tested using a two-sided Student‘s t-test with a permutation-based false discovery rate of 5% and 250 randomizations.

### Publication Abstract
White-rot basidiomycetes are the only microorganisms able to produce both hydrolytic (cellulases and hemicellulases) and oxidative (ligninolytic) enzymes for degrading all lignocellulose constituents. Their enzymatic machinery makes them ideal for the discovery of novel enzymes with desirable properties. In the present work, Abortiporus biennis, a white-rot fungus, was studied in regard to its lignocellulolytic potential. Secretomics and biochemical analyses were employed to study the strain's enzymatic arsenal, after growth in corn stover cultures and xylose-based defined media. The results revealed the presence of all the necessary enzymatic activities for complete breakdown of biomass, while the prominent role of oxidative enzymes in the lignocellulolytic strategy of the strain became evident. Two novel laccases, AbiLac1 and AbiLac2, were isolated from the culture supernatant with ion-exchange chromatography. Characterization of purified laccases revealed their ability to oxidize a wide variety of phenolic and non-phenolic substrates. AbiLac1 was found to oxidize polystyrene powder, showing high depolymerization potential, based on radical chain scission mechanism as evidenced by molecular weight decrease. The results of the present study demonstrate the biotechnological potential of the unexplored enzymatic machinery of white-rot basidiomycetes, including the design of improved lignocellulolytic cocktails, as well as the degradation and/or valorization of plastic waste materials.

### Keywords
Abortiporus biennis, Lignocellulose, Lc-ms/ms, Secretomics, Laccase

### Affiliations
Industrial Biotechnology & Biocatalysis Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
 Industrial Biotechnology & Biocatalysis Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Romanos Siaperas

### Lab Head
Dr Evangelos Topakas
Industrial Biotechnology & Biocatalysis Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece


