### Accession
PXD022187

### Title
BioID HEK293T PAX3-FOXO1 proximity labelling

### Description
PAX3-FOXO1 is a fusion transcription factor that is the main driver of tumorigenesis leading to the development of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS). Since aRMS cells are addicted to PAX3-FOXO1 activity, the fusion protein also represents a major target for therapeutic interference, which is however challenging as transcription factors usually cannot be inhibited directly by small molecules. Hence, characterization of the biology of PAX3-FOXO1 might lead to the discovery of new possibilities for an indirect inhibition of its activity. Here, our goal was to characterize the proteomic neighborhood of PAX3-FOXO1 and to find candidates potentially affecting its activity and tumor cell viability. Towards this aim, we expressed BirA fused versions of PAX3-FOXO1 (N- and C-terminal) in HEK293T cells under presence of biotin. In the control setup, we expressed the BirA enzyme alone. After Streptavidin purification of biotinylated proteins, we performed mass spectrometry and quantified relative abundances compared to control conditions. This enabled us to determine PAX3-FOXO1 proximal proteins, which we investigated further in orthogonal endogenous systems.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmids for expression of N- and C-terminal BirA-Flag fusion constructs were a kind gift of Philip Knobel (Laboratory for Applied Radiobiology, University Zurich). BirA-Flag/PAX3-FOXO1 fusion constructs were generated by amplification of a prevalidated PAX3-FOXO1 cDNA, using primers including restriction sites for AscI (forward) and NotI (reverse), and cloned into N- or C-terminal Bira-Flag backbone vectors. Transient transfection of BirA-Flag/PAX3-FOXO1 fusion constructs or BirA-Flag alone into HEK293T cells was conducted using PEI reagent. Expression as well as subcellular localization of proteins were confirmed by western blot or Immunofluorescence respectively. For Streptavidin Immunoprecipitations, 7.5 Mio. HEK293T cells were plated in a 15cm plate. The next day, cells were transfected with 12.6µg of plasmid DNA in presence or absence of 50µM Biotin. Biotin stock solution (20mM) was obtained by dissolving 100mg of powder (IBA, 2-1016-002) in 2.04ml of NH4OH 28-30% (Sigma Aldrich, ref# 221228),18ml of 1M HCl was added to neutralize the solution (pH~7.5) and sored at 4°C. 24h after transfection, cells were harvested by scraping in 1xPBS. After washing once with 1xPBS, cell pellets were resuspended in 1.5ml Lysis buffer (50mM TrisHCl pH7.5, 150mM NaCL, 1mM EGTA, 1%Triton-X, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with 250U of Benzonase (Novagen, 70664). Lysates were incubated for 1h at 4°C under rotation. After brief sonication to disrupt visible aggregates, centrifugation was performed at 16000g for 30min at 4°C. Cleared input samples were incubated together with 75ul Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1 (Thermo Fisher, 65601) per plate for 2h at 4°C under rotation. For subsequent western blot analysis immunoprecipitates were washed three times with lysis buffer and eluted from the beads in 1X NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher, LuBioScience) at 70°C. For downstream proteomic experiments, beads were washed once in lysis buffer followed by two washing steps with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Beads were resuspended in 150µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, snap-frozen and stored at-80°C. For on-bead digestion, 8M urea/100mM Tris-HCl pH8.2 was added to a final concentration of 2M urea. Reduktion and Alkylation were carried out using 2mM TCEP and 10mM Chloracetamide for 1h at 30°C under agitation in the dark. The solutions were diluted with Tris-HCl pH8.2 in a 1/1 ratio and digestion was performed with 1µg trypsin per sample overnight at 30°C under agitation in the dark. The next day, supernatant was taken from the beads and pooled with two washing steps with 100ul 10%ACN/Tris-HCl (final concentration of 3%ACN) and acidified to 0.5% TFA. Sample cleanup was performed using Sep-Pack C18 columns and completely dried using speed vac centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in LC-MS solution (3% ACN; 0.1% FA) for further analysis. Dissolved samples were injected by an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) and separated on an EasySpray-column (75 µm x 500 mm) packed with C18 material (PepMap, C18, 100 Å, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific). The column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water). Peptides were eluted using the following gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN): 5-25% B in, 60 min; 25-35% B in 10 min; 35-99% B in 5 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. All precursor signals were recorded in the Orbitrap using quadrupole transmission in the mass range of 300-1500 m/z. Spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z, a target value of 5E5 and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Data dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 1.6 Da and HCD fragmentation with 30% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 8E3 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Precursor signals were selected for fragmentation with a charge state from +2 to +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5E3. A dynamic exclusion list was used for 25 seconds. After data collection peak lists were generated using FCC and Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot human reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2016-12-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values and fold changes using the limma package. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a pediatric malignancy of skeletal muscle lineage. The aggressive alveolar subtype is characterized by t(2;13) or t(1;13) translocations encoding for PAX3- or PAX7-FOXO1 chimeric transcription factors, respectively, and are referred to as fusion positive RMS (FP-RMS). The fusion gene alters the myogenic program and maintains the proliferative state while blocking terminal differentiation. Here, we investigated the contributions of chromatin regulatory complexes to FP-RMS tumor maintenance. We define the mSWI/SNF functional repertoire in FP-RMS. We find that SMARCA4 (encoding BRG1) is overexpressed in this malignancy compared to skeletal muscle and is essential for cell proliferation. Proteomic studies suggest proximity between PAX3-FOXO1 and BAF complexes, which is further supported by genome-wide binding profiles revealing enhancer colocalization of BAF with core regulatory transcription factors. Further, mSWI/SNF complexes localize to sites of de novo histone acetylation. Phenotypically, interference with mSWI/SNF complex function induces transcriptional activation of the skeletal muscle differentiation program associated with MYCN enhancer invasion at myogenic target genes, which is recapitulated by BRG1 targeting compounds. We conclude that inhibition of BRG1 overcomes the differentiation blockade of FP-RMS cells and may provide a therapeutic strategy for this lethal childhood tumor.

### Keywords
Bioid, Rhabdomyosarcoma, Pax3-foxo1, Bira

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital Zurich

### Submitter
Dominik Laubscher

### Lab Head
Dr Beat Schäfer
Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital Zurich


