### Accession
PXD008148

### Title
Cdc42 phosphorylation study -  Cdc42 Regulates Neuronal Polarity during Cerebellar Axon Formation and Glial-Guided Migration

### Description
Govek et al. demonstrate conditional loss of Cdc42 in cerebellar granule cell progenitors (GCPs) perturbs GCP polarity and impairs axon patterning, glial-guided migration, and cerebellar foliation. Phospho-proteomic analysis identified polarity and cytoskeletal proteins as affected targets in Cdc42 deficient GCPs.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enriched samples were analyzed in technical duplicate.  Peptides were separated using a direct-loading setup with a 12 cm packed-in-emitter C18 column (inner diameter of 75 µm, Nikkyo Technologies, Japan). Peptides were eluted using a gradient increasing from 2% B/98% A  to  40% B/60% A (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) in 140 minutes. Gradient was delivered at 300nL/min (Easy 1200, Thermofisher). The mass spectrometer (Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher) was operated in High/High mode with MS and MS/MS mass resolution being 60,000 and 30,000, respectively. For MS/MS, Automatic Gain Control was set to 1e5 with a maximum injection time of 40 ms.  For quantitative protein profiling, peptides were separated using the same gradient but extended to a total of 180 minutes and the mass spectrometer was operated in High/Low mode. For protein quantitation, peptides were separated using a 50 cm EasySprayer (ES80, Themo Fisher). Data were also searched using MASCOT2/ProteomeDiscoverer combined with Percolator 3 and PhosphoRS 4

### Data Protocol
Protein profiling were quantitated using ‘Label Free Quantitation’ 6 (LFQ) while peptide ‘Intensity’ was used for the phosphopeptide quantitation. Based on similar distributions of peptide intensities in-between samples (Supplementary Figure 1, panel A) it was deemed appropriate to use non-normalized intensities. The distribution of LFQ values are shown in panel B where red bars indicates imputed values (imputation: width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8, separate for each sample). Missing values were manually accessed when signals were fully absent in all 4 replicates.  Correlation of peptide intensities in-between samples were good (R2 of 0.71 to 0.83). Scatter plots and the associated R2 values for peptide Intensities are shown in Supplementary Figure 2, panel A while LFQ values used for protein quantitation are shown in panel B.

### Publication Abstract
CNS cortical histogenesis depends on polarity signaling pathways that regulate cell adhesion and motility. Here we report that conditional deletion of the Rho GTPase <i>Cdc42</i> in cerebellar granule cell precursors (GCPs) results in abnormalities in cerebellar foliation revealed by iDISCO clearing methodology, a loss of columnar organization of proliferating GCPs in the external germinal layer (EGL), disordered parallel fiber organization in the molecular layer (ML), and a failure to extend a leading process and form a neuron-glial junction during migration along Bergmann glia (BG). Notably, GCPs lacking <i>Cdc42</i> had a multi-polar morphology and slowed migration rate. In addition, secondary defects occurred in BG development and organization, especially in the lateral cerebellar hemispheres. By phosphoproteomic analysis, affected Cdc42 targets included regulators of the cytoskeleton, cell adhesion and polarity. Thus, Cdc42 signaling pathways are critical regulators of GCP polarity and the formation of neuron-glial junctions during cerebellar development.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Phospho

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Mary E. Hatten
The Rockefeller University


