### Accession
PXD032674

### Title
Label-free LC-MS/MS analysis of silky fowl egg yolk

### Description
The proteomic profiles of silky fowl egg yolk (SFEY) and Leghorn egg yolk (LEY) were analysed by bottom-up label-free liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), aiming to provide a theoretical basis for understanding the proteomic and biological differences between the two yolks and further develop the nutritional and biomedical value of silky fowl eggs.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh Lueyang silky fowl eggs and Leghorn eggs were bought from the local farmer market in Hanzhong, China. Each yolk was carefully washed and separated with deionized water, and the yolk vitelline membrane was carefully removed from the yolk. SDT (4% SDS in w/v, 100mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 100 mM DTT) was used for sample ly-sis and protein extraction. The protein quantification was performed with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Each protein sample (200 μg) was incorporated into 30 μL SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) for trypsin diges-tion by following filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) method. The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration. Then, iodoacetamide (100 μL, 100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block the reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in dark. After the collection of all samples into the ul-trafiltration tube, UA (100 μL) was added for centrifugation for 15 min, followed by tripli-cated operation of adding ammonium bicarbonate NH4HCO3 (100 μL, 50 mM), and cen-trifugation for 10 min. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with trypsin (4 μg; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in ammonium bicarbonate NH4HCO3 buffer (40 μL, 25mM) overnight at 37°C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 in standard density, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), concentrat-ed by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in formic acid (40 μL, 0.1%, v/v). The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm and calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. The obtained peptides were separated by HPLC liquid phase system EasynLC with nanoliter flow rate. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (100 μm*2cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (length: 10 cm, inner diameter: 75 μm) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and then separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. After chromatographic separation, the samples were analyzed by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in the form of positive ions, with the scan range of the precursor ion 300-1800 m/z, and the related parameters as follow: automatic gain con-trol target: 3e6, the maximum inject time: 10 ms, dynamic exclusion duration: 40.0 s, res-olution of survey scans: 70,000 at m/z 200, resolution for HCD spectra: 17,500 at m/z 200, isolation width: 2 m/z, normalized collision energy: 30 eV, and under fill ratio (specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time): 0.1%. The instrument was operated with the use of peptide recognition mode for the collection of 20 fragments after each full scan.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using the MaxQuant search engine (1.5.3.17) for identification and quantitation analysis. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the NCBI database (UniProt. Gallus gallus. 34950. 20201026. FASTA). Related parameters and instructions were as follow: cleavage enzyme: trypsin (allowing up to 2 missing cleavages), mass tolerance for precursor ions: 20 ppm in the first search and 6 ppm in the main search, carbamidomethyl on cysteine residues: fixed modification, oxidation on methionine residues: variable modifications, the false discovery rate (FDR): ≤ 0.01. The same protein can be used for subsequent Perseus analysis if it is identified at least twice in three repeated biological tests. Protein abundance is represented by LFQ (label-free quantitative) value, with SFEY/LEY ratio > 2 and p value < 0.05 defined as up-regulation in SFEY, ratio < 0.5 and p value < 0.05 as down-regulation in SFEY.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic profiles of Silky fowl egg yolk (SFEY) and Leghorn egg yolk (LEY) were analyzed by bottom-up label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). From a total of 186 identified proteins, 26 proteins were found significantly differentially abundant between two yolks, of which, 19 were up-regulated and 7 were down-regulated in SFEY, particularly, vitelline membrane outer layer protein 1, transthyretin and ovoinhibitor were up-regulated by 26, 25, and 16 times, respectively. In addition, there were 57 and 6 unique proteins in SFEY and LEY, respectively. Gene Ontology (GO) revealed SFEY contained relatively more abundant protease inhibitors and coagulation-related proteins. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis revealed differentially abundant proteins in SFEY may be actively involved in the regulation of the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway. This study provides a theoretical basis for the understanding of proteomic and biological differences between these two yolks and can guide for further exploration of nutritional and biomedical use of Silky fowl egg.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomic analysis, Egg yolk, Silky fowl (black-bone chicken)

### Affiliations
Chinese-German Joint Laboratory for Natural Product Research, College of Biological Science and Engi-neering, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong 723000, Shaanxi, China
-

### Submitter
Rao Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoying Zhang
Chinese-German Joint Laboratory for Natural Product Research, College of Biological Science and Engi-neering, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong 723000, Shaanxi, China


