### Accession
PXD010660

### Title
Nuclear versus cytoplasmic VHL interactomes

### Description
Protein misfolding is linked to a wide variety of human disease. Protective cellular protein quality control (PQC) mechanisms evolved to selectively recognize misfolded proteins and limit their toxic effects. Using yeast as a model system, we previously discovered that the misfolded protein VHL interacts with various PQC machines on its way to being cleared by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. However, the clearance of nuclear and cytoplasmic VHL has difference PQC requirements. In this study, we performed SILAC-based AP-MS of nuclear (NLS) versus cytoplasmic (NES) VHL to identify, in an unbiased manner, the similarities and differences between nuclear and cytoplasmic PQC. We found that 4 molecular chaperones of the Hsp70 family, and multiple subunits of the proteasome, were significantly enriched with both nuclear and cytoplasmic VHL. By contrast, the chaperone Hsp90 and Sis1 were only associated with cytoplasmic VHL, whereas 6 of the 8 TRiC/chaperonin subunits were specifically enriched with nuclear VHL. Our study highlights unexpected differences between nuclear and cytoplasmic PQC, with important implications for our understanding of a wide range of protein misfolding diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells expressing one of NLS-GFP-VHL (Light, Lys-0), NES-GFP-VHL (Heavy, Lys-8) or Flag-VHL (Medium, Lys-4) were lysed by cryogrinding and resolubilizated in buffer containing 1 % Triton X-100. 1.5 mg of protein from each of the lysates were mixed prior to immunoprecipitation using GFP-TRAP_MA magnetic beads (ChromoTek) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  After 3 washes with Triton IP Buffer, the beads were washed twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 supplemented with 20mM calcium chloride. On-bead trypsin digestion and peptide clean-up  was performed using the in-StageTip method. Peptides were analysed on a Q ExactiveTM Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a NanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). An EASY-Spray PepMap® RSLC C18, 3 µm, 75 µm x 15 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to resolve peptides using a binary solvent system (0.1 % formic acid in water as mobile phase A, 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B). The Q Exactive Plus was run on a linear 60-min gradient from 2 % to 30 % B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Both precursor and fragment ions were analysed in the FT mode at a mass resolution of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. After a survey scan, the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for subsequent fragmentation by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from 4 biological replicates were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3) and searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (orf_trans_all.fasta, downloaded in January 2015) with common contaminant entries. The default MaxQuant parameters for a triple SILAC experiment were used, with the exception of ‘Re-quantify’, which was enabled. The proteinGroups.txt file was filtered to exclude contaminants, reverse hits, hits ‘only identified by site’, and hits for which only 1 peptide was identified. The normalized SILAC ratios were used to generate median fold-change values per protein. Proteins with a log2(Light/Medium) or log2(Heavy/Medium) > 0.5 were counted as ‘enriched’ in NLS- or NES- VHL interactomes, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Protein misfolding is linked to a wide array of human disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and type II diabetes<sup>1,2</sup>. Protective cellular protein quality control (PQC) mechanisms have evolved to selectively recognize misfolded proteins and limit their toxic effects<sup>3-9</sup>, thus contributing to the maintenance of the proteome (proteostasis). Here we examine how molecular chaperones and the ubiquitin-proteasome system cooperate to recognize and promote the clearance of soluble misfolded proteins. Using a panel of PQC substrates with distinct characteristics and localizations, we define distinct chaperone and ubiquitination circuitries that execute quality control in the cytoplasm and nucleus. In the cytoplasm, proteasomal degradation of misfolded proteins requires tagging with mixed lysine 48 (K48)- and lysine 11 (K11)-linked ubiquitin chains. A distinct combination of E3 ubiquitin ligases and specific chaperones is required to achieve each type of linkage-specific ubiquitination. In the nucleus, however, proteasomal degradation of misfolded proteins requires only K48-linked ubiquitin chains, and is thus independent of K11-specific ligases and chaperones. The distinct ubiquitin codes for nuclear and cytoplasmic PQC appear to be linked to the function of the ubiquilin protein Dsk2, which is specifically required to clear nuclear misfolded proteins. Our work defines the principles of cytoplasmic and nuclear PQC as distinct, involving combinatorial recognition by defined sets of cooperating chaperones and E3 ligases. A better understanding of how these organelle-specific PQC requirements implement proteome integrity has implications for our understanding of diseases linked to impaired protein clearance and proteostasis dysfunction.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Yeast, Lc-msms, Silac, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
Babraham Institute

### Submitter
Rahul Samant

### Lab Head
Dr Judith Frydman
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA


