### Accession
PXD013835

### Title
Migrasomes provide regional cues for organ morphogenesis during zebrafish gastrulation

### Description
Migrasomes are recently identified vesicular organelles that form on retraction fibers  behind migrating cells, cellular contents are released from migrasome by a process  named migracytosis. The function of migrasomes in living organisms is unknown.  Here we show that migrasomes are formed during zebrafish gastrulation, signaling  molecules such as chemokines are enriched in migrasomes. Migrasomes are clustered  on spatially restricted area in embryo where they provide regional cues for organ  morphogenesis. Our study shown migrasome is signaling organelles which integrate  spatial and specific biochemical information to coordinate migrating cells in complex  biological processes such as morphogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For the quantitative proteomics analysis, cells and migrasomes were lysed by lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea and protease inhibitor (BioTools, Jupiter, Florida) in PBS. Equal amounts of protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin, then desalted and labeled by different TMT reagents (Thermo, Pierce Biotechnology). The TMT-labeled peptides were mixed and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. The tryptic peptides were separated into 24 fractions with high-pH RPLC (XBridgeTM BEH300 C18 5μm, 300Å, 250 mm × 4.6 mm i.d., Waters; mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, pH = 10.0) and B (98% acetonitrile, pH = 10.0)).

### Data Protocol
For the quantitative analysis of Tspan4a protein, cells and migrasomes were lysed by lysis buffer containing 4% SDS and protease inhibitor (BioTools, Jupiter, Florida) in PBS. Equal amounts of protein were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE, and the corresponding bands were cut out for in-gel digestion. After digestion, the tryptic peptides and standard peptide (sequence: DLYAQN) were labeled by TMT reagents and mixed together. The mixture was desalted using C18 stage-tips.

### Publication Abstract
Migrasomes are recently identified vesicular organelles that form on retraction fibres behind migrating cells. Whether migrasomes are present in vivo and, if so, the function of migrasomes in living organisms is unknown. Here, we show that migrasomes are formed during zebrafish gastrulation and signalling molecules, such as chemokines, are enriched in migrasomes. We further demonstrate that Tspan4 and Tspan7 are required for migrasome formation. Organ morphogenesis is impaired in zebrafish MZtspan4a and MZtspan7 mutants. Mechanistically, migrasomes are enriched on a cavity underneath the embryonic shield where they serve as chemoattractants to ensure the correct positioning of dorsal forerunner cells vegetally next to the embryonic shield, thereby affecting organ morphogenesis. Our study shows that migrasomes are signalling organelles that provide specific biochemical information to coordinate organ morphogenesis.

### Keywords
Morphogenesis, Regional cue, Migrasome

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Dong Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Li Yu
Tsinghua University


