### Accession
PXD036238

### Title
Molecular characterization of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma using quantitative proteomics

### Description
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a heterogeneous cancer associated with high mortality rate. In India, it is the 6th most common cause of cancer-related mortality. In this study, we employed high-resolution mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to characterize differential protein expression pattern associated with ESCC. We identified several differentially expressed proteins including PDPN, TOP2A, POSTN and MMP2 that were overexpressed in ESCC. In addition, we identified downregulation of esophagus tissue-enriched proteins such as SLURP1, PADI1, CSTA and small proline-rich proteins like SPRR3, SPRR2A, SPRR1A and CSTA, KRT4, KRT13 involved in squamous cell differentiation. We identified several overexpressed proteins belonging to 3q24-29 chromosomal region, corroborating CNV alterations in this region reported by several published studies. For example, we identified overexpression of SOX2, TP63, IGF2BP2 and RNF13 that are encoded by 3q26 region. Functional enrichment analysis revealed proteins involved in cell cycle pathways, DNA replication, spliceosome, and DNA repair pathways. We identified overexpression of multiple proteins that play a major role in alleviating ER stress. SYVN1/SEL1L complex forms the ER quality control machinery clearing misfolded proteins from ER. SYVN1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates ER-resident proteins. There are also other non-canonical substrates of SYVN1 which are known to play a crucial role in tumor progression. Therefore, SYVN1 is a potential therapeutic target in ESCC. 

### Sample Protocol
Homogenized tissue samples were lysed in 4% SDS lysis buffer in 50mM TEABC and subjected to heating at 90˚C for 5 min. They were sonicated for 3 cycles at 40% amplitude on ice and heated at 90˚C for 5 min. Equal amounts of protein from each sample were reduced using 5mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 60˚C for 20min. Samples were cooled and alkylated by incubation in 10mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. Five volumes of chilled acetone were added to precipitate proteins and kept at -20˚C overnight. Pellets were suspended in 6M Urea in 50mM TEABC buffer and subjected to LysC digestion (1:75 enzyme to protein ratio) for 4 hrs at 37˚C. Further digestion was done using Trypsin at 1:75 (enzyme to protein ratio) and incubated overnight at 37˚C. Samples were acidified with 1% formic acid and cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 columns. 50 µg peptide from all samples were pooled and used as bridging channels between the experiments. 12 tumour and adjacent normal tissue samples were distributed between 3 TMT experiments (4 tumour and 4 adjacent normal tissues per experiment) with the pooled sample using the other 2 channels for each TMT10plex reaction. 200ug of peptide digest from each sample was labelled with TMT 10plex reagent as per manufacturer's instructions. After labelling, all the samples in each TMT set were pooled and cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 columns. The samples were fractionated using basic pH RPLC fractionation method on Agilent 1260 HPLC system. Finally, the fractions were pooled and reduced to 12 fractions, speed vac concentrated and cleaned using C18 stage tips. All the fractions were analysed on Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a front-end Dionex Ultimate RSLC 3000 system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The solvent system used in LC includes Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid) and Solvent B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid). Peptide mixture was loaded on a trap column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim Pepmap 100, 75µm x 2cm, 3µm C18 100A˚) and separated with a linear gradient of 8% to 35% solvent B on an analytical column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75µm x 50cm, 2µm C18). The total run time was 130 min with 15 min initial equilibration step in each run. The precursor ions were surveyed in Orbitrap mass analyser with 350 – 1600 m/z mass range. The MS scans were recorded using 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z with 30ms maximum injection time. MS/MS scans were triggered using data-dependent topN mode in which top 15 precursor ions from the MS scans were isolated using quadrupole mass filter and fragmented using high energy collision-induced dissociation (NCE 32%). An isolation width of 1.2 m/z was used to minimize the co-isolation of precursor ions.  Fragmented product ions were analysed again in orbitrap mass analyser at 50,000 resolution and 100 ms maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion of 30sec, charge state filter, monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled. Polysiloxane ion 445.12002 m/z was used as internal calibrant during the run. All the fractions were analysed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software (Version 2.2) for protein identification and quantification. Raw data were searched against the human UniProt protein database using Sequest and Mascot search algorithms with the following parameters: trypsin as enzyme with two missed cleavages, oxidation at Methionine and acetyl modification at protein N-terminus as variable modification, carbamidomethylation at Cysteine and TMT modification at N-terminus and Lysine as static modifications. Precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were allowed during the search. The reporter ions' intensity was obtained using an integration tolerance of 30 ppm around the reporter masses. For reliable quantitation, only PSMs filtered for a co-isolation threshold of 70%, and an average S/N value of 10 were considered for protein quantitation. Protein identifications were filtered at 1% protein-level FDR using the software's Protein level FDR validator node.  Bioinformatics data analysis was done using Perseus computational platform. Differential expression analysis was done on logarithmized abundances using a 2-sample Test with multiple hypothesis correction. Principle component analysis and heat map visualization were performed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0. Functional characterization of the differentially expressed proteins was performed by gene ontology analysis using the DAVID web server. Protein-protein interaction networks were generated using the String database and the networks were further analysed using Cytoscape application V3.8.

### Publication Abstract
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a heterogeneous cancer associated with a poor prognosis in advanced stages. In India, it is the sixth most common cause of cancer-related mortality. In this study, we employed high-resolution mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to characterize the differential protein expression pattern associated with ESCC. We identified several differentially expressed proteins including PDPN, TOP2A, POSTN and MMP2 that were overexpressed in ESCC. In addition, we identified downregulation of esophagus tissue-enriched proteins such as SLURP1, PADI1, CSTA, small proline-rich proteins such as SPRR3, SPRR2A, SPRR1A, KRT4, and KRT13, involved in squamous cell differentiation. We identified several overexpressed proteins mapped to the 3q24-29 chromosomal region, aligning with CNV alterations in this region reported in several published studies. Among these, we identified overexpression of SOX2, TP63, IGF2BP2 and RNF13 that are encoded by genes in the 3q26 region. Functional enrichment analysis revealed proteins involved in cell cycle pathways, DNA replication, spliceosome, and DNA repair pathways. We identified the overexpression of multiple proteins that play a major role in alleviating ER stress, including SYVN1 and SEL1L. The SYVN1/SEL1L complex is an essential part of the ER quality control machinery clearing misfolded proteins from the ER. SYVN1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates ER-resident proteins. Interestingly, there are also other non-canonical substrates of SYVN1 which are known to play a crucial role in tumor progression. Thus, SYVN1 could be a potential therapeutic target in ESCC.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Er stress, Syvn1, Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, Cell cycle regulation

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discoverer Building, International Tech Park, Bangalore, 560 066, India

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Discoverer Building, International Tech Park, Bangalore, 560 066, India


