### Accession
PXD031481

### Title
N-terminal processing of beta and gamma actin in HAP1 cells

### Description
Actin is one of the most essential and abundant intracellular proteins, playing an essential physiological role as the major constituent of the actin cytoskeleton. Two cytoplasmic actins, beta- and gamma-actin, are encoded by different genes, but their amino acid sequences differ only by four conservative substitutions at the N-terminus, making it very difficult to dissect their individual regulation in vivo. The majority of actins are N-terminally acetylated, following the removal of N-terminal Met. Here, we analyzed beta and gamma cytoplasmic actin N-termini in different actin preparations.

### Sample Protocol
HAP1 cells with 70-80% confluence were harvested by scraping and centrifugation. The pellets were washed by PBS, and spun down to remove the supernatant. The cell pellets were lysed directly in 4 × SDS sample buffer at the W:V ratio of 1: 10 (1 mg cell : 10 μL buffer), followed by boiling in water for 10 min. 10 μL of each sample was loaded for SDS-PAGE electrophoresis at 150 V. The actin bands were excised from the gel, reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. The trypsin digested actin were analyzed using a standard 90-min LC gradient on the Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were searched against the mammalian actin isoform database and a contaminant database using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoplasmic beta- and gamma-actin are ubiquitously expressed in every eukaryotic cell. They are encoded by different genes, but their amino acid sequences differ only by four conservative substitutions at the N-termini, making it difficult to dissect their individual regulation. Here, we analyzed actin from cultured cells and tissues by mass spectrometry and found that beta, unlike gamma actin, undergoes sequential removal of N-terminal Asp residues, leading to truncated actin species found in both F- and G-actin preparations. This processing affects up to &#x223c;3% of beta actin in different cell types. We used CRISPR/Cas-9 in cultured cells to delete two candidate enzymes capable of mediating this type of processing. This deletion abolishes most of the beta actin N-terminal processing and results in changes in F-actin levels, cell spreading, filopodia formation, and cell migration. Our results demonstrate previously unknown isoform-specific actin regulation that can potentially affect actin functions in cells.

### Keywords
Human, Actin, Hap1

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Dawei Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Kashina
University of Pennsylvania


