### Accession
PXD015399

### Title
Murine CLPP protease substrate trapping in MEF cells

### Description
Classic susbtrate-trapping screen for ClpXP substrates using MEF cell lines overexpressing FLAG-tagged CLPP (WT), proteolytically inactive CLPP (TRAP) or vector control (NEG)

### Sample Protocol
Three independent Clpp-/- MEF lines were transfected with each empty vector (NEG), CLPP-WT-FLAG (WT) and a catalytically inactive version, CLPP-TRAP-FLAG (TRAP)(Szczepanowska, Maiti et al. 2016) using the Nucleofector (Lonza) electroporation kit according to the manufacturer instruction. 72h after transfection, 80% confluent cells were harvested with trypsin, washed with PBS and lysed for 45 min in 300µL IP buffer (Thermo). Samples were incubated with 30µL α-FLAG magnetic beads (Sigma) over night at 4°C on a rotating wheel. On the following day, beads were washed 4 times with IP buffer and bound proteins were eluted in 70µL Elution buffer (Thermo). Samples were neutralized with 10µl 1M Tris/HCl pH 7.5, snap-frozen and stored at -80°C. 1% of each Lysate (L), unbound proteins (F), first washing solution (W) and 10% of the Elution fractions (E) were used for SDS-PAGE controls. Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis on a QExactive instrument as previously described (Szczepanowska, Maiti et al. 2016).

### Data Protocol
For the CLPP-TRAP experiment, spectra were matched to peptide sequences using MaxQuant v1.5.3. using the UniProt Mouse protein database and standard settings for the QExactive instrument. Enzyme specificity set to trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed, cys alkylation with iodoacetamide was set as fixed and Met oxidation as variable modifications. Label free quantification and match between runs was enabled with preset standard settings. Further data analysis was performed with Perseus version 1.6.6 (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016)

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian mitochondrial proteome consists of more than 1100 annotated proteins and their proteostasis is regulated by only a few ATP-dependent protease complexes. Technical advances in protein mass spectrometry allowed for detailed description of the mitoproteome from different species and tissues and their changes under specific conditions. However, protease-substrate relations within mitochondria are still poorly understood. Here, we combined Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) N termini profiling of heart mitochondria proteomes isolated from wild type and <i>Clpp</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice with a classical substrate-trapping screen using FLAG-tagged proteolytically active and inactive CLPP variants to identify new ClpXP substrates in mammalian mitochondria. Using TAILS, we identified N termini of more than 200 mitochondrial proteins. Expected N termini confirmed sequence determinants for mitochondrial targeting signal (MTS) cleavage and subsequent N-terminal processing after import, but the majority were protease-generated neo-N termini mapping to positions within the proteins. Quantitative comparison revealed widespread changes in protein processing patterns, including both strong increases or decreases in the abundance of specific neo-N termini, as well as an overall increase in the abundance of protease-generated neo-N termini in CLPP-deficient mitochondria that indicated altered mitochondrial proteostasis. Based on the combination of altered processing patterns, protein accumulation and stabilization in CLPP-deficient mice and interaction with CLPP, we identified OAT, HSPA9 and POLDIP2 and as novel bona fide ClpXP substrates. Finally, we propose that ClpXP participates in the cooperative degradation of UQCRC1. Together, our data provide the first landscape of the heart mitochondria N terminome and give further insights into regulatory and assisted proteolysis mediated by ClpXP.

### Keywords
Substrate, Trap experiment, Cell line, Mouse, Cllp protease, Interactor

### Affiliations
ZEA-3 Analytik Forschungszentrum Jülich
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytik Forschungszentrum Jülich


