### Accession
PXD003517

### Title
ECM-enriched mouse lung - TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry analysis was performed on ECM-enriched preparation from normal murine lung, bleomycin-induced fibrotic lung, primary tumors and lymph node metastasis isolated from the KrasG12D/+p53-/- mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma. Three independent samples were processed and analyzed for each condition. This study identified ECM signatures of normal and diseased lung tissue.

### Description
TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry analysis was performed on ECM-enriched preparation from normal murine lung, bleomycin-induced fibrotic lung, primary tumors and lymph node metastasis isolated from the KrasG12D/+p53-/- mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma. Three independent samples were processed and analyzed for each condition. This study identified ECM signatures of normal and diseased lung tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Decellularization of samples ranging from 50mg to 100mg was performed using the CNMCS compartmental protein extraction kit (Millipore, Billerica, MA).  The remaining insoluble pellet is enriched for ECM proteins. We processed three independent samples of each tissue type: normal lung, fibrotic lung, lung adenocarcinoma and derived lymph-node metastasis samples. The ECM-enriched samples were solubilized and reduced in a solution containing 8M urea and 10mM DTT. The samples were alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), deglycosylated with PNGaseF (New England BioLabs) and digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako) and trypsin (Promega).  Peptide labeling with TMT 10plex (Thermo) was performed per manufacturer’s instructions.  TMT labeled peptides were fractioned into five fractions using the ZOOM isoelectric fractionation (IEF) fractionator (Invitrogen) with a set of six ZOOM disks (pH 3.0, pH 4.6, pH 5.4, pH 6.2, pH 7.0, and pH 10). The anode buffer (7 M urea, 2M thiourea, Novex IEF anode buffer, pH 3.0) and the cathode buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, Novex IEF cathode buffer, pH 10.4) were generated per manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was separated by reverse phase HPLC using an EASY- nLC1000 (Thermo) over a 140-minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode.  The parameters for the full scan MS were:  resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms.  The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 32 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) using the SwissProt mus musculus database containing 16678 entries.  Mascot search parameters were:  10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.8 Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10plex modification of lysines and peptide N-termini; variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine, pyro-glutamic acid modification at N-terminal glutamine, and hydroxylation of proline and lysines.  Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the quantitative data analysis. The average false discovery rate was 0.0054 (ranging from 0.0015-0.0132). TMT quantification was obtained using Proteome Discoverer and isotopically corrected per manufacturer’ instructions, and the values were normalized to the median of each channel. Proteins were annotated as being ECM-derived or not.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extraceullar matrix

### Affiliations
MIT Koch Institute
Janssen Pharmaceuticals

### Submitter
Amanda Del Rosario

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Del Rosario
MIT Koch Institute


