### Accession
PXD007948

### Title
Calnexin depletion by ER-stress during cholestasis inhibits the Na+-taurocholate Cotransporting Polypeptide (NTCP)

### Description
Impaired bile flow (cholestasis) leads to transcriptional downregulation of the bile acid importer Na+-taurocholate co-transporting protein (NTCP) and to ER-stress in the liver. Here, we show that ER-stress induction strongly reduces NTCP protein expression, plasma membrane abundance and NTCP-mediated bile acid uptake. This is not controlled via a single specific UPR-pathway but mainly depends on the interaction of NTCP with calnexin, an ER chaperone involved in folding of N-glycosylated proteins. In mice, expression of both Ntcp and calnexin was reduced by thapsigargin-induced ER-stress. Calnexin downregulation in HepG2 and U2OS cells results in a decreased NTCP expression and a reduced bile acid uptake. Calreticulin shows partial functional redundancy with calnexin as it also interacts with NTCP, and is downregulated upon ER-stress, but specifically in calnexin-depleted cells. In conclusion, ER stress-induced downregulation of calnexin provides an additional mechanism to dampen NTCP-mediated bile acid uptake during cholestasis.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS sample preparation  Parental or Ha-hNTCP expressing HepG2 cells were grown in a 150mm culture dish until 80% confluence. After washing with PBS, cells were lysed in sucrose lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 5 mM EDTA, 10% (w/v) sucrose, 1% Nonidet P40) supplemented with protein inhibitors. Three culture dishes were pooled to generated one sample. Equal protein amounts were incubated with monoclonal anti-HA antibody immobilized on Protein A–agarose beads (Sigma 9568) for 16h at 4°C Precipitated proteins were denatured with 8M Urea in 1M Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) reduced with TCEP (10mM) at RT for 30 min after which the cysteines were alkylated with Chloroacetamide (40mM end concentration) for 30 minutes. After four-fold dilution with ABC, proteins were on-bead digested overnight at RT with 150ng of Trypsin/LysC (Promega), after which peptides were bound to an in house made c18 material stage tip washed with buffer A (0.1% Formic Acid (FA)) and stored at 4˚C until LC/MS-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis After elution from the stage tips with buffer B (80% ACN 0.1% FA), acetonitrile was removed from the samples using a SpeedVac and the remaining peptide solution was diluted with buffer A before loading. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (50µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using a 140 minute gradient (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 10000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data analysis  Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008) with deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. The Human protein database of Uniprot was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The raw data was processed with Maxquant software in which the LFQ algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes) (Luber, Cox et al. 2010, Schwanhausser, Busse et al. 2011, Cox, Hein et al. 2014). Proteins identified with two or more unique peptides were filtered for reverse hits and standard contaminants. LFQ intensities, were log2 transformed after which identified proteins were filtered for at least three valid values in a group and missing values were replaced by imputation. After a standard t-test, p-values were plotted against the difference of the mean log2 transformed LFQ values

### Publication Abstract
Cholestasis-induced accumulation of bile acids in the liver leads to farnesoid X receptor (FXR)-mediated transcriptional down-regulation of the bile acid importer Na<sup>+</sup>-taurocholate cotransporting protein (NTCP) and to induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. However, whether ER stress affects bile acid uptake is largely unknown. Here, we investigated the role of ER stress on the regulation and function of the bile acid transporter NTCP. ER stress was induced using thapsigargin or subtilase cytotoxin in human osteosarcoma (U2OS) and human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells stably expressing NTCP. Cellular bile acid uptake was determined using radiolabeled taurocholate (TCA). NTCP plasma membrane expression was determined by cell surface biotinylation. Mice received a single injection of thapsigargin, and effects of ER stress on NTCP messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein were measured by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot analysis. Effects of cholestasis on NTCP and ER stress were assessed in response to 3, 5-diethoxycarbonyl-1, 4-dihydrocollidine (DDC) feeding or bile duct ligation in FXR<sup>-/-</sup> mice after 7 or 3 days, respectively. Novel NTCP-interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrometry (MS), interaction verified, and assessed by co-immunoprecipitation and TCA uptake for functional relevance in relation to ER stress. ER stress induction strongly reduced NTCP protein expression, plasma membrane abundance, and NTCP-mediated bile acid uptake. This was not controlled by FXR or through a single unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway but mainly depended on the interaction of NTCP with calnexin, an ER chaperone. In mice, expression of both NTCP and calnexin was reduced by thapsigargin or cholestasis-induced ER stress. Calnexin down-regulation <i>in vitro</i> recapitulated the effect of ER stress on NTCP. <i>Conclusion</i>: ER stress-induced down-regulation of calnexin provides an additional mechanism to dampen NTCP-mediated bile acid uptake and protect hepatocytes against bile acid overload during cholestasis.

### Keywords
Calnexin/ cholestasis/er-stress/ ntcp/calreticulin/xbp1/perk/lectin chaperones

### Affiliations
Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 69-71, 1105 BK Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Stan F.J van de Graaf
Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 69-71, 1105 BK Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


