### Accession
PXD010913

### Title
Integrated transcriptomics and proteomics analyses reveal anthelmintic mechanism of arctigenin against Gyrodactylus kobayashii

### Description
The widespread resistance of parasitic worms to commonly used anthelmintics highlights the urgent need for development of new effective chemicals. Arctigenin (ARC) is a natural lignin compound that exhibits excellent anthelminthic efficacy against infections of Gyrodactylus, but knowledge about the mechanism of action is far from clear. In the present study, high-throughput RNA-sequencing was integrated with iTRAQ quantitative proteomics analysis to explore the anthelmintic mechanism and possible molecular targets of ARC against Gyrodactylus kobayashii.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 384 goldfish with high intensity of parasitism (> 500 parasites per fish) were randomly assigned to 12 tanks, one control (without ARC treatment) and three ARC treated groups: 4 mg/L ARC exposure for 0.5 h, 1.85 mg/L exposure for up to 0.5 h and 4.0 h.  Three technical replicates were used for each condition. After treatment, fish were anesthetized with 0.02% MS222. Tail fins were excised and poured into a fresh 15 mL Falcon tube with 3 ml 0.65% saline solution, which was slightly vortexed and allowed to stand for 5 min at room temperature, then the supernatant was removed. Worms were washed three times in saline solution to remove host tissue contaminants and other possible interfering substances. Parasites were subjected to iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS proteomics.After trypsin digestion and desiccation, the peptides were labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ reagent following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). A total of 20 fractions obtained were desalted using a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and then dried under vacuum.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). The precursor ion scanning range was 300–1800 m/z with a full-scan MS resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), a maximum ion accumulation time of 10 ms, and AGC target value of 3e6.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and analyzed using Mascot search engine (version 2.3.2; Matrix Science, UK). Mascot database was set up for protein identification using G. kobayashii reference transcriptome. The parameters for database searching were set as following: the mass tolerance was set as 0.1 Da for MS/MS and 20 ppm for MS, trypsin enzyme specificity and two max-missed cleavages were allowed, and the fixed modification included carbamidomethylation, iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) and Oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
Gold nanoparticles (GNPs) are one of the most widely used nanomaterials in various fields. Especially, the unique chemical and physical properties make them as the promising candidates in drug target identification, unfortunately, little is known about their application in parasites. In this paper, GNPs were employed as new solid support to identify drug targets of natural bioactive compound arctigenin (ARG) against fish monogenean parasite Gyrodactylus kobayashi. Before target identification, GNPs with ARG on the surface showed the ability to enter the live parasites even the nucleus or mitochondria, which made the bound compounds capable of contacting directly with target proteins located anywhere of the parasites. At the same time, chemically modified compound remained the anthelminthic efficacy against G. kobayashii. The above results both provide assurance on the reliability of using GNPs for drug target-binding specificity. Subsequently, by interrogating the cellular proteome in parasite lysate, myosin-2 and UNC-89 were identified as the potential direct target proteins of ARG in G. kobayashii. Moreover, results of RNA-seq transcriptomics and iTRAQ proteomics indicated that myosin-2 expressions were down-regulated after ARG bath treatment both in transcript and protein levels, but for UNC-89, only in mRNA level. Myosin-2 is an important structural muscle protein expressed in helminth tegument and its identification as our target will enable further inhibitor optimization towards future drug discovery. Furthermore, our findings demonstrate the power of GNPs to be readily applied to other parasite drugs of unknown targets, facilitating more broadly therapeutic drug design in any pathogen or disease model.

### Keywords
Target, Gyrodactylus;arctigenin;itraq

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University, College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangling,Shaanxi,China
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Xiao Tu

### Lab Head
Dr Gaoxue Wang
Northwest A&F University, College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangling,Shaanxi,China


