### Accession
PXD037431

### Title
Label-free shotgun proteomics of Mycoplasma pneumoniae grown in serum-free medium

### Description
We developed a serum and animal component-free medium capable of supporting robust growth of the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Here, we analyzed the proteome of the wild-type strain grown in serum-free vB13 medium compared to rich medium (Hayflick medium).

### Sample Protocol
Mycoplasma pneumoniae wild-type strain M129 was grown per duplicate in tissue culture flasks containing 20 ml of rich medium (Hayflick) or serum-free medium vB13. After 72h of culture at 37°C under 5% CO2, the culture medium was changed with fresh one and the cells further incubated for 6h. At this point, cells were washed with PBSx1 twice, scraped off from the flasks and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and the cell lysate disrupted using a Bioruptor sonication system (Diagenode) with an On/Off interval time of 30/30 sec at high frequency for 5 min. Cell lysates were spun, and the extracted protein quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Finally, samples were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided protocol (FASP) and they were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher  Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides (1µg) were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior to the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument, and QCloud (Chiva et al., 2018) has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5 Matrix Science (Perkins et al., 1999)). The data were searched against a home-made database consisting of a list of common contaminants and all possible M. pneumoniae ORFs >19aa (87,051 entries). For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to estimate the protein abundances with the average of the three most intense unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
To assist in the advancement of the large-scale production of safe <i>Mycoplasma</i> vaccines and other <i>Mycoplasma</i>-based therapies, we developed a culture medium free of animal serum and other animal components for Mycoplasma pneumoniae growth. By establishing a workflow method to systematically test different compounds and concentrations, we provide optimized formulations capable of supporting serial passaging and robust growth reaching 60 to 70% of the biomass obtained in rich medium. Global transcriptomic and proteomic analysis showed minor physiological changes upon cell culture in the animal component-free medium, supporting its suitability for the production of M. pneumoniae-based therapies. The major contributors to growth performance were found to be glucose as a carbon source, glycerol, cholesterol, and phospholipids as a source of fatty acids. Bovine serum albumin or cyclodextrin (in the animal component-free medium) were required as lipid carriers to prevent lipid toxicity. Connaught Medical Research Laboratories medium (CMRL) used to simplify medium preparation as a source of amino acids, nucleotide precursors, vitamins, and other cofactors could be substituted by cysteine. In fact, the presence of protein hydrolysates such as yeastolate or peptones was found to be essential and preferred over free amino acids, except for the cysteine. Supplementation of nucleotide precursors and vitamins is not strictly necessary in the presence of yeastolate, suggesting that this animal origin-free hydrolysate serves as an efficient source for these compounds. Finally, we adapted the serum-free medium formulation to support growth of Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, a swine pathogen for which inactivated whole-cell vaccines are available. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> <i>Mycoplasma</i> infections have a significant negative impact on both livestock production and human health. Vaccination is often the first option to control disease and alleviate the economic impact that some <i>Mycoplasma</i> infections cause on milk production, weight gain, and animal health. The fastidious nutrient requirements of these bacteria, however, challenges the industrial production of attenuated or inactivated whole-cell vaccines, which depends on the use of animal serum and other animal raw materials. Apart from their clinical relevance, some <i>Mycoplasma</i> species have become cellular models for systems and synthetic biology, owing to the small size of their genomes and the absence of a cell wall, which offers unique opportunities for the secretion and delivery of biotherapeutics. This study proposes medium formulations free of serum and animal components with the potential of supporting large-scale production upon industrial optimization, thus contributing to the development of safe vaccines and other <i>Mycoplasma</i>-based therapies.

### Keywords
Serum-free medium, Mycoplasma pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)

### Submitter
Raul Burgos

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain


