### Accession
PXD015572

### Title
Non-destructive Palaeoproteomics Of Mummified Human Skin

### Description
Palaeoproteomic study of mummified human skin using a non-destructive sampling technique, based on mixed-bed chromatographic media stabilised on ethylene vinyl acetate membranes (“EVA”), which had previously been used exclusively on historical material, was successful in extracting ancient proteins from the surface of Ancient Egyptian mummies. We tested the method on a decontextualised fragment of skin and assessed the endogeneity of its metaproteome by comparison with a procedural blank. Furthermore, we retrieved and authenticated sequences of collagen and keratin from the mummy of a young woman (Supp. 16747 of the Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography of the University of Turin) who lived and died between 2400 and 2200 BC, during the Old Kingdom of Egypt.

### Sample Protocol
Small squares of EVA membrane (0.5 x 0.5 cm approximately) were cut, rinsed in HPLC-grade water and rehydrated in clean HPLC-grade water for a minimum of one hour. Two squares were put in contact with the samples (skin fragments) and left for 45 minutes. After the contact with the membrane, the scalp fragments were left to air-dry in a laminar flow cabinet and did not show any alteration of the surface.  Each EVA sample was placed in clean Lo-Bind eppendorfs and the extracted proteins sequentially eluted using ammonium hydroxide (1M aqueous solution, Sigma), 1% aqueous solution of formic acid (Sigma) and 100% acetonitrile (Sigma) as per published protocols (Manfredi et al., Anal. Chem., 2017). The solutions were dried in an evaporator or air-dried in a laminar flow cabinet, and the extracts reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Alkylation and reduction steps were performed using DL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma) and iodoacetamide (Sigma) and were followed by enzymatic digestion overnight and solid-phase extraction (zip-tip) according to usual paleoproteomics protocols (e.g. Demarchi et al., eLife, 2016).   LC-MS/MS analyses were performed at the Open Access Mass Spectrometry Lab of the University of Turin. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analysed using an Ultimate 3000 Dionex nanoHPLC instrument coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific, Milan, Italy). Separation was achieved using a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm column (Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, preconcentration column (Thermo Scientific). The eluent used for preconcentration step was 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile 98/2 and the flowrate was 5 μL/min. The eluents used for chromatographic separation were 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile/water 8/2 (solvent B) in a program which was initially isocratic at 5:95 (A:B %) for 5 min, increased to 75:25 in 55 min, run up to 60:40 in 6 min, and to 10:90 in 5 min. Recondition time was 20 min. The injection volume was 1 μL and the flow rate 300 nL min−1. The nanocolumn was provided with the ESI source. The mass spectrometry parameters were: positive spray voltage 2,300 (V), sweep gas 1 (Arb) and ion transfer tube temperature 275°C. Full scan spectra were acquired in the range of m/z 375–1,500 (resolution 120,000 at m/z 200). MSn spectra in data-dependent analysis mode were acquired in the range between the ion trap cut-off and precursor ion m/z values. HCD collision energy was fixed at 28%, orbitrap resolution 50,000 and the isolation window was 1.6 m/z units. Water blanks were analysed before and after each sample.

### Data Protocol
Product ion spectra were analysed using the software PEAKS v. 8.5 (Zhang et al. 2012). The results reported were obtained by SPIDER searches of all the de novo peptides against the Uniprot_Sprot (downloaded on 19/07/2019) and common contaminants (cRAP, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Acceptance thresholds applied were as follows: False Discovery Rate ≤ 0.5 %, Protein -10lgP ≥ 20, Proteins unique peptides ≥ 2, De novo ALC Score ≥ 80 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-destructivity, Mummy, Metaproteomics, Ancient molecules, Eva sampling, Palaeoproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Turin

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
University of Turin


