### Accession
PXD023373

### Title
Long-read transcriptome sequencing reveals abundant promoter diversity in distinct molecular subtypes of gastric cancer

### Description
Deregulated gene expression is a hallmark of cancer, however most studies to date have analyzed short-read RNA-sequencing data with inherent limitations. Here, we combine PacBio long-read isoform sequencing (Iso-Seq) and Illumina paired-end short read RNA sequencing to comprehensively survey the transcriptome of gastric cancer (GC), a leading cause of global cancer mortality. We performed full-length transcriptome analysis across 10 GC cell lines covering four major GC molecular subtypes (chromosomal unstable, Epstein-Barr positive, genome stable and microsatellite unstable). We identify 60,239 non-redundant full-length transcripts, of which >66% are novel compared to current transcriptome databases. Novel isoforms are more likely to be cell-line and subtype specific, expressed at lower levels with larger number of exons, with longer isoform/coding sequence lengths. Most novel isoforms utilize an alternate first exon, and compared to other alternative splicing categories are expressed at higher levels and exhibit higher variability. Collectively, we observe alternate promoter usage in 25% of detected genes, with the majority (84.2%) of known/novel promoter pairs exhibiting potential changes in their coding sequences. Mapping these alternate promoters to TCGA GC samples, we identify several cancer-associated isoforms, including novel variants of oncogenes. Tumor-specific transcript isoforms tend to alter protein coding sequences to a larger extent than other isoforms. Analysis of outcome data suggests that novel isoforms may impart additional prognostic information. Our results provide a rich resource of full-length transcriptome data for deeper studies of GC and other gastrointestinal malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were grown and extracted in quadruplicates using RIPA buffer (Sigma) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 200 μg of protein were used for MS sample preparation. Samples were boiled at 95°C prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 15 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer. The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and each lane was divided into 2 equal fractions. For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 215-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative promoters, Long-read sequencing, Isoform sequencing (iso-seq), Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore


