### Accession
PXD044623

### Title
ABLs and TMKs are co-receptors for extracellular auxin

### Description
Extracellular perception of auxin, an essential phytohormone in plants, has been debated for decades. Auxin binding protein 1 (ABP1) physically interacts with quintessential transmembrane kinases (TMKs) and was proposed to act as an extracellular auxin receptor, but its role was disputed because abp1 knockout mutants lack obvious morphological phenotypes. Here we identified two new auxin-binding proteins, ABL1 and ABL2, that are localized to the apoplast and directly interact with the extracellular domain of TMKs in an auxin-dependent manner. Furthermore, functionally redundant ABL1 and ABL2 genetically interact with TMKs and exhibit functions that are overlapping with those of ABP1 as well as independent of ABP1. Importantly, the extracellular domain of TMK1 itself binds auxin and synergizes with either ABP1 or ABL1 in auxin binding. Thus, our findings discovered new auxin receptors ABL1 and ABL2 having functions overlapping with but distinct from ABP1 and acting together with TMKs as co-receptors for extracellular auxin.

### Sample Protocol
For SILIA-MS: Briefly, the WT and TMK1-Flag transgenic plants were grown for 2 weeks at 22°C under 16hr/8hr light period on vertical 1/2 MS plates with 0.5% sucrose (w/v) and 0.8% (w/v) agar at pH 5.7 containing either 14N (99.6%) or 15N (98.3%) salts (15NH415NO3 and K15NO3, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc) as the sole nitrogen source. About 5 g of tissue was harvested for each sample, ground in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Immunoprecipitation was performed as described previously with slight modifications77. Briefly, total proteins were extracted in 10 mL of Tris buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 Mm PMSF, 1% Triton X-100 with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor), centrifuged, and filtered through two layers of Miracloth on ice. The flow through was incubated with 20 µg of anti-Flag-agarose antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, A2220) at 4°C for 2 hours. The extracts were followed by four 2-min washes with immunoprecipitation buffer. At the last wash, 14N-labeled WT and 15N-labeled TMK1-Flag IP samples or reciprocal 15N-labeled WT and 14N-labeled TMK1-Flag IP samples were mixed, and 1/20 were eluted with 2 × SDS buffer. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with coomassie brilliant to determine the IP-MS assay. The rest of anti-Flag-agarose IP protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. After Coomassie Brillant blue staining, the whole lane of protein samples were cut into eight segments and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin.

For Phospho-proteome analysis for ABP1 mutant and Clo-0:
The samples were ground into powders with liquid nitrogen in mortar, and lysed in SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH=8.5), 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide). Lysates were heat at 95 °C for 5 min and sonicated (3X 10 Sec). After centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g, protein amount in the supernatants was quantified by BCA kit (ThermoFisher). SDS was removed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method on a centrifugal filter unit (10 kDa MWCO). Proteins were then digested with Lys-C (Promega) at 37 °C for 3 h, trypsin (Promega) was added to a final 1:100 (w/w) enzyme to sample ratio for overnight. The digests were then desalted using a 100 mg Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters)
Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by Fe-NTA Magnetic Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher). Tryptic peptides (200 μg) were reconstituted in 100 μL of binding buffer and loaded onto the Fe-NTA tube. After enrichment, the bound phosphopeptides were eluted and desalted by C18 StageTips. The phosphopeptides were dissolved in 5 μL of 0.2% formic acid (FA) and injected into an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo, Waltham, USA). Peptides were separated on a 350 mm in-house C18 analytical column. The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% FA in ultra-pure water (Buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN (Buffer B) run over a linear 90 min gradient of 3%–25% buffer B at ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min. The Easy-nLC 1200 was coupled online with an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer with the FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo, Waltham, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in the DIA mode in which 60 variable windows covering a mass range of 350–1200 m/z was performed. The resolution was set to 60,000 for MS1 and 30,000 for MS2. The AGC was 3e6 in MS1 and 1e5 in MS2, with a maximum injection time of 50ms in MS1 and auto in MS2. FAIMS separations were performed with the following settings: carrier gas flow = 3.8 L/min, compensation voltage = -45 V/-65 V.


### Data Protocol
For SILIA-MS: The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted as previously described by Ma et al., with slight modifications. Briefly, the peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed with LC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA), equipped with a NanoAcquity liquid chromatography system (Waters).  For protein identification and quantification, Mascot Distiller software version 2.8.3, including the quantitation toolbox, in conjunction with an in-house Mascot 2.7 search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10) database were used. The SILIA ratio (WT/TMK1-Flag) was normalized using the average ratios of non-specific interactor ribosomal proteins (with more than five peptides). 

For phospho-proteomics analysis: The raw files were submitted to DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) for peptide identification and quantitation, and searched against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR 10). The following parameters were used: the library-free mode for in silico library generation, Trypsin/P with maximum 1 missed cleavage; Carbamidomethyl on C as fixed modification; phosphorylation and oxidation as variable modification; peptide length from 6 to 30; precursor charge 2-5; precursor m/z from 300 to 1300; fragment m/z from 200 to 1800; precursor FDR 1%; mass accuracy at MS1 and MS2 set to 0; scan window set to 0; isotopologues and MBR turned on; protein inference at gene level; quantification strategy set to Robust LC (high precision); neural network classifier single-pass mode; cross-run normalization set to RT-dependent. The search results were further filtered with q value <0.01 for protein groups and phosphorylation site confidence was set to 0.01. 

For purified proteins, samples were digested by the FSAP method with trypsin or Glu-C. The LC/MS analyses were performed on a timsTOF Pro2 (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer using a 65 min LC gradient. Peptides and proteins were identified through automated database searching using MaxQuant (version 2.2.0.0) against Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10) database.


### Publication Abstract
Extracellular perception of auxin, an essential phytohormone in plants, has been debated for decades. Auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) physically interacts with quintessential transmembrane kinases (TMKs) and was proposed to act as an extracellular auxin receptor, but its role was disputed because abp1 knockout mutants lack obvious morphological phenotypes. Here, we identified two new auxin-binding proteins, ABL1 and ABL2, that are localized to the apoplast and directly interact with the extracellular domain of TMKs in an auxin-dependent manner. Furthermore, functionally redundant ABL1 and ABL2 genetically interact with TMKs and exhibit functions that overlap with those of ABP1 as well as being independent of ABP1. Importantly, the extracellular domain of TMK1 itself binds auxin and synergizes with either ABP1 or ABL1 in auxin binding. Thus, our findings discovered auxin receptors ABL1 and ABL2 having functions overlapping with but distinct from ABP1 and acting together with TMKs as co-receptors for extracellular auxin.

### Keywords
Auxin receptor, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Peking University Institute of Advanced Agricultural Sciences,
Peking University Institute of Advanced Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
guochen qin

### Lab Head
Dr guochen qin
Peking University Institute of Advanced Agricultural Sciences,


