### Accession
PXD027297

### Title
Proteome-Level Functional Redundancy in the Human Gut Microbiome

### Description
Here, we quantify the proteome-level functional redundancy in the human gut microbiome using metaproteomics and network approaches.In particular, we used an ultra-deep metaproteomics approach based on high-pH reverse phase fractionation. The data analysis revealed high protein-level functional redundancy and high nestedness in proteomic content networks - bipartite graphs that connect taxa with their expressed functions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion of the individual gut aspirate samples were performed as described previously (Zhang, Li, et al., 2018), with minor modifications. Frozen aliquots of aspirate samples were thawed and subjected to differential centrifugation for microbial cell purification: the samples were first centrifuged at 300 g, 4 °C for 5 min to remove debris; the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min to pellet microbial cells; the pellets were then washed three times by resuspending in cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and centrifuging at 14,000 g, 4 °C for 20 min. Next, the washed microbial cell pellets were resuspended in a cell lysis buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (w/v), 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8.0), and one Roche cOmplete™ mini tablet per 10 mL buffer, followed by ultra-sonication (30 s on, 1 min off, amplitude of 25%, two rounds) using a Q125 Sonicator (Qsonica, LLC). Cell debris was then removed by a centrifugation at 16,000 g, 4 °C for 10 min.
Each of the protein extract was then precipitated in five times its volume of precipitation solution (acetone : ethanol : acetic acid = 49.5 : 49.5 : 1, v:v:v) at −20 °C overnight. The precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifuging at 16,000 g, 4 °C for 20 min, followed by being washed with ice-cold acetone for three times to remove excess SDS that may affect trypsin activity. Next, the washed proteins were resuspended in a buffer containing 6M urea and 1M Tris-HCl (pH = 8.0). Protein concentration was determined by the DC™ assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Canada) following the manufacturer’s manual.
Finally, proteins were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digestion. The samples were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min, then were alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in dark for 40 min. The samples were then diluted 10 times with 1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH = 8.0), followed by trypsin digestion (at a concentration of 1 μg trypsin per 50 μg proteins) at 37 °C for 24 hours. The digests were then acidified to pH = 3 using 10% formic acid, followed by a desalting step using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The cartridges were first activated using 100% acetonitrile, and then equilibrated using 0.1% formic acid (v/v) before passing samples through the columns for three times. Samples bonded to the cartridges were then washed using 0.1% formic acid (v/v), and finally the samples were eluted from the cartridges using the elution solution containing 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v).
Eluted samples were evaporated in a SAVANT SPD1010 SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) to a concentration of 1 μg/μL for high-pH reversed phase fractionation following a previous workflow (Batth, Francavilla and Olsen, 2014), with minor adaptations: 30 μL sample were loaded to a ZORBAX Bonus-RP column (with 3.5 µm C18 resins, ID 2.1 mm, length 50 mm; Agilent Technologies, USA), and fractionated with an Agilent 1200 series HPLC System (Agilent Technologies, Germany). A 60-min gradient consisting of 5 - 35% buffer B (v/v) in 1 - 42 min, and 35 - 50% buffer B in 42 - 45 min at a flow rate of 100 μL/min was used for the fractionation. Here, 10 mM ammonium formate was used as buffer A, and 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile (v/v) was used as buffer B. Ammonium hydroxide was used to adjust the pH of both buffers A and B to 10. Sample fractions were continuously collected into 96 well plates by an Agilent 1100 Series Micro-FC G1364D micro fraction collector (Agilent Technologies, Germany). For each sample, 48 fractions were collected into different wells at 1 min intervals over the first 48 min. The samples were then pooled by combining four fractions at an interval of 12 wells, resulting in 12 fractionated samples per individual microbiome.

### Data Protocol
Database search for the fractionated metaproteomics samples was performed based on the MetaPro-IQ workflow (Zhang et al., 2016). Briefly, a two-step database search was first performed using X!Tandem (version 2015.12.15.2). All sample fractions were searched against the IGC database of human gut microbiome (http://meta.genomics.cn/)(Li et al., 2014) to generate a reduced database, then a classical target-decoy database search was performed using the reduced database to generate confidently identified peptide and protein lists based on a strict filtering criteria of FDR = 0.01. The protein lists for all sample fractions were then combined, and duplicated proteins were removed to generate a combined non-redundant FASTA database using an in-house PERL script. Next, MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) was used to generate quantified protein groups and peptides in each sample using the combined non-redundant FASTA database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as potential modifications. The maximum missed cleavages of trypsin was set as two. The resulting peptide and protein group lists from MaxQuant were then inputted to MetaLab (version 1.2.0) for taxonomic analysis and functional annotation (Cheng et al., 2017). For the taxonomic analysis, identified peptides were mapped to taxonomic lineages based on a built-in pep2tax database in MetaLab. Functional annotation to COG (Galperin et al., 2021) was performed using Diamond (version0.8.35). In addition, KEGG KOs were annotated using GhostKOALA (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000).

### Publication Abstract
Functional redundancy is a key ecosystem property representing the fact that different taxa contribute to an ecosystem in similar ways through the expression of redundant functions. The redundancy of potential functions (or genome-level functional redundancy [Formula: see text]) of human microbiomes has been recently quantified using metagenomics data. Yet, the redundancy of expressed functions in the human microbiome has never been quantitatively explored. Here, we present an approach to quantify the proteome-level functional redundancy [Formula: see text] in the human gut microbiome using metaproteomics. Ultra-deep metaproteomics reveals high proteome-level functional redundancy and high nestedness in the human gut proteomic content networks (i.e., the bipartite graphs connecting taxa to functions). We find that the nested topology of proteomic content networks and relatively small functional distances between proteomes of certain pairs of taxa together contribute to high [Formula: see text] in the human gut microbiome. As a metric comprehensively incorporating the factors of presence/absence of each function, protein abundances of each function and biomass of each taxon, [Formula: see text] outcompetes diversity indices in detecting significant microbiome responses to environmental factors, including individuality, biogeography, xenobiotics, and disease. We show that gut inflammation and exposure to specific xenobiotics can significantly diminish the [Formula: see text] with no significant change in taxonomic diversity.

### Keywords
Functional redundancy, Metaproteomics, Network, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Leyuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


