### Accession
PXD021773

### Title
Systematic elucidation of neuron-astrocyte interaction in models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis using multi-modal integrated bioinformatics workflow

### Description
Cell-to-cell communications are critical determinants of pathophysiological phenotypes, but methodologies for their systematic elucidation are lacking.  Herein, we propose an approach for the Systematic Elucidation and Assessment of Regulatory Cell-to-cell Interaction Networks (SEARCHIN) to elucidate ligand-mediated interactions between distinct cellular compartments.  To test this approach, we selected a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), in which astrocytes expressing mutant superoxide dismutase-1 (mutSOD1) kill wild-type motor neurons (MNs) by an unknown mechanism.  Integrative analysis that combines proteomics and regulatory network analysis infers the interaction between astrocyte-released amyloid precursor protein (APP) and death receptor-6 (DR6) on MNs as the top predicted ligand-receptor pair.  The inferred deleterious role of APP and DR6 is confirmed in vitro in models of ALS.  Moreover, the DR6 knockdown in MNs of transgenic mutSOD1 mice attenuates the ALS-like phenotype.  Our results support the usefulness of integrative, systems biology approach to gain insights into complex neurobiological disease processes as in ALS and posit that the proposed methodology is not restricted to this biological context and could be used in a variety of other non-cell-autonomous communication mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
ACM were passed through Q or S columns (Pierce Strong Anion Exchange Spin column, Thermo Scientific #90011; Cation Exchange Spin column, Thermo Scientific #90009). Sample flow-through from the column after passing the sample was discarded. Molecules bound to the column were eluted by increasing concentrations of NaCl (0.5, 1 and 2M respectively). The eluate was desalted using spin columns (Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-3 membrane, Millipore, Cat. # UFC900396). The elute was brought up to original volume and supplemented with HS, B27, P/S, L-glutamine and β-mercaptoethanol and then applied to primary spinal cord MN cultures.  In another set of experiments, ACM media from NTg and mutSOD1 were passed through cut-off filters of 5, 10, 30, 50 and 100 kDa to separate potential toxic moieties based on molecular weight. The components of the ACM retained on the filters were then resuspended in fresh MN culture media before being applied to primary spinal cord MN cultures to examine their effect on viability.  For heat inactivation, ACM from NTg and mutSOD1  astrocytes were incubated in a water bath at 95°C for 15 or 30 min, cooled down to 37°C and then resupplemented with horse serum (2%) and trophic factors before being applied on mouse primary spinal cord MN cultures. To eliminate proteins, ACM from NTg and mutSOD1 were first adjusted to a pH 2.5 with 1N HCl and then incubated with pepsin at 37°C for 2 hours. At the end of the incubation the pH was readjusted to 7.4 with 1N NaOH and ACM were re-supplemented as described above. Control incubations identical to those above were performed except that pH was not adjusted and ACM were kept at room temperature to prevent pepsin activity. For charcoal treatment, ACM were incubated for 5 min at RT with 50 mg/mL charcoal (Norit: activated and neutralized; Sigma 97876), then centrifuged at 11,500xg for 3 min. The supernatants were then filtered and re-supplemented as described above before treatment. For lipid depletion, ACM were mixed with chloroform (v/v), vortexed for 30 sec and centrifuged for 5 min at 750xg. The chloroform phase was then removed and this extraction was repeated twice.  The aqueous phase was then poured in a petri dish and placed in an incubator at 45°C for 30 min to remove all traces of chloroform. Finally, the volumes were readjusted to the original volume of the aqueous phase with sterile water, filtered and re-supplemented.

### Data Protocol
ACM derived from rat astrocytes was analyzed by Gel LC-MS/MS as described previously 24.  Briefly, ACM were resolved on NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).  Proteins were visualized by Colloidal blue (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).  Uniform (2 mm) slices were cut into 1 × 1 mm cubes followed by in-gel digestion with trypsin. Tryptic digests were analyzed on hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a NanoLC pump (Eksigent Technologies, Livermore, CA).  Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant. The raw intensities of peptides in MS1 were transformed to log2 values, which were then used to calculate the difference in relative levels of proteins between mutSOD1 and NTg.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-to-cell communications are critical determinants of pathophysiological phenotypes, but methodologies for their systematic elucidation are lacking. Herein, we propose an approach for the Systematic Elucidation and Assessment of Regulatory Cell-to-cell Interaction Networks (SEARCHIN) to identify&#xa0;ligand-mediated interactions between distinct cellular compartments. To test this approach, we selected a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), in which astrocytes expressing mutant superoxide dismutase-1 (mutSOD1) kill wild-type motor neurons (MNs) by an unknown mechanism. Our&#xa0;integrative analysis that combines proteomics and regulatory network analysis infers the interaction between astrocyte-released amyloid precursor protein (APP) and death receptor-6 (DR6) on MNs as the top predicted ligand-receptor pair. The inferred deleterious role of APP and DR6 is confirmed in vitro in models of ALS. Moreover, the DR6 knockdown in MNs of transgenic mutSOD1 mice attenuates the ALS-like phenotype. Our results support the usefulness of integrative, systems biology approach to gain insights into complex neurobiological disease processes as in ALS and posit that the proposed methodology is not restricted to this biological context and could be used in a variety of other non-cell-autonomous communication mechanisms.

### Keywords
Als, Mutant sod1, Motor neuron, Death receptor-6, Bioinformatics, Non-cell autonomous, Searchin

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Page and William Black Professor of Neurology Vice-Chair, Research Chief, Movement Disorders Division Director, Columbia Translational Neuroscience Initiative Co-Director, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease Co-Director, Thompson Family Foundation Initiativ Departments of Neurology, Pathology & Cell Biology and Neuroscience College of Physicians and Surgeons, Room 5-420 630 West 168th Street Columbia University New York, NY 10032 Phone: 212-342-4119 Fax: 212-342-4512

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Serge Przedborski
Page and William Black Professor of Neurology Vice-Chair, Research Chief, Movement Disorders Division Director, Columbia Translational Neuroscience Initiative Co-Director, Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease Co-Director, Thompson Family Foundation Initiativ Departments of Neurology, Pathology & Cell Biology and Neuroscience College of Physicians and Surgeons, Room 5-420 630 West 168th Street Columbia University New York, NY 10032 Phone: 212-342-4119 Fax: 212-342-4512


