### Accession
PXD031241

### Title
Post-covid surgical complications in adipose tissue

### Description
Spinal cord injury (SCI) patients who underwent reconstructive surgery for pressure ulcers (PU) within 4 weeks of positive SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis were included in this study. Patient’s post-operative progression was registered, while the adipose tissue surrounding the ulcers was analyzed by proteomic and immunohistochemical assays to identify molecular/cellular signatures of impaired recovery.

### Sample Protocol
1. Biopsy Procedure Biopsies were collected from the ulcerated tissue area as well as an adjacent sample consisting of subcutaneous white adipose tissue (WAT) peripheral to the ulcer. Immediately after removal, tissue samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for further protein extraction. Frozen WAT was homogenized overnight at 4 °C in rotation in 0·5 mL of lysis buffer (1% (w/v) SDC; 10 mM TCEP; 100 mM TRIS; 40 mM chloroacetamide; protease and phosphatase inhibitors pH: 8·5). Samples were centrifuged for 15 mins at 2-8 °C at 13000 g. The top layer (adipocytes) was discarded. The resulting liquid layer was isolated, and the remaining pellet discarded. 1.1. 2D-Gel based proteomics Protein samples (150 μg) were precipitated using the 2D Clean-up kit (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences Corp), following manufacturer’s protocol, and then resuspended in rehydration solution containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 Mm Tris, 1% DTT 2 M, 1.2% DeStreak Reagent (GE Healthcare) and 2% IPG buffer (pH 3-11NL, GE Healthcare), to a final volume of 200 μL. Samples were loaded onto the IPG strips (11 cm, pH 3-11NL) by 12 h active rehydration at 50 V and 20 ºC. IPG strips were subjected to IEF in the PROTEAN i12 IEF Cell, following the protocol: 500 V for 30 min, 1000 V for 1 h, linear ramp to 5000 V over 3 h followed by 5000 for 7 hr. A current limit of 50 μA was applied. After IEF, strips were equilibrated with 1% DTT in equilibration buffer (1.5 M Tris, pH 8.8 buffer containing 6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS and bromophenol blue), for 20 min, followed by incubation with 2.5% iodoacetamide in the same buffer for 20 min. SDS-PAGE was performed 1 h 30 min, using the Criterion Cell Electrophoresis System (Bio-Rad), at 15 W/gel. Gels were stained with Page Blue Protein Staining solution (Thermo Scientific). Coomassie stained gels were recorded as digitalized images using an Image Scanner III (GE Healthcare).  1.2.   2.2.1 Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis Spots from 2D-WB were excised and digested according to Schevchenko et al. [ doi: 10.1021/ac950914h] with minor modifications: gel cuts were incubated with 10 mM DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic), for 60min at 37ºC and after reduction, alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide in 50mM Ambic was carried out for 20min at RT. Gel plugs were washed with 50mM Ambic in 50% methanol, rinsed in acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a speedvac. Gel pieces were then embedded in sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a final concentration of 12.5ng/µL in 20 mM Ambic. After digestion at 37 ºC overnight, peptides were extracted with 0.5% formic acid (FA) in 60% ACN, dried in speedvac and resuspended in 2% FA, 2% ACN.  Samples lysates were digested using Single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) according to Hughes et al [doi: 10.15252/msb.20145625]. Samples were reduced and alkylated using DTT and IAA, respectively and then incubated with 6 µL of the prepared bead mix, in 50 µL final volume of H2O. Afterward, EtOH was added to a final concentration of 50% (v/v) and samples were left stirring at 1000 rpm and room temperature for 5 min. Subsequently, beads were immobilized by incubation on a magnetic rack for 2 min. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was rinsed with 80% (v/v) EtOH in water. Beads were resuspended in 300 µl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with trypsin/LysC in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:25 (w/w). After digestion overnight at 37 °C and 1000 rpm, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g, and the supernatant was collected and acidified using 2% FA. 2.2.2. MS Analysis Peptides were separated into an Ekspert™ nanoLC425 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) using a C18 column (ChromXPC18, 3µm, 120Å 0.075 x 150 mm, Eksigent) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min in combination with a precolumn (NanoLC Trap ChromXP C18, 3µm 120Å, Eksigent) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. The buffers used were: A (0.1% FA 2% ACN) and B (0.1% FA, 98% ACN)). Peptides were desalted for 3 min with 0.1% FA/2% ACN on the precolumn, followed by 85 min gradient from 5% to 30% of solvent B, 30%-95% for 0.1 min, and finally 95% of solvent B for 5 min.  Peptides eluted were directly injected into a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer TripleTOF® 6600+ (Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA). Samples were ionized in a source type Optiflow < 1µL Nano applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 125 °C. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent positive ion mode (DDA). Survey MS1 scans were acquired 350-1400 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to “LOW” for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100-1500 m/z for 25 ms in “high sensitivity” mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity 100 counts per second (cps). Up to 100 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set at 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using ProteinPilotTM Software V 5.0 (Sciex) using MASCOT Versions 2.5 (Matrix Science Ltd., UK) and Paragon algorithm [doi: 10.1074/mcp.T600050-MCP200] against the SwissProt-SARS2 database (2021 May, 564,277 sequences; 203340877 residues). Parameters applied: 1 trypsin miss-cleavage; methionine oxidation (variable modification), cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed modification); precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm; MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 amu; significance threshold (p-value) below 0.05 (MudPIT scoring) and minimal protein Mascot score of 56. A False Discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used.

### Publication Abstract
The risk of complications following surgical procedures is significantly increased in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, the mechanisms underlying these correlations are not fully known. Spinal cord injury (SCI) patients who underwent reconstructive surgery for pressure ulcers (PUs) before and during the COVID-19 pandemic were included in this study. The patient's postoperative progression was registered, and the subcutaneous white adipose tissue (s-WAT) surrounding the ulcers was analyzed by proteomic and immunohistochemical assays to identify the molecular/cellular signatures of impaired recovery. Patients with SCI and a COVID-19-positive diagnosis showed worse recovery and severe postoperative complications, requiring reintervention. Several proteins were upregulated in the adipose tissue of these patients. Among them, CKMT2 and CKM stood out, and CKM increased for up to 60 days after the COVID-19 diagnosis. Moreover, CKMT2 and CKM were largely found in MGCs within the s-WAT of COVID patients. Some of these proteins presented post-translational modifications and were targeted by autoantibodies in the serum of COVID patients. Overall, our results indicate that CKMT2, CKM, and the presence of MGCs in the adipose tissue surrounding PUs in post-COVID patients could be predictive biomarkers of postsurgical complications. These results suggest that the inflammatory response in adipose tissue may underlie the defective repair seen after surgery.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Adipose tissue, Covid-19, Surgery, Lc-ms/ms, Pressure ulcers, Spinal cord injury

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz

### Submitter
Carmen Duran

### Lab Head
Dr Carmen Duran-Ruiz
University of Cadiz


