### Accession
PXD024915

### Title
Chemical proteomics identifies a novel off-target protein of small molecule NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor MCC950

### Description
Inhibition of inflammasome and pyroptotic pathways are promising strategies for clinical treatment of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. MCC950, a potent inhibitor of the NLR-family inflammasome pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) protein, has shown encouraging results in animal models for a range of conditions; however, little is known about its off-target effects. We have designed, synthesized and applied a novel photoaffinity alkyne-tagged probe for MCC950 which shows direct engagement with NLRP3 and inhibition of inflammasome activation in macrophages. Affinity-based chemical proteomics in live macrophages identified several potential off-targets, and independent cellular thermal proteomic profiling revealed stabilization of these by MCC950. This is the results of the thermal protein profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of treated cells were heat treated and soluble proteins collected. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, before addition of 0.3 µg trypsin and overnight incubation at 37 °C. TMT10plex™ Isobaric Mass Tag Labelling Reagent (Thermo Scientific) were prepared and incubated with the trypsinised peptides. 50.5 and 60 °C samples of each concentration were in pooled into one 10-plex TMT set, and the 54 and 56 °C into a second 10-plex TMT set. Samples were fractionated into 6 layers on stage-tip membranes, made of 3 layers of sulfonic acid (SCX) membrane. Stage-tip filters were prepared with 3 layers of PVDF Durapore Filter, and were inserted into the caps of labelled LC-MS vials. Samples were resuspended in 10 μL of 2% MeCN, 0.5%TFA in LC-MS grade H2O, before passing through the stage-tips. Peptides were separated on an EASY-SpraTM Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 3-hour gradient of 0–100% (solvent A 2% MeCN with 0.1% formic acid; solvent B 80% MeCN with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans were acquired from 350 to 1800 m/z, with the 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 or higher from each scan selected and fragmented further in MS/MS scans. The following settings were used: • maximum ion injection time: survey scan 20 ms; MS/MS scans 120 ms • ion target value: survey scan 106; MS/MS 105 • intensity threshold: 8.3×102

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis and peptide search using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) using default parameters, except for the ones listed hereafter. Under group-specific parameters and type, reporter ion MS2 was selected, and the appropriate TMT10plex labels selected for lysines and N-termini, with their corresponding correction factors. Oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin/P was set as the digestion mode and re-quantify and match between runs were enabled. Searches were run in the built-in Andromeda search engine using the human Swissprot curated database with isoforms. ProteinGroups output file was loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.0.2) was filtered against ‘only identified by site’, ‘reverse’, and ‘potential contaminants’. Data was log2 transformed and filtered by valid values, retaining only those with 100% valid values.* For pseudo melt curves, from * data was further filtered by valid values, retaining only those with 90% valid values. A two-sample test was performed between the TMT runs, and biased proteins removed. Data was then normalised within each concentration by the subtraction of the 50.5 °C value for that concentration. For analysis within temperature sets, from * TMT data was normalized by subtracting the mean of each row within each TMT plex, before median subtraction across samples (columns).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mcc950, Thp1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Cassandra Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK


