### Accession
PXD019700

### Title
Neuropilin 1 interactome in endothelial cells

### Description
To get unbiased insights on the molecular networks through by which Neuropilin 1 (NRP1) controls endothelial cell (EC) and blood vessel functions independently from its ligands, wehave implemented a Halo Tag (HT)-based approach, which enables effective surface labeling and pull-down of proteins, and combined it with quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were washed three times with lysis buffer with and without detergent and eluted with reducing sample buffer. Proteins eluted in sample buffer were boiled 5 min at 95 °C and separated on 4–12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies) and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were desalted using StageTip, and injected on an EASY‐nLC system coupled on line to a LTQ‐Orbitrap Elite via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 20‐cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reversed‐phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and eluted with a flow of 200 nl/min from 5% to 30% of buffer containing 80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid, in a 90 min linear gradient, as previously described. MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw files wereprocessed with the MaxQuant version 1.5.0.26 and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2012 01, 88,847 entries). Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (methionine) and N-acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. The requantification and match between runs features were enabled. For protein quantification, the label-free quantification (LFQ) was calculated by MaxQuant. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification and we required proteins to be quantified with at least two ratio counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Ms-proteomics, Cell-cell adhesion, Neuropilin, Blood vessels, Vessel permeability, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


