### Accession
PXD028348

### Title
Human sperm tails proteomics - Centrosome enrichment

### Description
The aim of this study was to identify the human sperm tail proteome using normozoospermic samples. In particular, we were interested in identifying the centrosomal proteins present in the human sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Human sperm samples were sonicated and the sperm tails were separated from the heads through a 30% sucrose cushion. To extact centrosomal proteins we used 2 different approaches. In the first approach (3 different experiments) the tails fraction was diluted with the same volume of Buffer 1 (100 mM Tris HCl p.H. 8, 4 mM EGTA, 4 mM EDTA, 1000 mM NaCl, 2% NP40, 0.2% ß-mercaptoethanol, 2mM DTT, protease inhibitors in dH2O) and incubated 1 h at 4˚C under movement. After this incubation, the sample was centrifuged at maximum velocity for 10 min at 4˚C. The pellet and the supernatant were separated in two different tubes to be treated differentially. In the supernatant, the proteins solubilized by buffer 1 are found. 125 µl of 100% trichloroacetic acid was added to the supernatant and kept at 4˚C for 10 min. To pellet the precipitated proteins, the sample was centrifuged at maximum velocity at 4˚C, 5 min. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was washed twice with cold acetone and then dried at 95˚C. Finally, the pellet was diluted with 6 M urea and 200 mM of ABC (ammonium bicarbonate, Sigma, MO, USA) in ddH2O. The pellet fraction from the first extraction was sequentially extracted with extraction buffer 2 (50 mM Tris HCl p.H. 8, 600 mM KSCN, 2 mM DTT, protease inhibitors in dH2O) and extraction buffer 3 (50 mM Tris HCl p.H. 8, 4 M urea, protease inhibitors in dH2O). 3 different extractions diluted in 6 M urea and 200mM ABC were finally obtained for proteomic analysis. In the second approach (1 experiment), the sperm taisl were pelleted at 4˚C at the maximum velocity and diluted with LB (Loading Buffer, 2% w/v SDS, 10% Glycerol, 50 mM Tris-HCl p.H. 6.8, 5% ß-mercaptoethanol). Samples were run on a precasted gradient gel (4 – 15% Criterion TGX, 12+2 wells, 45 μl, BioRad, CA, USA) for 45 min at 60 mA. Gels were stained for 10 min using Coomassie (Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, WA, USA), 10% acetic acid, 50% methanol) and distained with 10% methanol and 10% acetic acid. Gels were cut into 9 bands to process for proteomic analysis. In solution samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT, 37˚C, 60 min and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 25 ˚C, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea for overnight digestion with LysC (Wako, USA) at 37˚C and then diluted 2-fold for 8 h digestion with trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37˚C. Gels band samples were destained with 40% ACN/100mM ABC, reduced with DTT, 10 mM, 56 ˚C, 30 min and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (IAM, 55 mM, 25˚C, 30 min). Gel bands were then dehydrated with ACN and digested overnight with trypsin at 37˚C. After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc, MA, USA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, WA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, WA, USA) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 60 min for the in solution samples and 120 min for the gels. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Ion Trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, WA, USA) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science (Perkins et al. , 1999)) were used. Samples were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (20797 entries). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of three miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR < 5 %.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanism of conversion of the human sperm basal body to a centrosome after fertilization, and its role in supporting human early embryogenesis, has not been directly addressed so far. Using proteomics and immunofluorescence studies, we show here that the human zygote inherits a basal body enriched with centrosomal proteins from the sperm, establishing the first functional centrosome of the new organism. Injection of human sperm tails containing the basal body into human oocytes followed by parthenogenetic activation, showed that the centrosome contributes to the robustness of the early cell divisions, increasing the probability of parthenotes reaching the compaction stage. In the absence of the sperm-derived centrosome, pericentriolar material (PCM) components stored in the oocyte can form de novo structures after genome activation, suggesting a tight PCM expression control in zygotes. Our results reveal that the sperm basal body is a complex organelle which converts to a centrosome after fertilization, ensuring the early steps of embryogenesis and successful compaction. However, more experiments are needed to elucidate the exact molecular mechanisms of centrosome inheritance in humans.

### Keywords
Human, Sperm cells, Centrosome

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Center for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Farners Amargant i Riera

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Vernos
Center for Genomic Regulation


