### Accession
PXD010508

### Title
Activated neutrophils exert myeloid-derived suppressor cell activity, damaging T cells beyond repair

### Description
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have the capacity to suppress T cell-mediated immune responses, and impact clinical outcome of cancer, infections and transplantation settings. Although MDSCs were initially described as bone-marrow-derived immature myeloid cells (either monocytic [m-MDSC] or granulocytic [g-MDSC]), also mature neutrophils have been shown to exert MDSC activity towards T cells, in ways that so far remained unclear. In this study, we demonstrate that human neutrophils – both from healthy donors and cancer patients – do not exert MDSC activity unless they are activated. Using neutrophils with genetically well-defined defects, we found that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and granule-derived constituents are required for MDSC activity after direct CD11b-dependent neutrophil-T cell interactions. Besides these cellular interactions, neutrophils were engaged in the uptake of pieces of T cell membrane, a process called trogocytosis. Together, these interactions led to changes in T cell morphology, mitochondrial dysfunction and ATP depletion, as indicated by electron microscopy, mass spectrometry and metabolic parameters. Our studies characterize the different steps by which activated mature neutrophils induce functional T cell non-responsiveness and irreparable cell damage.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were prepared according to the method described by Kulak et al.(2014) with some adjustments. Briefly, cells were lysed in 30 μL of 1% sodium deoxy cholate (Sigma Aldrich) 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific), 40 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich), 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 (Life Technologies, Paisly, UK) and HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), incubated at 95 °C for 5 minutes and sonicated for 10 minutes in a Sonifier bath (Branson, Dansbury, CT, USA). An equal volume of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich), pH 8.0 was added, containing 200 ng trypsin Gold (Promega, USA) was present. Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature. Subsequently, samples were acidified by addition of 1 µL trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific) and loaded on in-house prepared SDB-RPS STAGEtips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA). Peptides were desalted and eluted in 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (Sigma Aldrich), 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (BioSolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands). Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) to a final volume of 10 μL. 3 μL of each sample was injected for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.3.30. Proteins and peptides were identified with the Andromeda search engine by querying the Human Uniprot database (downloaded March 2017). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ with Perseus 1.6.0.2. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale, the replicates per experimental condition grouped and averaged based on the median, and proteins were filtered for at least two valid values in one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Quantitative significance (Two-sample T-tests (s0=2) and Principal Component Analysis) and MitoCarta2.041 annotation were performed using Perseus software. GO-term enrichments were performed in Cytoscape 3.6.0 using the BiNGO 3.0.3, EnrichmentMap 3.0.0 and stringapp 1.2.2 plugins.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have the capacity to suppress T-cell-mediated immune responses and impact the clinical outcome of cancer, infections, and transplantation settings. Although MDSCs were initially described as bone marrow-derived immature myeloid cells (either monocytic or granulocytic MDSCs), mature neutrophils have been shown to exert MDSC activity toward T cells in ways that remain unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that human neutrophils from both healthy donors and cancer patients do not exert MDSC activity unless they are activated. By using neutrophils with genetically well-defined defects, we found that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and granule-derived constituents are required for MDSC activity after direct CD11b-dependent interactions between neutrophils and T cells. In addition to these cellular interactions, neutrophils are engaged in the uptake of pieces of T-cell membrane, a process called trogocytosis. Together, these interactions led to changes in T-cell morphology, mitochondrial dysfunction, and adenosine triphosphate depletion, as indicated by electron microscopy, mass spectrometry, and metabolic parameters. Our studies characterize the different steps by which activated mature neutrophils induce functional T-cell nonresponsiveness and irreparable cell damage.

### Keywords
Mdsc, Small t cells, Large t cells

### Affiliations
Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology & Infectious Disease, Emma Children’s Hospital, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Cathelijn Aarts

### Lab Head
Dr T.W. Kuijpers
Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology & Infectious Disease, Emma Children’s Hospital, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


