### Accession
PXD018784

### Title
Characterization of PITH domain-containing protein 1 (C1orf128) functionality in olfactory metabolism

### Description
Taking into account the relevance of the smell sense in the early diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases, we have analyzed the expression profile of the dark proteome across public proteomic and transcriptomic data derived from primary olfactory areas such as olfactory bulb (OB) and cleft mucus as well as from specific brain/OB cell linages. In this study, we have used an experimental workflow combining neuropathological diagnosis, co-regulation maps, physical and functional interaction data, transgenic models, intracellular and extracellular proteomics and immunohistochemical and biochemical approaches to partially decipher the UPE1 PITHD1 function in olfactory metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis. ON cells and PITHD1-treated ON cells were harvested after 24 hours (triplicates). After centrifugation (5 min, 300xg), supernatants were discarded and pellets were washed with PBS three times to remove remaining media. Cellular pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM DTT and incubated on ice for 30 min, spinning and vortexing each 10 min. After sonication, homogenates were spinned down at 20000 x g for 1 hour. Protein concentration was measured in the supernatants with the Bradford assay kit (Bio-rad).   Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics using trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS-TOF) - A shotgun comparative proteomic analysis of ON cells was performed combining TMT labeling and TIMS-TOF mass-spectrometry. Briefly, after a precipitation step using the Clean-up kit (BioRad ref.1632130), samples were resuspended in 6M urea and 100mM TEAB. Then, equal amounts of ON protein extract (50µg) were reduced with 200mM TCEP during 1 hour at 55ºC. Cysteine residues were alkylate with 375mM IAA at room temperature for 30 minutes in darkness. Protein enzymatic cleavage was carried out with trypsin (Promega; 1:40, w/w) at 37ºC for 16h. Then, after performing a peptide desalting step (Thermo Scientific, ref. 89852), each tryptic digest was labelled according to the manufacturer’s instructions with one isobaric tag: Tag 126, control 1; tag 127, control 2; tag 128, control 3; tag 129 treated 1; tag 130, treated 2; and tag 131, treated 3. After 1 hour of incubation, each set of labeled samples was independently pooled and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Pooled samples were separated in a HPLC (Agilent Technologies 1200 series) by High pH reverse phase chromatography. High pH fractions were evaporated, resuspended (in 0.1% and loaded onto a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). Samples (approximately 200ng) were  loaded in a nanoEASY trap (Waters) and then resolved in a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) at 300 nl/min with a 15 min gradient (2-35% ACN). Column was heated to 40ºC using an oven.  Protein identification and quantification was carried out using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Purity correction was performed following the instructions of the manufacturers. Peptide-spectra matches were filtered at FDR<1%, leading to a 2% FDR at peptide level, using a decoy-fusion approach. In this approach target and decoy entries of the same protein are concatenated and further separated after the search by checking whether they come from the first or the second half of each concatenated sequence. Thus, the FDR is calculated as the ratio between the number of decoy hits and the number of target hits above a given score threshold.   Then, identified proteins were cut off using a -10logp threshold of 27.5 in order to keep protein-level FDR at 1%. Of these, only proteins identified with at least two different peptides were considered for further analysis. The Perseus software (1.6.10.50) was used for statistical analysis and data visualization. Protein quantification was considered valid with at least two unique peptides for each protein and statistical significance was calculated by a two-way Student t-test (p < 0.05). A 20% fold change cut-off was used to select differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The Human Proteome Project (HPP) consortium aims to functionally characterize the dark proteome. On the basis of the relevance of olfaction in early neurodegeneration, we have analyzed the dark proteome using data mining in public resources and omics data sets derived from the human olfactory system. Multiple dark proteins localize at synaptic terminals and may be involved in amyloidopathies such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). We have characterized the dark PITH domain-containing protein 1 (PITHD1) in olfactory metabolism using bioinformatics, proteomics, in vitro and in vivo studies, and neuropathology. PITHD1<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibit olfactory bulb (OB) proteome changes related to synaptic transmission, cognition, and memory. OB PITHD1 expression increases with age in wild-type (WT) mice and decreases in Tg2576 AD mice at late stages. The analysis across 6 neurological disorders reveals that olfactory tract (OT) PITHD1 is specifically upregulated in human AD. Stimulation of olfactory neuroepithelial (ON) cells with PITHD1 alters the ON phosphoproteome, modifies the proliferation rate, and induces a pro-inflammatory phenotype. This workflow applied by the Spanish C-HPP and Human Brain Proteome Project (HBPP) teams across the ON-OB-OT axis can be adapted as a guidance to decipher functional features of dark proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD018784 and PXD021634.

### Keywords
Hpp, Tmt, Pithd1, Timstof

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Service, CIC bioGUNE, Build. 800 Bizkaia Tech. Park, Zamudio, Spain

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service, CIC bioGUNE, Build. 800 Bizkaia Tech. Park, Zamudio, Spain


