### Accession
PXD005861

### Title
Tripartite symbiosis formed by Pisum sativum, rhizobia and mycorrhiza: Implications for the symbionts, the host plant and the pathogenic fungi

### Description
Ascochyta blight causes severe losses in field pea production and the search for resistance traits towards the causal agent Didymella pinodes is of particular importance to farmers. Various microsymbionts are reported to shape the plants´ immune response. However, regardless their contribution to resistance, they are hardly included in experimental designs. In this project, the bi-directional effect of the symbionts´ (rhizobia, mycorrhiza) and the leaf proteome/metabolome of two field pea cultivars with varying resistance levels towards D. pinodes is delineated.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were sonicated in TRIzol® (80 µL) and after phase separation with 160 µL chloroform, the phenolic phase was transferred and precipitated overnight (-20°C, acetone containing 0.5% β mercaptoethanol). The protein pellet was dissolved in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8) and the protein content was determined via Bradford essay. Per sample, 100 µg protein was digested with lysC (1:100 vol/vol, 5 h, 30 °C, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) and trypsin (1:10, vol/vol, overnight, 37°C, Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). Peptides were desalted with C18-SPEC 96-well plates (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany) and graphite according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo scientific, Pierce® graphite spin columns). Graphite and C18 eluates were combined, split into two technical aliquots and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides of 3 biological replicates were dissolved in 100 µL 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and 1 µg of each sample was applied in random order on a C18 column (15 cm x 50 µm column, PepMap®RSLC, Thermo scientific, 2 µm particle size) and separated during a 90 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 for subsequent measurement on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350-1800 m/z, max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 1000.

### Data Protocol
The Pisum sativum genome remains to be sequenced. Therefore, a database was assembled as previously presented [12], with additional transcript information from Alves-Carvalho, Aubert [22]. Identification and quantification was done with MaxQuant v1.5 [23] with following parameters: first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search tolerance 4.5 ppm, ITMS MS/MS match tolerance 0.6 Da; maximum 3 of the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-term; maximum two missed cleavages allowed; best retention alignment function was determined in a 20 minute window and identifications were matched between runs in a 0.7 min window. A FDR cut-off at 0.01 (at PSM and protein level) was set with aid of a revert decoy db. A minimum of 6 amino acids was required for identification of a peptide and at least two peptides were required for protein identification. For label free quantification (LFQ) at least one MS2 scan was present with a minimum LFQ ratio of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Rhizobia, Mycosphaerella pinodes, Field pea, Proteomics, Mycorrhiza, Metabolomicsfield pea, Ascochyta blight, Pathogen, Legume

### Affiliations
University of Vienna, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Reinhard Turetschek

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
University of Vienna, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology


