### Accession
PXD020565

### Title
"Analysis of Zika virus capsid-Aedes aegypti mosquito interactome reveals pro-viral host factors critical for establishing infection"

### Description
The emergence of mosquito-borne diseases because of climate change emphasizes the need to study arbovirus-vector protein-protein interactions (PPI) to better understand viral replication and transmission. One such human pathogenic arbovirus is Zika virus (ZIKV; Flaviviridae), transmitted by Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. With the lack of molecular tools to study mosquito cells, we developed an Ae. aegypti AF5 cell line stably expressing ZIKV capsid to investigate PPI through label-free quantification proteomics. We identified 157 interactors with 8 potentially pro-viral during ZIKV infection and showed that the transitional endoplasmic reticulum 94 (TER94) protein of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) was important during ZIKV infection in mosquito cells. Silencing TER94 in AF5 cells prevented ZIKV capsid degradation and significantly reduced the establishment of replication at the early stages of infection. Human TER94 ortholog, valosin containing protein (VCP), identified through ortholog mapping, was found to have a similar function during ZIKV infection in A549 cells. ZIKV had reduced ability to replicate when ubiquitination and VCP function were blocked by chemical inhibitors. Furthermore, ubiquitin protein ligase E3 component n-recognin 5 (UBR5) was identified as a TER94/VCP co-factor for capsid interaction. Our study demonstrates a conserved function for TER94/VCP-UPP during early ZIKV infection in mosquito and human cells.

### Sample Protocol
All proteomics experiments were performed at the Fingerprints Proteomics Facility (University of Dundee, https://www.lifesci.dundee.ac.uk/technologies/fingerprints-proteomics-facility). Proteins from IP samples were initially separated by SDS-PAGE with gel selection processing, in-gel reduction/alkylation, and in-gel trypsin digestion. Digested samples were then subjected to LFQ proteomics through nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed with peptide identification and database searching performed in MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16) using Andromeda against the Ae. aegypti proteome (UP000008820) in UniProt104 with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level and peptide spectrum match.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vcp, Ter94, Upp, Aedes aegypti, Zika virus, Capsid, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research

### Submitter
Margus Varjak

### Lab Head
Dr Alain Kohl
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research


