### Accession
PXD022317

### Title
Global lysine acetylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation reveal the metabolism conversion mechanism in Giardia lamblia

### Description
Giardia lamblia (G. lamblia) disease is a zoonosis with a-infection rate affecting the general population of the world. Despite the constant possibility of damage due to their own metabolism, G. lamblia have survived and evolved to adapt to various environments. However, research on energy-metabolism conversion in G. lamblia is limited. This study aimed to reveal the dynamic metabolism-conversion mechanism in G. lamblia under sugar starvation by detecting global lysine acetylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation sites combined with quantitative proteome analyses. A total of 2999 acetylation sites on 956 proteins and 7894 2-hydroxyisobutyryl sites on 1546 proteins were quantified under sugar starvation. Integrated Kac and Khib data revealed that modified proteins were associated with arginine biosynthesis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and alanine, aspartate, and glutamate metabolism. These findings suggested that lysine acetylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation were ubiquitous and provided deep insight into the metabolism-conversion mechanism in G. lamblia under sugar starvation. Overall, these results can help understand the biology of G. lamblia infections and reveal the evolution rule from prokaryote to eukaryote.

### Sample Protocol
Acetyl-Proteomics  Western blot analysis  The G. Lamblia was dissolved in SDS-PAGE loading buffer (250 mM Tris, 1.92 M glycine, and 1% SDS), electrophoresed on an SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to PVDF membrane. After being blocked with Tris-buffered saline containing Tween 20 (TBST) and 5% skim milk for 1 h at 37°C, the membrane was incubated in TBST containing 5% skim milk and the anti-Acetyl antibody (1:1,000 dilution; PTM BIO) for 12 h at 4°C. Next, the appropriate secondary antibody was added and incubation for 1 h at room temperature. Immunoreactive protein bands were detected by chemiluminescence using enhanced chemilumunescence reagents (ECL).  Enrichment of acetylated peptides and sample preparation  Four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the harvested parasites, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times and total protein content was quantified by BCA kit. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and mixtured with TMT/iTRAQ reagent. Then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, and 250 mm length). Sample were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  To enrich acetyl modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore).  LC-MS/MS Analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt Giardia intestinalis WB clone C6 database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylated modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation-Proteomics  The samples were harvest as described in Acetyl-Proteomics. The total proteins were isolated by 20% TCA and digested by trypsin. The 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylated peptides were enriched with pan-anti-Khib–conjugated resin (PTM BioLabs, catalog no. PTM-804) and subjected to HPLC-MS/MS analysis. The HPLC-MS/MS analysis condition was the same as Acetyl-Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis  Protein function annotation analysis  Enrichment analysis for KEGG pathway and PFAM domain was performed using a hypergeometric test in GOstats package in R(27). Protein complexes were enriched basing on that manually curated CORUM protein complex database (28) for all mammals using a hypergeometric test. Unbiased gene ontology terms and UniProt keywords enrichment analyses were performed using a web tool (https://agotool.sund.ku.dk).  Protein-protein interaction network analysis  The STRING database (v10, http://www.string-db.org/) was used for analyzing the protein-protein interaction network of the Acetyl-Proteomics and 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation-Proteomics. Interactions with the highest confidence score (above 0.9) were selected and the network was visualized in Cytoscape (v.3.2.1).  Data Integration between the Acetyl-Proteomics and 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation-Proteomics  In order to explore the potential connections and differences in biological functions (GO, KEGG pathway, protein domains, etc.) of differentially expressed proteins or differentially modified proteins, we clustered the functional enrichment results of differentially expressed proteins and differentially modified proteins. First of all, we performed GO, KEGG pathway, and protein domain enrichment analyses on proteins, acetylated modifications, and 2-hydroxyisobutyryl modifications. For the enrichment test, Fisher's exact test is used here to obtain the p-value. P-value values less than 0.05 and Fold enrichment greater than 1.5 are considered significant. Then group them at different time points, which are 24h vs 0h, 48 h vs 0h, and 72 h vs 0h. Each group contains three types: proteome, acetylation modification, and 2-hydroxyisobutyryl modification. Afterwards, we collect the functional classification enriched by each group and the corresponding enriched P-value. Functional classifications that were significantly enriched (P-value <0.05) were retained in at least one protein group. The P-value data matrix undergoes -ln transform and Z transform. Then use the hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average connected clustering) method for cluster analysis. The clustering relationship is visualized using the heatmap drawn by the R language package heatmap. The horizontal axis of the heat map represents different groups, and the vertical axis is a description of functions (GO, KEGG pathway, protein domain). The color indicates the degree of enrichment. Red means strong enrichment, and blue means weak enrichment. The figure shows the top 50 significantly enriched features.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia lamblia (G.&#xa0;lamblia) is the cause of giardiasis, a common infection that affects the general population of the world. Despite the constant possibility of damage because of their own metabolism, G.&#xa0;lamblia has survived and evolved to adapt to various environments. However, research on energy-metabolism conversion in G.&#xa0;lamblia is limited. This study aimed to reveal the dynamic metabolism conversion mechanism in G.&#xa0;lamblia under sugar starvation by detecting global lysine acetylation (Kac) and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) sites combined with quantitative proteome analyses. A total of 2999 acetylation sites on 956 proteins and 8877 2-hydroxyisobutyryl sites on 1546 proteins were quantified under sugar starvation. Integrated Kac and Khib data revealed that modified proteins were associated with arginine biosynthesis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and alanine, aspartate, and glutamate metabolisms. These findings suggest that Kac and Khib were ubiquitous and provide deep insight into the metabolism conversion mechanism in G.&#xa0;lamblia under sugar starvation. Overall, these results can help delineate the biology of G.&#xa0;lamblia infections and reveal the evolutionary rule from prokaryote to eukaryote.

### Keywords
Giardia lamblia; acetylation; 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; metabolism conversion.

### Affiliations
Jilin Medical University

### Submitter
Wenhe Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xianmin Feng
Jilin Medical University


