### Accession
PXD019552

### Title
Site-Specific Ubiquitination of Pathogenic Huntingtin Attenuates its Deleterious Effects- PART2

### Description
Huntington’s disease (HD) is a progressive incurable neurodegenerative disorder characterized by motor and neuropsychiatric symptoms. It is caused by expansion of a CAG triplet in the N-terminal domain of exon 1 in the huntingtin (HTT) gene that codes for an expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) stretch in the protein product which becomes aggregation-prone. The mutant Htt (mHtt) aggregates are associated with components of the Ubiquitin-Proteasome System (UPS), suggesting that mHtt is marked for proteasomal degradation and that for reasons still debated are not properly degraded. We used a novel HD rat model, proteomic analysis, and long-term live neuronal imaging to characterize the effects of ubiquitination on aggregation of mHtt and its subsequent cellular response. We identified two lysine residues - 6 and 9 - in the first exon of mHtt that are specifically ubiquitinated in striatal and cortical brain tissues of mHtt-transgenic animals. Expression of mHtt exon 1 lacking these ubiquitination sites in cortical neurons and cultured cells was found to slow aggregate appearance rates and reduce their size, but at the same time increase the number of much smaller and less visible ones. Importantly, expression of this form of mHtt was associated with elevated death rates. Furthermore, proteomic analysis indicated that compared to cells expressing the protein that can be modified by ubiquitin, cells expressing the lysine-less protein did not activate protein synthetic pathways that enable the cell to cope with stress. Taken together, the findings suggest a novel role for ubiquitination - attenuation of the pathogenic effect of mHtt.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from control and HTT-mut cells. Proteins were sequentialy extracted or separated on SDS PAGE. The proteins were proteolyzed and analysed by capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (μLC-MS/MS)using Q Exactive plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org)(Cox and Mann 2008) fitted with the Andromeda search engine searching against the Danio rerio Uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive incurable neurodegenerative disorder characterized by motor and neuropsychiatric symptoms. It is caused by expansion of a cytosine-adenine-guanine triplet in the N-terminal domain of exon 1 in the huntingtin (HTT) gene that codes for an expanded polyglutamine stretch in the protein product which becomes aggregation prone. The mutant Htt (mHtt) aggregates are associated with components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, suggesting that mHtt is marked for proteasomal degradation and that, for reasons still debated, are not properly degraded. We used a novel HD rat model, proteomic analysis, and long-term live neuronal imaging to characterize the effects of ubiquitination on aggregation of mHtt and subsequent cellular responses. We identified two lysine residues, 6 and 9, in the first exon of mHtt that are specifically ubiquitinated in striatal and cortical brain tissues of mHtt-transgenic animals. Expression of mHtt exon 1 lacking these ubiquitination sites in cortical neurons and cultured cells was found to slow aggregate appearance rates and reduce their size but at the same time increase the number of much smaller and less visible ones. Importantly, expression of this form of mHtt was associated with elevated death rates. Proteomic analysis indicated that cellular reactions to mHtt expression were weaker in cells expressing the lysineless protein, possibly implying a reduced capacity to cope with the proteotoxic stress. Taken together, the findings suggest a novel role for ubiquitination-attenuation of the pathogenic effect of mHtt.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination huntingtin

### Affiliations
Technion
1The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Haifa 3109601, Israel; 2Network Biology Research Laboratories, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Noam Ziv
1The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Haifa 3109601, Israel; 2Network Biology Research Laboratories, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel


