### Accession
PXD021221

### Title
Proteomics analyses of immature (21 day post infection) Fasciola hepatica

### Description
The major pathogenesis associated with Fasciola hepatica infection results from the extensive tissue damage caused by the tunnelling and feeding activity of immature flukes during their migration, growth and development in the liver. This is compounded by the pathology caused by host innate and adaptive immune responses that struggle to repair this damage. Complementary transcriptomic and proteomic approaches defined the F. hepatica factors associated with their migration in the liver, and the resulting immune-pathogenesis. The liver-stage parasites display different secretome profiles, reflecting their distinct niche within the host, and supports the view that cathepsin peptidases, cathepsin peptidase inhibitors, saposins and leucine aminopeptidases play a central role in the parasite’s destructive migration, digest of host tissue and blood. Immature flukes are also primed for countering immune attack by secreting immunomodulating fatty acid binding proteins (FABP) and helminth defense molecules (FhHDM). The migration of immature F. hepatica parasites within the liver is associated with an increase in protein production, expression of signalling pathways and neoblast proliferation that drive their rapid growth and development. The secretion of a defined set of molecules, particularly cathepsin L peptidases, peptidase-inhibitors, saponins, immune-regulators and anti-oxidants allow the parasite to negotiate the liver micro-environment, immune attack and increasing levels of oxidative stress. This data contributes to the growing F. hepatica -omics information that can be exploited to understand parasite development more fully and for the design of novel control strategies to prevent host liver tissue destruction and pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty six BALB/c mice were infected orally with 30 metacercariae (Italian isolate; Ridgeway Research Ltd). Following 21 days of infection (dpi) the mice were euthanised, and the parasites recovered from the liver for total enumeration, which were then separated into three biological replicates. The recovered parasites termed hereon in as 21-day old immature flukes were washed and incubated for 24h in pre-warmed (37°C) culture medium (RPMI 1640 medium; ThermoFisher Scientific) containing 2mM L-glutamine, 30 mM HEPES, 0.1% (w/v) glucose, and 2.5 µg/ml gentamycin). After the incubation, the parasites were centrifuged at 400 x g and the supernatant, the excretory-secretory (ES) proteins recovered for proteomic analyses. The parasites were washed in PBS and stored at -80°C prior to somatic protein extraction.  Somatic proteins were extracted from three biological replicates of 21-day old immature flukes by homogenization in RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) containing protease inhibitors (cOmplete Ultra tablets; Sigma Aldrich) and placed on ice for 30 min. The extracted proteins were centrifuged at 13, 000 x g for 10 min to remove any insoluble components, quantified using the Bradford assay (BioRad) and the supernatant stored at -20°C until use. The secreted proteins recovered from parasite culture of the 21-day old immature flukes were concentrated 6-fold using an Amicon Ultra 3kDa column (Sigma Aldrich).  For comparative analysis the secreted proteins were recovered from parasite culture of the newly excysted juveniles (NEJ; 24h culture) and the adult liver fluke parasites (5h culture) as previously described (Cwiklinski et al., 2015b; Cwiklinski et al., 2018). In each case the parasite isolate used was the Italian isolate (Ridgeway Research, UK). The adult secreted proteins were concentrated 30-fold using an Amicon Ultra 3kDa column (Sigma Aldrich). Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analyses were performed by the Proteomics Platform of the CHU de Québec Research Center (Quebec, Qc, Canada). Protein samples were acetone precipitated and subsequently solubilized in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1% sodium deoxycholate followed by reduction with 0.2 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min and alkylated with 0.9 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 20 min. Trypsin digestion of the protein samples was performed in solution using 0.2 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were purified by stage tip (C18), vacuum centrifuge dried and then re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid, with final amount of 1 µg of protein being used for analysis by mass spectrometry. The re-suspended peptide samples were separated by online reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany). Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA,USA) utilising the Orbitrap Fusion Tune Application 2.0 and fitted with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., version 2.2.0) and analysed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1), set up to search against a database comprised of gene models identified from the F. hepatica draft genome as utilised for the transcriptome analysis above (version 1.0, 101,780 entries; PRJEB6687; Cwiklinski et al., 2015a), assuming digestion with trypsin with two missed cleavages permitted. Fragment and parent ion mass tolerance were set at 0.60 Da and 10.0 PPM, respectively. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation of methionine specified as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications and calculate protein abundance using the Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Putative annotation of the F. hepatica gene models was assigned based on annotation carried by Cwiklinski et al. (2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica, Somatic proteome, Growth, Lc-ms-ms, Liver, Secretome

### Affiliations
NUI Galway
Molecular Parasitology Lab (MPL),Orbsen Building,  School of Natural Sciences/Ryan Institute National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland

### Submitter
Krystyna Cwiklinski

### Lab Head
Dr John P Dalton
Molecular Parasitology Lab (MPL),Orbsen Building,  School of Natural Sciences/Ryan Institute National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland


