### Accession
PXD019054

### Title
Early cleavage of preimplantation embryos is regulated by tRNAGln-TTG-derived small RNAs present in mature spermatozoa

### Description
Sperm-derived tsRNAs could act as acquired epigenetic factors and contribute to offspring phenotypes. However, the roles of specific tsRNAs in early embryo development remain to be elucidated. Here, by using pigs as a research model, we probed the tsRNA dynamics during spermatogenesis and sperm maturation, and demonstrated the delivery of tsRNAs from semen-derived exosomes to spermatozoa. By microinjection of the antisense sequence into in vitro fertilized oocytes and subsequent single-cell RNA-sequencing of embryos, we identified a specific functional tsRNA group (Gln-TTGs) that participate in the early cleavage of porcine preimplantation embryos, probably by regulating cell cycle-associated genes. Thus, specific tsRNAs present in mature spermatozoa play significant roles during preimplantation embryo development.

### Sample Protocol
Six thousand mature porcine oocytes were pooled and lysed to release proteins by using Pierce IP Lysis Buffer. RNAs (scrambled RNAs, Gln-TTGs and Antisense RNAs) were synthesized by the GenePharma Biotech Company. The 3’ end of RNAs were labeled with desthiobiotin by using PierceTM RNA 3’ End Desthiobiotinylation Kit according to the manufacturer’s guidance. Briefly, a single biotinylated nucleotide was attached to the 3’ end of 50 pmol non-labeled RNAs by T4 ligase. The reactions were incubated at 16 ℃ for 2 h, and then the labeled-RNAs were precipitated and diluted in nuclease-free water. Next, RNA pull-down was conducted by using the PierceTM Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit. In brief, streptavidin agarose beads were washed twice with 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5). Biotinylated RNAs (50 pmol) were added to streptavidin beads and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, with rotation in 50 μl RNA capture buffer. After incubation, the immobilized biotinylated RNA-streptavidin complexes were washed by 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5) followed by Protein-RNA Binding buffer. After washing, the immobilized biotinylated RNA-streptavidin complexes were incubated with a mixture composed of protein lysates, 50% glycerol and Protein-RNA Binding buffer for 1 h at 4 ℃ with rotation. After washing with the wash buffer for 3 times, 50 μl elusion buffer was added to the beads and incubated for 30 min at 37 ℃ with agitation to acquire the RNA-binding proteins. The bound proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS at the APT Biotech. In details, proteins for each sample were mixed with loading buffer and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel, which were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Gel pieces were de-stained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Then, the in-gel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (100 mM DTT/ 100mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at 56 ℃. After that, proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (200 mM IAA/ 100mM NH4HCO3) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Gel pieces were rinsed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN. Gel pieces were digested with 12.5 ng/μl trypsin overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, the peptides were extracted three times with 60% CAN/0.1% TFA, which were further pooled and dried completely by a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Q Exactive mass sperctrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific) for 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300 - 1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Version 2.2), embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 against Uniport Pig database (50040 total entries, downloaded 23/05/2018) and the decoy database. For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da, Enzyme = Trypsin, Missed cleavage = 2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification: Oxidation (M), FDR ≤ 0.01. The RNA pull-down proteins in the tsRNA or in the Anti group were picked up by subtracting the proteins in the NC group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sperm maturation, Spermatogenesis, Tsrnas, Embryo development

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of the Ministry of Agriculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Xiaoxu Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxian Zeng
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of the Ministry of Agriculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.


