### Accession
PXD007034

### Title
Dynamic T. vaginalis secretome and secretion of β-amalyses

### Description
During infection of the urogenital tract, the parasite Trichomonas vaginalis is challenged by factors such as nutrient limitation, the host immune response and coexistence with other members of the microbial fauna. Thus establishment of trichomonad infection depends on multifactorial host-parasite interactions, that involve both contact-dependent mechanisms, such as adherence to vaginal epithelial cells, contact-dependent extracellular killing of host cells, and active phagocytosis of host cells and bacteria, as well as contact independent mechanisms that include secretion of soluble biologically active molecules. To get more insight into the secreted proteome of T. vaginalis we detected and quantified released proteins at consecutive time points. Out of 2072 detected proteins, 89 were estimated to significantly increase in time. These include leishmaniolysin-like metallopeptidases, cathepsin-like cystein peptidases and a number of proteins involved in sugar metabolism, most notably beta-amylases, which may be significant in utilization of host-cell derived glycogen. We further discovered a large group of secreted hypothetical proteins with predicted triple tyrosine domain that may facilitate interaction with the extracellular matrix of the host epithelium.

### Sample Protocol
Samples  were dissolved in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonare buffer (TEAB)  buffer with 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), reduced with 5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) for 30 min at 60 °C, and alkylated with 10 mM  MMTS (S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate )for 10 min at room temperature. Total protein concentrations were measured with bicinchoninic acid assay  (Sigma pn:BCA1-1KT ). 100 g of proteins were digested with trypsin (trypsin:protein ratio 1:50) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added. SDC was removed by extraction to ethyl acetate as described by (Masuda et al., 2008). Remaining ethylacetate was removed using vacuum centrifugation at 45°C for 10 min and then 1% TFA was added. Samples were desalted using C18 sorbent (Supelco pn: 66883-U) as described (Ishihama, 2005, J. Proteome Res.). Eluents were dryed and resuspended in 20 l of  1% TFA. 2 g of samples were used for nanoLC-MS analysis. Three technical replicates were run for each biological sample. Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for nanoLC-MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 2% to 40% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Scientific). Spectra were acquired with 2 seconds duty cycle. Full MS spectra were acquired in orbitrap within mass range 350 - 1400 m/z with resolution 120 000 at 200 m/z and maximum injection time 50 ms. Most intense precursors were isolated by quadrupole with 1,6 m/z isolation window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with collision energy set to 30 %. Fragment ions were detected in ion trap with scan range mode set to normal and scan rate set to rapid with maximum injection time 35 ms. Fragmented precursors were excluded from fragmentation for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the data were processed with  MaxQuant LFQ version 1.5.8.3 (Cox, Mol Cell Proteomics., 2014).  Searches  were performed using latest version of T.vaginalis database from Uniprot (release 2017_4) and common contaminant  database Protein modification were set: Cystein  (unimod nr:39) as static, and methionoine oxidation (unimod : 1384 ) and  protein N terminus acetylation (unimod : 1) as variable. Precursor mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da. FDR  (false discovery rate) for peptide and for protein was set on 1%. Further MaxQuant results data processing   were done in Perseus software (Tyanova, S.,Nature Methods, 2016.).   LFQ values (normalized value of intensity directly proportional to real protein amount)  were converted on to logarithm in base 2  and proteins with valid values in at  least two biological replicates with two valid values within technical were used for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
The secretion of virulence factors by parasitic protists into the host environment plays a fundamental role in multifactorial host-parasite interactions. Several effector proteins are known to be secreted by <i>Trichomonas vaginalis</i>, a human parasite of the urogenital tract. However, a comprehensive profiling of the <i>T. vaginalis</i> secretome remains elusive, as do the mechanisms of protein secretion. In this study, we used high-resolution label-free quantitative MS to analyze the <i>T. vaginalis</i> secretome, considering that secretion is a time- and temperature-dependent process, to define the cutoff for secreted proteins. In total, we identified 2 072 extracellular proteins, 89 of which displayed significant quantitative increases over time at 37 &#xb0;C. These 89 <i>bona fide</i> secreted proteins were sorted into 13 functional categories. Approximately half of the secreted proteins were predicted to possess transmembrane helixes. These proteins mainly include putative adhesins and leishmaniolysin-like metallopeptidases. The other half of the soluble proteins include several novel potential virulence factors, such as DNaseII, pore-forming proteins, and &#x3b2;-amylases. Interestingly, current bioinformatic tools predicted the secretory signal in only 18% of the identified <i>T. vaginalis</i>-secreted proteins. Therefore, we used &#x3b2;-amylases as a model to investigate the <i>T. vaginalis</i> secretory pathway. We demonstrated that two &#x3b2;-amylases (BA1 and BA2) are transported via the classical endoplasmic reticulum-to-Golgi pathways, and in the case of BA1, we showed that the protein is glycosylated with multiple <i>N</i>-linked glycans of Hex<sub>5</sub>HexNAc<sub>2</sub> structure. The secretion was inhibited by brefeldin A but not by FLI-06. Another two &#x3b2;-amylases (BA3 and BA4), which are encoded in the <i>T. vaginalis</i> genome but absent from the secretome, were targeted to the lysosomal compartment. Collectively, under defined <i>in vitro</i> conditions, our analysis provides a comprehensive set of constitutively secreted proteins that can serve as a reference for future comparative studies, and it provides the first information about the classical secretory pathway in this parasite.

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Secretome

### Affiliations
Charles University
Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Parasitology, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595, 252 42 Vestec,

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Tachezy
Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Parasitology, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595, 252 42 Vestec,


