### Accession
PXD009681

### Title
Nuclear PTEN safeguards pre-mRNA splicing to link Golgi apparatus for its tumor suppressive role

### Description
Dysregulation of pre-mRNA alternative splicing (AS) is closely associated with cancers. However, the relationships between the AS and classic oncogenes/tumor suppressors are largely unknown. Here we show that the deletion of tumor suppressor PTEN alters pre-mRNA splicing in its phosphatase-independent manner, and identify262 PTEN-regulated AS events in 293T cells by RNA sequencing, which are associated with significant worse outcome of cancer patients. Based on these findings, we report that nuclear PTEN interacts with the splicing machinery, spliceosome, to regulate its assembly and pre-mRNA splicing. Especially, the exon-2b exclusion of GOLGA2 contributes to PTEN knockdown-induced tumorigenesis by promoting dramatic Golgi extension and secretion, and PTEN depletion significantly sensitizes cancer cells to secretion inhibitors, Brefeldin A and Golgicide A. Given that many cancers lack PTEN expression, our results suggest that Golgi secretion inhibitors alone or in combination with PI3K/Akt kinase inhibitors may be therapeutically useful for PTEN-deficient cancers.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were subjicted to co-IP using anti-PTEN antibody and normal IgG. The immunoprecipitates were identified by LC-MS/MS.  The same experiments were performed twice. PTEN_1 and IgG_1 represent two groups of the first experiment. PTEN_2 and IgG_2 represent two groups of the second experiment.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS ion spectra were extracted by ProteoWizard msConvert and were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the uniport_human database (88625 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme semiTrypsin allowed for two missed tryptic cleavages with full mass from 600 to 4600. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm(38). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of pre-mRNA alternative splicing (AS) is closely associated with cancers. However, the relationships between the AS and classic oncogenes/tumor suppressors are largely unknown. Here we show that the deletion of tumor suppressor PTEN alters pre-mRNA splicing in a phosphatase-independent manner, and identify 262 PTEN-regulated AS events in 293T cells by RNA sequencing, which are associated with significant worse outcome of cancer patients. Based on these findings, we report that nuclear PTEN interacts with the splicing machinery, spliceosome, to regulate its assembly and pre-mRNA splicing. We also identify a new exon 2b in GOLGA2 transcript and the exon exclusion contributes to PTEN knockdown-induced tumorigenesis by promoting dramatic Golgi extension and secretion, and PTEN depletion significantly sensitizes cancer cells to secretion inhibitors brefeldin A and golgicide A. Our results suggest that Golgi secretion inhibitors alone or in combination with PI3K/Akt kinase inhibitors may be therapeutically useful for PTEN-deficient cancers.

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Alternative splicing, Golga2, Protein-protein interaction, U2af2, Golgi, Pten, Tumor suppressor

### Affiliations
1Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM), Shanghai 200025, China. 2Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences of Chinese Academy of Sciences and SJTU-SM, Shanghai 200025, China.
Department of Core Facility of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Li Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Guo-Qiang Chen
1Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM), Shanghai 200025, China. 2Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences of Chinese Academy of Sciences and SJTU-SM, Shanghai 200025, China.


