### Accession
PXD028355

### Title
THE PHARMACOLOGICAL RESCUE OF CFTR BY LUMACAFTOR (VX-809) IN THE CYSTIC FIBROSIS BRONCHIAL EPITHELIUM IS ASSOCIATED WITH AN EXTENSIVE REORGANIZATION OF MITOCHONDRIA.

### Description
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder CF is caused by mutations of the gene encoding for the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein (CFTR), a transmembrane anion channel expressed at the apical membrane of several organs, including the epithelial cells of the airway. CFTR mutations result in dysfunctional ion transport across the apical membrane at the surface of the epithelia, generating thickened and dehydrated secretions. In the lung, this leads to a decrease in the mucociliary clearance, favoring bacterial colonization and progressive obstruction of the duct. Although over 2000 CFTR variants have been identified so far, the most common mutation is a deletion of the phenylalanine in position 508 (F508del), which shows an allelic frequency of around 90% among CF patients. F508del-CFTR is incorrectly folded, causing its retention at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and subsequent proteasomal degradation. Among the several drugs available in CF pharmacological treatment, VX-809 (commercial name Lumacaftor) is the most used drug for patients carrying F508del-CFTR mutation. This drug corrects the aberrant folding of F508del-CFTR by favoring the correct intramolecular interactions, thus enabling a higher number of copies of the defective protein to reach the plasma membrane. We applied SWATH-based proteomics to understand if a pharmacological rescue of F508del-CFTR is associated with changes in global protein expression of the human bronchial epithelium by using the CFBE41o- cell model, a line that stably expresses F508del-CFTR.

### Sample Protocol
CFBE41o- cells overexpressing F508del-CFTR (5 million cells per condition) were plated on 60 mm Petri and treated for 24 h with vehicle alone (DMSO), or VX-809 1 μM.  Five independent biological replicates were prepared. Cells were harvested in PBS Ca2+/Mg2+ free and pelleted by centrifugation 4 °C at 2000 rpm, the supernatant was discarded. Cells pellets were then resuspended in H2O (50 μL), transferred to glass vials, and crushed with 1 mL isopropanol, vortexed for 10 minutes and sonicated for 10 minutes at RT. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 minutes, and, after discarding the surnatant, the pellets were dried under nitrogen under the fume hood. The protein lysates were then re-dissolved in 400 µL of SDS 2% and a BCA assay was performed to measure  protein concentration. From each sample, a volume corresponding to 50 µg of proteins was transferred to Eppendorf tubes and 10 µL of reducing solution (100 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM NH4HCO3) were added. Samples  were then incubated at 56 °C for 30 minutes to reduce disulphide bonds. 30 µL of alkylating solution (100 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3) were then added and samples were vortexed and incubated at RT for 20 minutes in the dark to alkylate cysteine residues. After spinning the tubes, 1 mL of cold acetone was added to each tube and samples were incubated at -20 °C overnight to precipitate proteins. Samples were then centrifuged at 20000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C, the supernatant was removed and pellets was washed with 500 µL of cold methanol, vortexed for 1 minute and centrifuged at 20000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and protein pellets dried again under the fume hood. Each sample was then re-dissolved in 70 µL of Rapigest solution (Waters Inc, Milford, MS, USA). After vortexing for 1h, 2 µL of trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, 0.5 µg/µL) were added. Tubes were incubated at 37 °C in a shaker at 600 rpm overnight. To remove Rapigest before analysis, 7 µL of trifluoroacetic acid 5% were added and samples were incubated at 37 °C in a shaker at 600 rpm for 45 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 20000 g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, transferred to new  tubes and dried down in a speed-vac evaporator. The day of analysis, the peptides were re-suspended in 50 µL of 3% acetonitrile added with 0.1% formic acid.  QC samples were prepared by pooling together equal aliquots of the ten samples. Samples from controls, treated and QC groups were then acquired in a randomized way by high-resolution LC-MS for a total of 15 runs. A nanoUPLC Acquity chromatographic system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a TripleTof 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX) was used.  Eluents were: A (water +0.1% formic acid) and B (acetronitrile +0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was set to 5 µL (Full Loop), flow rate was set to 5 µL/min. The peptides were loaded and desalted on a trapping column (Guard column YMC-Triart C18, 3 µm particle size, 0.5 x 5 mm, 1/32’’ ) at 1% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid for 5 minutes then moved on a reversed-phase C18 column (Eksigent C18, 3 µm particle size, 0.3 x 150 mm format), kept at 45 °C. Peptides were eluted with the following gradient program: 0,0 -1,0 min 2 % B; 1,0 - 60,0 min 2 to 35 % B; 60,0 – 63,0 min 35 to 95 % B; 63,0 – 68,0 min 95% B and 68,0 – 68,1 min 95 back to 2 % B. The column was then reconditioned for 12 min. The total run time was 80 min. A mixture of triptic peptides from bovine serum albumin was analyzed every 5 runs and used for mass recalibration. Analysis was performed in SWATH DIA (data independent acquisitions) mode, in positive ESI mode. A TOF MS Scan was set from 350 to 1,250 m/z with a survey scan of 50 ms. 100 SWATH experiments, with an accumulation time of 25 ms each, were collected from 100 to 1500 m/z in High Sensitivity mode. The total cycle time was ̇2.6 sec. The collision energy for each SWATH experiment was automatically calculated by the acquisition software using the equation: CE=0.063(m/z) −3.24. The ion source parameters were: ion spray voltage floating at 5000 V, Ion source gas 1 at 30, curtain gas at 30, declustering potential at 80 V.

### Data Protocol
The SWATH-MS raw data were analyzed by using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0.1.2133 incorporated in PeakView software 2.2 (SCIEX). An ion library, specifically dedicated to CFBE41o- cells was used (doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2018.10.004). For protein quantification, the following peptide filter parameters were used: number of peptides per protein at 6, number of transition per peptide at 6, peptide confidence threshold at 99%, FDR threshold at 1%, maximum mass tolerance at 50 ppm, modified peptides were excluded. For further processing, only proteins quantified by at least 2 peptides were retained. Data was normalized using the MLR algorithm (10.1074/mcp.M115.055558). Multivariate data analysis was then performed by using MetaboAnalyst web-based software (doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab382). Only features showing a percent coefficient of variation (CV%) lower than 25% in QC samples were retained, for a total of 3432 quantified proteins. Proteins quantified but showing higher CV% in quality check samples (pools of aliquots from all the samples) were excluded. Data were not transformed, but simply Pareto-scaled to perform PCA analysis and the subsequent t-test statistics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vx-809, Proteomics, Cystic fibrosis, Cfbe41o- cells

### Affiliations
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy

### Submitter
Clarissa Braccia

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy


