### Accession
PXD004859

### Title
Anal Canal Cancer : subclassification

### Description
Etiologically linked to HPV infection, malignancies of the anal canal have substantially increased in incidence over the last 20 years. Although most anal squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) respond well to chemoradiotherapy, for undetermined reasons, a subgroup of patients experience a poor outcome. Despite cumulative efforts for discovering independent predictors for overall survival, both nodal status and tumor size are still the only reliable factors predicting patient outcome. In the present study, we correlated both proteomic signatures and clinicopathological features of neoplastic lesions arising from two distinct portions of the anal canal: the lower part (squamous zone) and the more proximal anal transitional zone. Although microdissected cancer cells appeared indistinguishable by morphology (squamous phenotype), unsupervised clustering analysis of the whole proteome significantly highlighted the heterogeneity that exists within anal canal tumors. More importantly, two region-specific subtypes of SCC were revealed. The expression profile (sensitivity/specificity) of several selected biomarkers (keratin filaments) further confirmed the subclassification of anal (pre)cancers based on their cellular origin. Less commonly detected compared to their counterparts located in the squamous mucosa, SCC originating in the transitional zone displayed more frequently a poor or basaloid differentiation and were significantly correlated with reduced disease-free and overall survivals. Taken together, we present for the first time direct evidence that anal canal SCC comprises two distinct entities with different cells of origin, proteomic signatures and survival rates. This study forms the basis for a novel dualistic classification of anal carcinoma with implications for management, outcome expectations and possibly therapeutic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Laser capture microdissection and sample processing:
Sections (6 µm thick) of anal squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) specimens were deparaffinized and rehydrated in graded alcohols. For laser capture microdissection, tissue sections were dried and ~5,000 cancer cells were captured onto high recovery tube caps using a Leica LMD7000 system (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Quantification of neoplastic cells was previously performed on one serial section [Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining] by computerized image analysis (Mesurim Pro software, Amiens, France). The detailed experimental procedure for sample processing was recently described (19). The microdissected tissue pieces were first centrifuged at 15000g for 5 min in order to transfer these latter from the cap to the bottom of the tubes. The specimens were then suspended in 20µl of citric acid (10mM, pH6) and sonicated for 10 min. Heat induced antigen retrieval was performed at 99°C for 60 min while shaking at 800 rpm. During this step, the eppendorfs were briefly centrifugated every 10 min in order to collect the condensed water from the cap to the bottom. The samples were then cooled at room temperature and the detergent RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA) that can be used during digestion and removed without clean up was added (final concentration: 0.01%), thus enhancing the solubilization and extraction of the proteins while being digested. Prior to enzymatic digestion, pH was adjusted to 7.4 by adding 500mM NH4HCO3 and the samples were reduced [10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 40 min at 56°C] and alkylated [20mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 30 min at room temperature]. 11 mM DTT was finally added in each sample in order to remove IAA in excess. The trypsin digestion was performed using 60μg/ml high purified porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) at 37°C for 16h (in NH4HCO3 solution) followed by a second digestion step (30μg/ml trypsin in 80% acetonitrile, 3h) allowing the digestion of the most hydrophobic proteins. High trypsin concentrations were used in order to insure an optimal "on-tissue" digestion (19). The enzymatic reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration: 0.5%) and the solutions were incubated at 37°C for 45 min. The tubes were centrifuged at 15000g for 10 min (4°C) and the supernatants were collected. The peptide mixtures were dried using a speedvac and desalted using ZipTip microcolumns according to the manufacturer's instructions (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The samples were finally resuspended in 10µl NH4CHO2 buffer (100 mM) containing MPDS mix (1 or 2) with protein digests of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (50 fmol).

Liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and data analysis:
The separation of digested peptides was performed by reversed-phase chromatography using a nanoACQUITY two-dimensional UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray source. Similarly to other studies using restricted tissue specimens (20-22), each peptide digest/extract was loaded in the column without previous peptide dosage. The 2D-nano LC system was used with a reversed-phase pH 10/reversed-phase pH 3-based separation. The first dimension separation was made at 2 μl/min (20 mM ammonium formate solution adjusted to pH 10) on an X-Bridge BEH C18 5 μm column (300 μm x 50 mm). Three elution steps were performed on this pH 10 column by increasing the percentage of acetonitrile (13.3%, 19% and 65% for fractions 1, 2 and 3 respectively). After a 1:9 dilution with acidified water, the eluted peptides were loaded on the trap column Symmetry C18 5μm (180 μm x 20 mm) followed by a separation on analytical column BEH C18 1.7 μm (75 μm x 250 mm) (Waters). The same analytical run (180 min) was used for the 3 fractions coming from pH 10 column. The flow rate was constant at 250 nl/min with a linear gradient ranging from 99% water 0.1% formic acid (v/v) to 93% after 5 minutes and 65% after 140 minutes. Solvent B was acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid (v/v). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive nanoESI mode with main source parameters as follows: spray voltage of 1.9 kV (first campaign) and 2.2 kV (second campaign), capillary temperature of 270°C and an S-Lens RF level of 50. Data were acquired in data dependent mode with a Top10 method. Resolution was set to 70000 for full MS (range 400 to 1750 m/z) and 17500 for MS/MS acquisitions. The automatic gain control (AGC) target and maximum injection time were respectively set to 1x106 and 200 ms for MS and 1x105 (underfill ratio of 1%) and 200 ms for MS/MS. A 2 m/z isolation window was used for selection of precursors and a stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) of 21.2, 25 and 28.8 was used for activation of ions. A dynamic exclusion of 10 seconds was used. The singly charged peaks and unassigned charge states were discarded for the MS/MS selection. 

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) was used to analyze raw mass spectrometric files (23). The following parameters were selected: N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed variation. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (version 2015-04). Seven amino acids were the minimum peptide length and at least two peptides per protein were required for identification, including at least one unique peptide and one razor peptide. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm (main search). The use of label-free quantification algorithms allowed a "global normalization" tolerating slight differences in the overall amount of injected peptides generated by technical or analytical variations between the samples to be compared.
Finally, Perseus software (version 1.5.0.15) was used to perform further downstream statistical/bioinformatic analyses of the MaxQuant processing results (principal component analysis, vulcano plot, heatmap, sample-to-sample comparisons, hierarchical clustering). All data were log2 transformed and z-score normalization was applied before hierarchical clustering of significantly different proteins. Principal component analysis was conducted using all data sets. R-based two sample t tests (FDR <0.01, S0 value =1) were used to identify proteins significantly more abundant in one group compared to another. Fisher’s exact test was used to extract enriched Gene Ontology terms and KEGG-pathways (enrichment factor >2.1, p<0.001).  

### Publication Abstract
Aetiologically linked to HPV infection, malignancies of the anal canal have substantially increased in incidence over the last 20 years. Although most anal squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) respond well to chemoradiotherapy, about 30% of patients experience a poor outcome, for undetermined reasons. Despite cumulative efforts for discovering independent predictors of overall survival, both nodal status and tumour size are still the only reliable factors predicting patient outcome. Recent efforts have revealed that the biology of HPV-related lesions in the cervix is strongly linked to the originally infected cell population. To address the hypothesis that topography also influences both gene expression profile and behaviour of anal (pre)neoplastic lesions, we correlated both proteomic signatures and clinicopathological features of tumours arising from two distinct portions of the anal canal: the lower part (squamous zone) and the more proximal anal transitional zone. Although microdissected cancer cells appeared indistinguishable by morphology (squamous phenotype), unsupervised clustering analysis of the whole proteome significantly highlighted the heterogeneity that exists within anal canal tumours. More importantly, two region-specific subtypes of SCC were revealed. The expression profile (sensitivity/specificity) of several selected biomarkers (keratin filaments) further confirmed the subclassification of anal (pre)cancers based on their cellular origin. Less commonly detected compared to their counterparts located in the squamous mucosa, SCCs originating in the transitional zone more frequently displayed a poor or basaloid differentiation, and were significantly correlated with reduced disease-free and overall survivals. Taken together, we present direct evidence that anal canal SCC comprises two distinct entities with different cells of origin, proteomic signatures, and survival rates. This study forms the basis for a dualistic classification of anal carcinoma, with implications for management, outcome expectations, and possibly therapy. Copyright &#xa9; 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

### Keywords
Anal, Transitionnal zone, Hpv

### Affiliations
University of Liege
Head of Department (Pathology), University of Liege, Liege, Belgium

### Submitter
Nicolas Smargiasso

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Delvenne
Head of Department (Pathology), University of Liege, Liege, Belgium


