### Accession
PXD015202

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveal an Altered Pattern of Protein Expression in Brain Tissue from Mice Lacking GPR37 and GPR37L1

### Description
GPR37 and GPR37L1 are glia-enriched GPCRs that have been implicated in several neurological and neurodegenerative diseases. To gain insight into the potential molecular mechanisms by which GPR37 and GPR37L1 regulate cellular physiology, proteomic analyses of whole mouse brain tissue from wild-type (WT) versus GPR37/GPR37L1 double knockout (DKO) mice were performed in order to identify proteins regulated by the absence versus presence of these receptors. These analyses revealed a number of proteins that were significantly increased or decreased by the absence of GPR37 and GPR37L1. One of the most decreased proteins in the DKO versus WT brain tissue was S100A5, a calcium-binding protein, and the reduction of S100A5 expression in KO brain tissue was validated via Western blot. Co-expression of S100A5 with either GPR37 or GPR37L1 in HEK293T cells did not result in any change in S100A5 expression but did robustly increase secretion of S100A5. To dissect the mechanism by which S100A5 secretion was enhanced, cells co-expressing S100A5 with the receptors were treated with different pharmacological reagents. These studies revealed that calcium is essential for the secretion of S100A5 downstream of GPR37 and GPR37L1 signaling, as treatment with BAPTA-AM, an intracellular Ca2+ chelator, reduced S100A5 secretion from transfected HEK293T cells. Collectively these findings provide a panoramic view of proteomic changes resulting from loss of GPR37 and GPR37L1 and also impart mechanistic insight into the regulation of S100A5 by these receptors, thereby shedding light on the functions of GPR37 and GPR37L1 in brain tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue preparation for proteomic analysis Proteomic data was generated as stated in Smith et al. (2017).23 Brain lysates were prepared from 3-month-old WT (n=3) and GPR37L1/GPR37 double knockout mice (n=3) in urea buffer (8M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5) with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Pierce) and processed at the Emory Proteomics Core. An aliquot of 100 μg from each sample was treated with 1 mM (final concentration) dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes followed by 5 mM (final concentration) iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark. Both steps were performed at room temperature. The protein mixtures were digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25oC for 2 hours. Trypsin (Promega) was then added at 1:50 (w/w) and digestion was allowed to proceed overnight. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum.  Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Dried peptides were resuspended in peptide 100 μL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% TFA, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (2 μL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 μm Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 μm internal diameter (ID); New objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSL CNano and monitored on a Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 140 minute gradient at a rate of 300nl/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 99% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The gradient starts off at 3% B and goes to 10% within 5 minutes, then from 10% to 40% within 100 minutes, then from 40% to 60% within 20 minutes, then from 60% to 99% in 5 minutes, and finally settling at 99% for the rest of the gradient. The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The spray voltage starts off at 2 kV and changes to 2.2 kV at 75 minutes. The MS scans (400-1500 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode. The higher energy dissociation (HCD) MS2 spectra (1.6 m/z isolation width, 0.5 m/z offset, 32% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap in centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.  Database search and label-free quantification The Raw LC-MS/MS data was then analyzed via MaxQuant v1.5.4.1 using Andromeda search employing a target-decoy paradigm to control MS/MS peptide spectral match false discovery rate, and a database of contaminants plus the mouse Uniprot database (n=534,249 proteins, downloaded April 2015). MaxQuant search parameters allowed up to 2 miscleavages, fully tryptic peptides only, and fixed modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da), plus variable oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da). Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da, a minimum peptide length of 7 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for high resolution MS/MS scans. Co-fragmented peptide search was enabled to deconvolute multiplex spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent. The “match between runs” function was used to recover unsequenced precursors. Matches were matched within a 0.7 minute retention time match window and a 20 minute alignment. Quantitation of proteins was performed using LFQ with consideration of only razor and unique peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and determination of differential protein abundance in GPR37/GPR37L1 double knockout vs. wild-type Because data-dependent acquisition and label-free quantitation (LFQ) can miss individual sample measurements, the LFQ intensity quantitative data from MaxQuant for the n=6 samples were filtered to limit missingness, and then missing values were imputed as previously described. 24,25,26 Imputation of missing protein LFQ intensity values was performed using the imputation algorithm of Perseus23,26 as implemented and previously reported.24 Proteins were considered to have a high fold change if the fold change (FC) was a minimum of log2(1.286), 28.6% or more, represented by DKO-WT log2 values of -0.36 and 0.36 or for downregulated and upregulated proteins, respectively. These significant differentially expressed proteins were then determined by additional filtering for t-test p values equal to or less than 0.05.  Filtering of quantitative results (after imputation of missed quantitation) We removed 581/4512 proteins from consideration that were sequenced and quantified on 1 unique or razor peptide maximum in any of the 6 samples. We determined the distribution of a true null 3x3 experiment log2FC values. The distribution histogram was fit to a Gaussian distribution per Dammer et al., 201527 where 1.96-fold of SD of the Gaussian fit to the histogram of the null 3931 measurements was log2(1.286), or a minimum FC of 28.6%. The counting of proteins beyond 1.96-fold(SD) corresponds to false positives quantitative measurements in a 1-sample vs. 1-sample comparison of WT samples 1 and 2 that are expected to have no change. In the fit normal distribution, the relative area under the curve for the tails beyond this log2(FC) cutoff represents a probability of 0.05. At this FC cutoff, the null test produces 156/3931 (3.9%) of measurements that pass the FC criteria. This indicates that data filtered for minimum percent change 28.6% has been controlled to an empirical false discovery rate of less than 4%.

### Publication Abstract
GPR37 and GPR37L1 are glia-enriched G protein-coupled receptors that have been implicated in several neurological and neurodegenerative diseases. To gain insight into the potential molecular mechanisms by which GPR37 and GPR37L1 regulate cellular physiology, proteomic analyses of whole mouse brain tissue from wild-type (WT) versus GPR37/GPR37L1 double knockout (DKO) mice were performed in order to identify proteins regulated by the absence versus presence of these receptors (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015202). These analyses revealed a number of proteins that were significantly increased or decreased by the absence of GPR37 and GPR37L1. One of the most decreased proteins in the DKO versus WT brain tissue was S100A5, a calcium-binding protein, and the reduction of S100A5 expression in KO brain tissue was validated via Western blot. Coexpression of S100A5 with either GPR37 or GPR37L1 in HEK293T cells did not result in any change in S100A5 expression but did robustly increase secretion of S100A5. To dissect the mechanism by which S100A5 secretion was enhanced, cells coexpressing S100A5 with the receptors were treated with different pharmacological reagents. These studies revealed that calcium is essential for the secretion of S100A5 downstream of GPR37 and GPR37L1 signaling, as treatment with BAPTA-AM, an intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> chelator, reduced S100A5 secretion from transfected HEK293T cells. Collectively, these findings provide a panoramic view of proteomic changes resulting from loss of GPR37 and GPR37L1 and also impart mechanistic insight into the regulation of S100A5 by these receptors, thereby shedding light on the functions of GPR37 and GPR37L1 in brain tissue.

### Keywords
Mice lfq gpr37

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of Medicine
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Randy A. Hall
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory University School of Medicine


