### Accession
PXD019117

### Title
Phosphoproteomic profiling of hippocampus from offspring rats exposed to prenatal stress

### Description
Prenatal stress (PS) could cause depression of offprsing. Here, relative quantitative phosphoproteomics of hippocampus of PS-S and CON offspring rats were performed using LC-MS/MS to confirm known pathways and identify new areas of depression. A total of 6,790 phosphopeptides, 9,817 phosphorylation sites and 2978 phosphoproteins were detected. Among the 2978 phosphoproteins, 1760 (59.09%) with more than two phosphorylated sites, ENSRNOP00000023460 protein has more than 117 phosphorylated sites, and the average distribution of modification sites per 100 amino acids was 2.97. There were 197 different phophpeptides, including 140 increased phosphopeptides and 57 decreased phosphopeptides in PS-S offspring rats when compared to the CON offspring rats. These differential phosphopeptides corresponded to 100 upregulated and 44 downregulated phosphoproteins respectively. GO enrichment analysis these different phosphoproteins in the first five enrichments of CC category, MF category and BP category were involved in a total of 35 different phosphoproteins and these phosphoproteins were mainly related to myelin, microtubule and synapse associated proteins. The first five enrichment of KEGG pathways were found to be involved in many essential biological pathways, and the first five pathways included amphetamine addiction, insulin secretion, cushing syndrome and circadian entrainment signaling pathway. And these first five pathways were related to nine proteins including Adcy9, Apc, Cacna1c, Camk2a, Camk2b, Camk2g, Ctnnd2, Grin2a, Stx1a. Further research is needed to understand the precise role of these pathways in the depressive-like behavior of offspring rats caused by PS.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection and phosphoproteomic sample preparation Rats were anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg, i. p.). The total brain was isolated and bilateral hippocampus was removed from the brain immediately upon ice. Then, 100mg samples were added to SDT buffer and transferred to 2 ml tubes with amount quartz sand (another 1/4 inch ceramic bead MP 6540-424 for tissue samples). The lysate was homogenized by MP homogenizer (24×2, 6.0M/S, 60s, twice). The homogenate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters. The filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA).  Trypsin hydrolysis for protein in each sample was performed by FASP method[1]. 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl Dissolution buffer (DS buffer) twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl DS buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.Three biological replicates for each group were performed. Peptides (100µg) in each sample were collected to be labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The labeled peptides were mixed, concentrated by a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 500 μL 1×DHB buffer. Then, TiO2 beads were added and agitated for 2 hour. The centrifugation was carried out for 1 min at 5000 g, resulting the beads. And washed with 50 uL of washing buffer I three times and then 50 uL of washing buffer II three times to remove the remaining non-adsorbed material. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 uL of elution buffer three times, followed by lyophilization and MS analysis. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was used to separate the peptides. Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid and buffer B is a mixture of 84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 95% buffer A was used to balance the chromatographic column. Samples were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 µm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific), underwent an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm, ID75 µm, 3µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the flow rate is 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. Motif analysis The modification sites and ± 6 amino acids of the modified sites were extracted to predict the possible conservative motifs using MEME software (http://meme-suite.org/index.htm). The parameters of software were set as follow: width was 13, occurrences was 50, background was Ensembl_Rattus_29107_20190628.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  For all behavioral tests, data were presented as means ± standard deviation (SD). Kolmogorov-Smirnov was used for normality test. One-Way ANOVA was used for comparison between groups. Dunnett test was used for multiple comparisons as a post hoc analysis. p < 0.05 was set as a significant level. Statistical analysis was accomplished by Prism version 5.0 software (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). For LC-MS/MS analysis, the raw MS spectra were were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 . The observed MS/MS spectra were performed using Ensembl_Rattus_29107_20190628. An initial mass tolerance of precursor ions was set at 6 and 20 ppm, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was carbamido methylation for cysteines, TMT 6plex (N-term), TMT 6plex (K). Variable modifications were phosphorylation modification for lysines, tyrosine and serine. The false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide spectrum matching, protein assembly, and modifications identification were set at 1%. Only phosphopeptides were considered for expression analysis, in at least two of the three biological replicates in at least one sample. The ratios of phosphopeptides were normalized by the median protein ratio. For TMT quantification, a fold change of ≥1.2 or ≤ 0.83, and p values of <0.05 were defined as statistically different.  Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG Annotation The differentially expressed phosphoproteome were annotated using a Blast2GO to be classified into different gene ontology (GO). Then a KAAS software (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server: http://www.genome.jp/kegg/kaas/) was applied to map the significant differentially expressed phosphorylated proteins to the terms in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. KEGG pathway analysis was employed and the pathways or GO terms with p-value <0.05 were considered significant difference. To further explore the impact of differentially expressed protein in cell physiological process and discover internal relations between differentially expressed proteins, enrichment analysis was performed. GO enrichment on three ontologies (biological process, molecular function, and cellular component) and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified protein annotations as background dataset. Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values. And only functional categories and pathways with p-values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered as significant. Hierarchical Clustering The studied protein relative expression data was used to performing hierarchical clustering analysis. Forthispurpose, Cluster3.0 (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) and the Java Treeview software (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) were used. Euclidean distance algorithm for similarity measure and average linkage clustering algorithm (clustering uses the centroids of the observations) for clustering were selected when performing hierarchical clustering. Heatmap is often presented as a visual aid in addition to the dendrogram.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Xi'an Children's Hospital
Xi’an Children’s Hospital (The Affiliated Children’s Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University)

### Submitter
Hongli Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Hongli Sun
Xi’an Children’s Hospital (The Affiliated Children’s Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University)


