### Accession
PXD001010

### Title
SWATH Analysis of Yeast Proteome over Time in Response to Osmotic Stress

### Description
SWATH analysis of Yeast Proteome over time in response to Osmotic Stress. We sampled cell cultures in biological triplicates at six time points following the application of osmotic stress and acquired single injection DIA datasets on a high-resolution 5600 tripleTOF instrument operated in SWATH mode. Proteins were quantified by the targeted extraction and signal integration from the SWATH-MS datasets of peak groups representing proteotypic peptides for specific yeast proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Three series of six cultures each from the yeast strain BY4741 MATa his3Δ leu2Δ met15Δ ura3Δ were grown in SD medium until they reached an A600 of 0.8. To apply the osmotic shock, 0.4 M NaCl was added to each 50 ml culture and after 0 min (T0), 15 min (T1), 30 min (T2), 60 min (T3), 90 (T4) and 120 min (T5) the cells were harvested. Indeed, the culture media was quenched by addition of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to a final concentration of 6.25 % and the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1500 g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatants were discarded and the cell pellets were washed three times by centrifugation with cold (-20°C) acetone to remove interfering compounds. The final cell pellets were resolubilized in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and 5 mM EDTA and cells were disrupted by glass bead beating (5 times 5 minutes at 4°C). The total protein amount from the pooled supernatants was estimated by BCA Protein Assay Kit  (Thermo, Rockford, US). Yeast proteins were reduced with 12 mM dithiotreitol at 37°C for 30 min and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea and the proteins were digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a final enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptide mixtures were desalted using reverse phase cartridges Sep-Pak tC18 (Waters, Milford, MA) according to the following procedure; wet cartridge with 1 volume of 100% methanol, wash with 1 volume of 80% acetonitrile, equilibrate with 4 volumes of 0.1% formic acid, load acidified digest, wash 6 volumes of 0.1% formic acid, and elute with 1 volume of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resolubilized in 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid and frozen at -20°C. For in depth-fractionation experiments of NaCl-untreated yeast cells, the peptide mixtures were separated by off gel electrophoresis (OGE) using a pH 3–7 IPG strip (Amersham Biosciences) and a 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent Technologies) with collection in 12 wells and then submitted for C18 clean-up. All samples were spiked with the retention time standard peptides iRT-Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland).

### Data Protocol
The shotgun spectral library was generated using a total of 46 shotgun injections on an ABSciex TripleTOF 5600 instrument: 2 series of 12 off-gel fractions from the BY 4741 strain, 18 injections (6 time points in biological triplicates) from the complete BY 4741 osmotic shock study, and 4 technical replicate injections of a FY4 strain pooled from various time points of a diauxic shift experiment. Each file was searched with Sorcerer-Sequest (TurboSequest v4.0.3rev11 running on a Sage-N Sorcerer v4.0.4) and Mascot (version 2.3.0) against the SGD database. For the search, we allowed for semi-tryptic digests and up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide, and we used carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification on cysteine and oxidation as variable modification on methionine residues. The Sequest and Mascot search results were converted to pep.xml and then combined using iProphet (included in TPP version 4.5.2). The search results were sorted by decreasing iProphet probability and filtered at 1% FDR by decoy counting (iProphet score cut-off 0.0242) at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) level, resulting in 891’570 identified spectra, 78’605 unique peptides (4.7% FDR at the peptide level) and 5’125 proteins (inclusive isoforms). Those spectra were used to build a consensus spectra library using SpectraST (included in TPP 4.5.2). The transition MS/MS coordinates for the peptides were then computed using an in-house python script that used the spectrast .sptxt library as input and retrieved the top 3-4 most intense (singly or doubly charged) y or b fragment ions for each spectra applying the following algorithm:  i) the fragment ion m/z was above 300 and outside of the range of the 25 Da swath/precursor fragmentation window from which the fragment ion was acquired and ii) the extracted m/z values matched the theoretical fragment ion masses within 0.05 Da tolerance. We selected the transitions originating from proteotypic peptides and that did not contain oxidation on methionine. The final fragment ion library comprised 331’449 transitions for 83’520 proteotypic precursors. For each peptide, we finally appended its iRT value by calculating the average of the iRT values found for the corresponding precursor(s) of that peptide at 1% PSM FDR in the search results across all the shotgun runs by using a simple linear regression after re-alignment/re-scaling onto the spiked-in reference iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland).   The SWATH-MS targeted data extraction was performed by the Spectronaut software from Biognosys (RC.2.0.3). A maximum of four transitions was extracted for each targeted peptide, together with their corresponding decoy-transition groups which were generated by pseudo-reversing the sequence of the targeted peptides. False discovery rates are determined for SWATH-MS using adapted decoy model. For the technical replicates measurements, the features confidently identified below 1% FDR threshold were used to estimate the elution iRT value of the feature. Then we recovered those identifications over 1% FDR and below 10% FDR with an elution iRT value close (in less than 0.35 iRT units) to the estimated elution iRT. To evaluate the FDR after this identification recovery, we considered that the iRT tolerance window only covers 8.33% of the total extraction window, and therefore only 8.33% of the recovered false identifications meet the recovery criterion, assuming that false identifications are spread uniformly in the retention time space. This keeps the actual FDR below 1%.  To validate the protein fold changes obtained by SWATH-MS, we quantified a subset of 100 proteins in the 18 osmotic shock time course samples using a another targeted proteomics approach namely SRM. We selected 50 proteins that were identified by SWATH-MS as up-regulated (n= 25) and down-regulated (n= 25), respectively, and distributed among the enriched pathways. For normalization purpose, we also added 50 proteins that were not found regulated across the time course study. For each protein, we choose the optimal peptides confidently identified in SWATH-MS, together with their corresponding fragment ions and quantified them by SRM across the 18 yeast samples. We then integrated the fragment ion traces of all peptides detected with SRM and re-extracted the peak area of the same peptide measured by SWATH-MS. For consistency in the data analysis we used the skyline software, since it allowed us to process both data sets with the same integration/quantification parameters. We then determined the fold changes between 15 min (T1), 30 min (T2), 60 min (T3), 90 min  (T4), 120 min (T5) and  the initial time point 0 min (T0) and upon addition of salt by SWATH-MS and SRM. To further pinpoint the proteins that were significantly changing in abundance between the different time points, we applied SRMstats, a statistical modeling framework for protein significance analysis previously designed for SRM experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted mass spectrometry by selected reaction monitoring (S/MRM) has proven to be a suitable technique for the consistent and reproducible quantification of proteins across multiple biological samples and a wide dynamic range. This performance profile is an important prerequisite for systems biology and biomedical research. However, the method is limited to the measurements of a few hundred peptides per LC-MS analysis. Recently, we introduced SWATH-MS, a combination of data independent acquisition and targeted data analysis that vastly extends the number of peptides/proteins quantified per sample, while maintaining the favorable performance profile of S/MRM. Here we applied the SWATH-MS technique to quantify changes over time in a large fraction of the proteome expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae in response to osmotic stress. We sampled cell cultures in biological triplicates at six time points following the application of osmotic stress and acquired single injection data independent acquisition data sets on a high-resolution 5600 tripleTOF instrument operated in SWATH mode. Proteins were quantified by the targeted extraction and integration of transition signal groups from the SWATH-MS datasets for peptides that are proteotypic for specific yeast proteins. We consistently identified and quantified more than 15,000 peptides and 2500 proteins across the 18 samples. We demonstrate high reproducibility between technical and biological replicates across all time points and protein abundances. In addition, we show that the abundance of hundreds of proteins was significantly regulated upon osmotic shock, and pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the proteins reacting to osmotic shock are mainly involved in the carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism. Overall, this study demonstrates the ability of SWATH-MS to efficiently generate reproducible, consistent, and quantitatively accurate measurements of a large fraction of a proteome across multiple samples.

### Keywords
Yeast, 5600, Swath-ms, Osmotic stress

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Lucia Espona Pernas

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


