### Accession
PXD028644

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals metabolic versatility of Amycolatopsis sp. BX17: a strain native from milpa agroecosystem soil

### Description
Amycolatopsis sp. BX17 is an actinobacterium isolated from milpa soils that antagonizes the phytopathogenic fungus Fusarium graminearum. Metabolites secreted by the actinobacterium cultured in medium without glucose inhibited 100% the mycelial growth of F. graminearum RH1, while in medium supplemented with 20 g/L of glucose inhibition was 65%. With the aim of studying how the metabolism of strain BX17 is modulated by glucose, as the main carbon source, media with 0 and 20 g/L glucose were selected to analyze the intracellular proteins by quantitative label-free proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Amycolatopsis BX17 biomass produced at 72 h (media with 0 and 20 g/L glucose) was suspended in 60 mL of wash buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride protease inhibitor (PMSF)] and homogenized by vortexing. The suspension was incubated in a water bath at 100 °C for 10 min and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm (Sorvall Lynx 4000, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) at 25 °C for 20 min to remove the supernatant. Three biological replicates for every glucose concentration (0 and 20 g/L) were prepared and processed as independent samples.  Cell pellets were suspended in 20 mL of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, 0.3% SDS, 0.5% β-mercaptoethanol) and lysed by sonication (35% amplitude, two 1-min pulses) using an Ultrasonic Processor GEX500 (Sonics & Materials, Inc., Newtown, CT, USA). Then, the sample was incubated in an ice bath for 5 min and sonicated again under the same conditions. The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C for 20 min, and the supernatant, containing the soluble proteins, was mixed with 3 volumes of 100 mM ammonium acetate and incubated at -20 °C for 16 h to precipitate the proteins. This sample was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C for 25 min, and the resulting pellet was washed twice with 1 mL of 100 mM ammonium acetate, centrifuging each wash at 13,000 rpm at 4 °C for 12 min. The pellet was then washed with 100% acetone and centrifuged under the same conditions. Finally, the pellet was dried under vacuum (Vacufuge plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and suspended in rehydration buffer [8 M urea, 2% 3- (3-chloroamidopropyl)-dimethylammonium and 20 mM DTT]. Protein concentration was determined with the RC/DCProtein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using bovine serum albumin as standard.  Total soluble Amycolatopsis BX17 proteins (125 µg) for two technical replicates of every biological triplicate of each growth condition (medium with and without glucose) were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and in-solution digestion with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) at a 1:30 (w/w) trypsin: protein ratio, for 20 h at 37 °C. After digestion detergent was removed with ethyl acetate. Next, peptide samples were desalted with C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak C18, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried under vacuum. Samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an ultra-performance liquid chromatograph (Dionex Ultimate 3000, RSLCnano UHPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously reported by Gil et al.[Journal of Biological Chemistry 2017;292(44):18129-18144] with a brief modification: The peptides were separated by an elution gradient of 250 minutes in a capillary column at a flow of 250 nL/min (EASY Spray Column, PepMap RSLC, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 150 mm).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Max Quant software (v 1.6.10.43) and the Amycolatopsis azurea reference proteome database (available at www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000014137). Trypsin was used as the specific protease and one missed cleavage was allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and acetylation of the N-terminus of proteins were considered variable modifications. At least two peptides (razor + unique) with a false discovery rate < 0.01 and the presence of the protein in at least two of the three biological replicates in one of the two conditions (glucose and no glucose) were necessary for a confident identification.  For label-free relative quantification, the LFQ intensities obtained with MaxQuant software were normalized, transformed into logarithms and significant changes were determined applying Student's t-test (P<0.05) using the Perseus program (v1.6.12.0). Proteins with a log2 fold change ≥ 1.5 were considered as differentially expressed proteins.  Identified proteins were classified according to their cellular location, biological process, and molecular function according to the annotations available in blast2go (www.blast2go.org). Proteins were also classified according to the metabolic pathways in which they participate using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database.

### Publication Abstract
Amycolatopsis sp. BX17 is an actinobacterium isolated from milpa soils, which antagonizes the phytopathogenic fungus Fusarium graminearum. Metabolites secreted by the actinobacterium cultured in glucose-free medium inhibited 100% of the mycelial growth of F. graminearum RH1, while the inhibition rate was 65% in medium supplemented with 20&#xa0;g/L glucose. With the aim of studying how the metabolism of strain BX17 is modulated by glucose as the main carbon source, media with 0 and 20&#xa0;g/L glucose were selected to analyze the intracellular proteins by quantitative label-free proteomic analysis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028644. Proteins identified in bacteria cultured in medium without glucose were involved in glutamate metabolism, the Krebs cycle and the shikimate pathway, suggesting that amino acids are metabolized to synthesize antifungal compounds. In glucose-containing medium, carbon flux was directed mainly toward the synthesis of energy and cell growth. This study shows the metabolic versatility of Amycolatopsis BX17, and strengthens its potential use in designing biotechnological strategies for phytopathogen control. SIGNIFICANCE: Amycolatopsis BX17 is a bacterium isolated from milpa agroecosystems that antagonizes the phytopathogenic fungus Fusarium graminearum. Currently, there is scarce information about the metabolism involved in the biosynthesis of antifungal agents by this genus. We used a label-free proteomic approach to identify the differences in metabolic routes for antifungal biosynthesis in Amycolatopsis BX17 grown in media with 0 and 20&#xa0;g/L glucose. Taken together the results suggest that the BX17 strain could be synthesizing the antifungal metabolite(s) from the Shikimate pathway through the synthesis and degradation of the amino acid tyrosine, which is a known precursor of glycopeptides with antibiotic and antifungal activity. While the lower antifungal activity of the metabolites secreted by Amycolatopsis BX17 when grown in a medium with glucose as the main carbon source, may be correlated with a lower synthesis of antifungal compounds, due to the directing of carbon flux toward metabolic pathways involved with energy synthesis and cell growth. Likewise, it is possible that the bacteria synthesize other compounds with biological activity, such as glycopeptides with antibiotic activity. These findings are relevant because they represent the first stage to understand the metabolic regulation involved in the biosynthesis of antifungal metabolites by the genus Amycolatopsis. Finally, improving our understanding of the metabolic regulation involved in the biosynthesis of antifungal metabolites is essential to design of strategies in agricultural biotechnology for phytopathogen control.

### Keywords
Conservation agriculture, Antifungal activity, Intracellular proteins, Actinobacteria, Metabolism

### Affiliations
CONACYT-Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo A.C. Laboratorio de Bioquímica de Proteínas y Glicanos Carretera Gustavo Enrique Astiazarán Rosas No. 46 Colonia La Victoria. Código Postal 83304 Hermosillo, Sonora. México.  +52 662 2892400 ext. 513
CONACYT-Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, A.C.

### Submitter
José Ángel Huerta-Ocampo

### Lab Head
Dr José Ángel Huerta-Ocampo
CONACYT-Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo A.C. Laboratorio de Bioquímica de Proteínas y Glicanos Carretera Gustavo Enrique Astiazarán Rosas No. 46 Colonia La Victoria. Código Postal 83304 Hermosillo, Sonora. México.  +52 662 2892400 ext. 513


