### Accession
PXD005571

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Hepatocellular Adenoma

### Description
Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are rare benign tumors that constitute a heterogeneous entity, divided into 5 groups based on molecular features (1) H-HCA with inactivating mutations of Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1A (HNF1α), (2) inflammatory HCA (IHCA) with diverse mutations activating the JAK/STAT pathway, (3) b-HCA with activating β-catenin mutation (4) recently identified sh-HCA presenting a Sonic Hedgehog pathway activation and finally, (5) the unclassified HCA (UHCA)). Risk of bleeding of sh-HCA and UHCA is their main clinical feature with malignant transformation. Nowadays, no specific biomarker exists to evaluate this hemorrhage risk. The objective of this study was to combine laser microdissection and mass spectrometry analysis to define Hepatocellular Adenoma proteome in the purpose of identifying specific biomarkers able to predict this bleeding risk.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.5 algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Homo sapiens database (70 380 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release 2016_03) from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Peptide identifications were accepted if their FDR value was less than 1.0%, while protein identifications had the same and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out with a tolerance mass of 10 ppm and a time tolerance of 300 s. Protein ratios were median normalized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteome, Hepatocellular adenoma, Lc-msms, Liver, Arginine metabolism, Hemorrhage risk

### Affiliations
Bariton INSERM 1053, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Raymond Anne-Aurelie
Bariton INSERM 1053, Bordeaux, France


