### Accession
PXD029269

### Title
Boost-DiLeu: Enhanced Isobaric N,N-Dimethyl Leucine Tagging Strategy for Comprehensive Quantitative Glycoproteomic Analysis

### Description
Intact glycopeptide analysis has been of great interest because it can elucidate glycosylation site information and glycan structural composition at the same time. However, mass-spectrometry (MS)-based glycoproteomic analysis is hindered by the low stoichiometry of glycosylation and poor ionization efficiency of glycopeptides. Due to the relatively large amounts of starting materials needed for enrichment, identification and quantification of intact glycopeptides in some size-limited biological systems are especially challenging. To overcome these limitations, here we developed an improved boosting strategy to enhance N,N-dimethyl leucine tagging-based quantitative glycoproteomic analysis, termed as Boost-DiLeu. With integration of one-tube sample processing workflow and high pH fractionation, 3514 quantifiable N-glycopeptides were identified from 30 µg HeLa cell tryptic digests with reliable quantification performance. Furthermore, this strategy was applied to human cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) samples to differentiate N-glycosylation profiles between Alzheimer’s disease patients and healthy donors. The results revealed processes and pathways affected by dysregulated N-glycosylation in AD, including platelet degranulation, cell adhesion, and extracellular matrix, which highlighted the involvement of N-glycosylation aberrations in AD pathogenesis. Moreover, co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) showed 3 modules of glycoproteins, one of which are associated with AD phenotype. Our results demonstrated the feasibility of using this strategy for comprehensive glycoproteomic analysis of size-limited clinical samples. Taken together, we developed and optimized a strategy for enhanced comprehensive quantitative intact glycopeptide analysis with DiLeu labeling, which is especially promising for identifying novel therapeutic targets or biomarkers in sample size limited models or systems.

### Sample Protocol
One-tube sample preparation method was optimized for DiLeu tag labeled samples by taking advantage of an acid-cleavable detergent, RapiGest SF Surfactant, to reduce sample clean-up steps. DiLeu 118d was used as a boosting channel which was loaded with a large amount of analogous sample of other channels. High-pH (HpH) reversed-phase liquid chromatography fractionation was applied after HILIC enrichment to further improve glycoproteome coverage. Samples were loaded to nanoLC coupled to orbitrap MS for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against UniProt Homo sapiens reviewed database (August 2020, 20311 sequences) using Byonic search engine (version 2.9.38, Protein Metrics Inc) embedded within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD 2.1) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and two maximum missed cleavages were allowed. Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 Da. Static modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation (+ 57.02146 Da) on cysteine residues and 12-plex DiLeu (+ 145.12801 Da) on peptide N-terminus and lysine residues. Dynamic modifications consisted of oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da), deamidation (+ 0.984016 Da) of asparagine and glutamine residues, and N-glycosylation. Oxidation and deamidation were set as “rare” modification, and N-glycosylation was set as “common” modification. Glycan modifications were searched against a glycan database expanded from the  Byonic embedded human N-glycan database (182 entries) to include N-linked M6P glycans consisting of HexNAc (2-4) Hex (3-9) Phospho (1-2) modiﬁcation. N-glycopeptides were filtered at a 1% peptide FDR, Byonic score >150 and log|Prob| >1. Proteins were filtered at a 1% protein FDR for global proteomic analysis. Quantification of protein and N-glycopeptides was performed in PD 2.1 with a reporter ion integration tolerance of 10 ppm for the most confident centroid.

### Publication Abstract
Intact glycopeptide analysis has been of great interest because it can elucidate glycosylation site information and glycan structural composition at the same time. However, mass spectrometry (MS)-based glycoproteomic analysis is hindered by the low abundance and poor ionization efficiency of glycopeptides. Relatively large amounts of starting materials are needed for the enrichment, which makes the identification and quantification of intact glycopeptides from samples with limited quantity more challenging. To overcome these limitations, we developed an improved isobaric labeling strategy with an additional boosting channel to enhance <i>N</i>,<i>N</i>-dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) tagging-based quantitative glycoproteomic analysis, termed as Boost-DiLeu. With the integration of a one-tube sample processing workflow and high-pH fractionation, 3514 quantifiable <i>N-</i>glycopeptides were identified from 30 &#x3bc;g HeLa cell tryptic digests with reliable quantification performance. Furthermore, this strategy was applied to human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples to differentiate <i>N-</i>glycosylation profiles between Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and non-AD donors. The results revealed processes and pathways affected by dysregulated <i>N-</i>glycosylation in AD, including platelet degranulation, cell adhesion, and extracellular matrix, which highlighted the involvement of <i>N-</i>glycosylation aberrations in AD pathogenesis. Moreover, weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) showed nine modules of glycopeptides, two of which were associated with the AD phenotype. Our results demonstrated the feasibility of using this strategy for in-depth glycoproteomic analysis of size-limited clinical samples. Taken together, we developed and optimized a strategy for the enhanced comprehensive quantitative intact glycopeptide analysis with DiLeu labeling, showing significant promise for identifying novel therapeutic targets or biomarkers in biological systems with a limited sample quantity.

### Keywords
Human, Glycoproteomics, Csf, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Danqing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy


