### Accession
PXD039431

### Title
Analysis of CDPK1 targets identifies a trafficking adaptor complex that regulates microneme exocytosis in Toxoplasma - Thiophosphorylation

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites use Ca2+-regulated exocytosis to secrete essential virulence factors from specialized organelles called micronemes. Ca2+-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) are required for microneme exocytosis; however, the molecular events that regulate trafficking and fusion of micronemes with the plasma membrane remain unresolved. Here, we combine sub-minute resolution phosphoproteomics and bio-orthogonal labeling of kinase substrates in Toxoplasma gondii to identify 163 proteins phosphorylated in a CDPK1-dependent manner. In addition to known regulators of secretion, we identify uncharacterized targets with predicted functions across signaling, gene expression, trafficking, metabolism, and ion homeostasis. One of the CDPK1 targets is a putative HOOK activating adaptor. In other eukaryotes, HOOK homologs form the FHF complex with FTS and FHIP to activate dynein-mediated trafficking of endosomes along microtubules. We show the FHF complex is partially conserved in T. gondii, consisting of HOOK, an FTS homolog, and two parasite-specific proteins (TGGT1_306920 and TGGT1_316650). CDPK1 kinase activity and HOOK are required for the rapid apical trafficking of micronemes as parasites initiate motility. Moreover, parasites lacking HOOK or FTS display impaired microneme protein secretion, leading to a block in the invasion of host cells. Taken together, our work provides a comprehensive catalog of CDPK1 targets and reveals how vesicular trafficking has been tuned to support a parasitic lifestyle.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii tachyzoites from the RH strain (CDPK1G and CDPK1M) were passaged in SILAC media in T12.5 flasks. CDPK1G parasites were grown in “heavy” SILAC media (DMEM 88364, 10% dialyzed FBS, 0.1 mg/mL 13C15N L-arginine, 0.1 mg/mL 13C15N L-lysine) and CDPK1M parasites were grown in “light” SILAC media (DMEM 88364, 10% dialyzed FBS, 0.1 mg/mL L-Arginine, 0.1 mg/mL L-Lysine). HFFs in 15 cm dishes were infected with CDPK1G and CDPK1M parasites in SILAC media. On day 6, extracellular parasites were harvested. Parasites were washed once in 1X intracellular buffer (ICB) (137 mM KCl, 5 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 10 mM MgCl2, pH 7.5 KOH) and then resuspended in 400 µL of 1X ICB. Parasites were semi-permeabilized after the addition of 400 µL of 6 µg/mL aerolysin diluted in 1X ICB and incubated at 37°C for 10 min. After semi-permeabilization, the kinase reaction was initiated and parasites were incubated at 30°C for 5 min. Parasite pellets were resuspended in 250 µL of 1X lysis buffer (10% TritonX-100, 1X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor, 10 mM K2EGTA in 1X ICB). Proteins were precipitated using methanol chloroform extraction. For 250 µL of lysate, 800 µL methanol and 200 µL of chloroform was added, followed by vortexing. After adding 600 µL of water, the sample was vortexed and centrifuged at max speed for 5 min at 4°C. After removing the supernatant without disrupting the precipitate, 375 µL of methanol was added and vortexed. Samples were centrifuged at max speed for 15 min at 4°C. The protein pellet was allowed to air dry after removing the supernatant. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 200 µL of 8M urea. 1 mg of protein (determined from protein quantification; see above) from CDPK1G and CDPK1M parasites were pooled for a total of 2 mg of protein. To digest protein, 5X volume of 1X Trypsin Digest Buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate pH 8.9, 1mM CaCl2, 2 mM TCEP) was added to the sample followed by 40 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Proteins were digested overnight rotating at room temperature. To prepare samples for desalting, glacial acetic acid was added to 10% (v/v) and debris was briefly spun down. A C18 Sep-Pak Plus cartridge (Waters) was prepared using a syringe pump and 10 mL syringe with three 10 mL washes at a flow rate of 2 mL/min: 0.1% acetic acid, 90% acetonitrile/0.1% acetic acid, and 0.1% acetic acid. The sample was loaded in a 5 mL syringe at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The syringe and cartridge were washed with 5 mL of 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. A final wash was performed using 10 mL of 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. Peptides were eluted with 4.5mL of 40% acetonitrile/0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. Samples were spun in a speed vac for 3 hrs until samples could be pooled into a single 2 mL tube. Samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized overnight. Lyophilized peptides were stored at -80°C. To enrich for thiophosphorylated peptides, 400 µL of SulfoLink Coupling Resin slurry was used (Thermo). Incubations were performed in the dark using aluminum foil due to the light sensitivity of the resin. The resin was washed twice with 1 mL of binding buffer (25 mM HEPES, 50% acetonitrile, pH 7.0 NaOH + HCl) rotating for 5 min followed by a 1000 rpm spin for 10 sec. The supernatant was removed without disturbing the pelleted resin. The beads were blocked with 1mL of blocking buffer (binding buffer with 25 µg/mL β-casein and 2 mM TCEP) and rotated for 5 min at room temperature. After pelleting the resin and removing the supernatant, the resin was resuspended with lyophilized peptides dissolved in 500 µL of the blocking buffer. Samples were incubated overnight at room temperature. Samples were spun at 1000 rpm for 10 sec and the supernatant was spun again, lyophilized, and stored at -80°C prior to MS analysis. The beads received the following series of 1 mL washes for 5 min rotating and spun at 1000 rpm for 10 sec: twice with binding buffer with 2 mM TCEP, once with quenching buffer (25 mM HEPES, 50% acetonitrile, 5 mM DTT, pH 8.5 NaOH), once with binding buffer with 2 mM TCEP, once with 5% formic acid (no rotation), once with binding buffer with 2 mM TCEP, and three times with 0.1% acetic acid. The resin was no longer light sensitive after incubation with the quenching buffer. To elute captured peptides, resin was resuspended in 500 µL OXONE (2 mg/mL potassium monopersulfate) and rotated for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant containing eluted peptides was collected after spinning at 1000 rpm for 10 sec. OXONE was removed from the sample using C18 spin columns (Pierce) according to manufacturer instructions. A total of 4 washes with the equilibrium/wash buffer was performed. Peptides were spun in a speed vac until dry and stored at -80°C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The samples were resuspended in 10–20 µL of 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis and were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Buffer A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Buffer B. Peptides were loaded onto a analytical column (column: PF360-75-15-N-5, New Objective, 360 µm OD, 75 µm ID, 15 µm Tip PicoFrit Emitter; resin: 04A-4506, Phenomenex Aeris Peptide, C18 1.7 µm) via trapping column (column: 360 um OD, 100 um ID; resin: AA12S11, YMC Gel ODS-A, C18 10 µm). Peptides were separated at 300 nL/min on a gradient of 2% B for 5 min, 2–25% B for 100 min, 25–40% B for 20 min, 40–100% B for 1 min, and 100% B for 12 min. The orbitrap was operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 2700V with an ion transfer tube temperature of 300°C. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 375 to 1600 m/z, 1 x 106 AGC target, maximum injection time of 50 msec, intensity threshold of 4 x 105, dynamic exclusion of 13 sec, and 20 data dependent scans (DDA Top 20). MS2 spectra were generated with a HCD collision energy of 27 at a resolution of 15,000, first mass at 100 m/z, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, an AGC target of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 20 msec, and scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z. Raw files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptides identifications using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB release 34 GT1 protein database. The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was limited to 2. The following modifications were included in the search: dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S,T,Y), dynamic 13C615N4 (+10.008 Da; R), dynamic 13C615N2 (+8.014 Da; K), and dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da; N-terminus). Site localization scores were generated using ptmRS, with phosphoRS and use of diagnostic ions set to true. SILAC 2plex (Arg10, Lys8) method was used for relative quantification of protein and unique peptide abundances. For peptide level analysis, ratios of unique peptides comparing CDPK1G and CDPK1M were generated and low abundance resampling (5%) was used to impute missing values. For protein level analysis, ratios of proteins were determined from the summed abundance of unique peptides comparing CDPK1G and CDPK1M strains.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T. gondii, Signaling, Lc-msms, Vesicular trafficking

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alex Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research


