### Accession
PXD045328

### Title
Characterizing the secretome of EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinoma

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death worldwide, mainly due to the late stage of disease at the time of diagnosis. Non-invasive biomarkers are needed to supplement existing screening methods to enable earlier detection and increased patient survival. This is critical to EGFR-driven lung adenocarcinoma as it commonly occurs in individuals who have never smoked and do not qualify for current screening protocols. Methods: In this study, we performed mass spectrometry analysis of the secretome of cultured lung cells representing different stages of mutant EGFR driven transformation, from normal to fully malignant. Identified secreted proteins specific to the malignant state were validated using orthogonal methods and their clinical activity assessed in lung adenocarcinoma patient cohorts. Results: We quantified 1020 secreted proteins, which were compared for differential expression between stages of transformation. We validated differentially expressed proteins at the transcriptional level in clinical tumor specimens, association with patient survival, and absolute concentration to yield three biomarker candidates: MDK, GDF15, and SPINT2. These candidates were validated using ELISA and increased levels were associated with poor patient survival specifically in EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinoma patients. Conclusions: Our study provides insight into changes in secreted proteins during EGFR driven lung adenocarcinoma transformation that may play a role in the processes that promote tumor progression. The specific candidates identified can harnessed for biomarker use to identify high risk individuals for early detection screening programs and disease management for this molecular subgroup of lung adenocarcinoma patients.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis through a protocol of reduction, alkylation, and protein digestion. Samples were reduced by incubating with 16μL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Bio-Rad) for 30 minutes at 55°C, then alkylated by incubating with 32 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Bio-Rad) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were quenched with an additional 16 μL 200 mM DTT. Trypsin/Lys-C mix was prepared for sample digestion, where 200μL of 200 mM HEPES pH 8.0 was added to 20 μg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega). Samples were digested by incubating with 16μL Trypsin/Lys-C mix on a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 1000 RPM, overnight at 37°C. One tenth of each sample was pooled and prepared to confirm quality. Peptides were acidified by adding 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and diluted to a concentration of 1% TFA, then desalted following a Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Briefly, STAGE tips were packed with 3 punches of C18 resin which was washed (100 uL 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile) and equilibrated (2x100 uL 0.1% TFA in 18 MΩ water) then peptide was loaded. Salts were removed by rinsing (200 uL 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) then eluted in 100 uL 0.1% formic acid in 60/40 acetonitrile/HPLC water. Desalted peptides were eluted and solvent evaporated by centrifuging samples in a SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) until dry. Peptides were reconstituted in a 0.1% formic acid, 1% DMSO aqueous solution and assessed for quality on a LTQ Orbitrap VelosTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The remaining digested peptides were tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled using a TMT 11-plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Post-labeling, samples were pooled, dried by speed vacuum to evaporate excess solvent, and acidified with TFA as described above. Peptides were desalted following the STAGE tip protocol and excess solvent was reduced by vacuum centrifugation (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were constituted in a 0.1% formic acid, 1% DMSO aqueous solution and run on an Orbitrap EclipseTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) set to MS2 mode.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer suite (v.2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Swissprot human reference database (20585 sequences, October 2020). Full trypsin specificity was required. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Dynamic modifications included Oxidation(+15.995 Da, M), Acetylation (+42.011 Da, N-Term), and static modification included Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C) and TMT (+229.163 Da, K, N-Term). Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were validated with Percolator, where only PSMs with false discovery rate(FDR) < 0.01 were retained in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretome, Lung adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.


