### Accession
PXD012524

### Title
Human hippocampal spheroids for modelling AD

### Description
The hippocampus is important for memory formation and is severely affected in the brain with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Since AD brain tissue is available postmortem, our understanding of early pathogenic processes occurring in hippocampi remains speculative.  Here, an MS-based proteomic approach was used to analyze free-floating hippocampal spheroids (HSs) enriched in PROX1-positive granule neurons, from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) of healthy individuals and AD patients. HSs generated from two AD patients carrying variations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) or presenilin 1 (PS1) genes, and their age and gender matched controls.

### Sample Protocol
100 µl of lysis buffer (50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 2 w/v% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 100 mM Tris-Cl buffer, pH 8.6) was added to the spheroid sample. The sample was boiled at 95 °C for 5 minutes, then proteins were extracted by sonication executing 30 cycles of 15s on and 15 s off at 4 °C using a Bioruptor plus (model UCD-300) (Diagenode). Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the lysate at the final concentration of 20 mM and was incubated at RT for 30 minutes in dark. The proteins were precipitated using 9 volumes of cold ethanol O/N at -20 °C and the protein pellet was dissolved in 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (AmBic) with 0.5% SDC (sodium deoxycholate). The protein concentration was measured using the Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) prior the digestion. Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to the sample in 1:25 enzyme-substrate ratio and was incubated for 18 hours at 37 °C. SDC was removed by EtOAc (ethyl acetate) extraction under acidic conditions. Peptide concentration of the sample was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. The peptide samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSCLnano pump (Thermo Scientific). Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (5 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 2 cm, nanoViper) was used as trap column and EASY-spray RSLC C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm) as analytical column. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA), solvent B was 80% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.08% FA. The flow-rate was set to 0.3 µl/min and the column temperature was 45 °C. The peptides were separated using a 120 min non-linear gradient and analyzed with a top 20 DDA (data dependent acquisition) method. MS1 scans were acquired using a mass range of 375-1500 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 (@ 200 m/z), a target AGC value of 3e06 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. The 20 most intense peaks were fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of 15,000, a target AGC value of 1e05 and a maximum IT of 50 ms. The ion selection threshold was set to 8.00e03 and the dynamic exclusion to 40 s while single charged ions were excluded from the analysis. The precursor isolation window was set to 1.2 Th.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.2. Peptide/protein identification was performed against UniProt human database (released 20180207, 42213 sequences including isoforms) with SEQUEST HT as search engine. The following parameters were set during the search: max. 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as static modification, methionine oxidation, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as dynamic modifications, acetylation as a dynamic N-terminal protein modification, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The hippocampus is important for memory formation and is severely affected in the brain with Alzheimer disease (AD). Our understanding of early pathogenic processes occurring in hippocampi in AD is limited due to tissue unavailability. Here, we report a chemical approach to rapidly generate free-floating hippocampal spheroids (HSs), from human induced pluripotent stem cells. When used to model AD, both APP and atypical PS1 variant HSs displayed increased A&#x3b2;42/A&#x3b2;40 peptide ratios and decreased synaptic protein levels, which are common features of AD. However, the two variants differed in tau hyperphosphorylation, protein aggregation, and protein network alterations. NeuroD1-mediated gene therapy in HSs-derived progenitors resulted in modulation of expression of numerous genes, including those involved in synaptic transmission. Thus, HSs can be harnessed to unravel the mechanisms underlying early pathogenic changes in the hippocampi of AD patients, and provide a robust platform for the development of therapeutic strategies targeting early stage AD.

### Keywords
Ad, Ipsc, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Lund University, Dept. Biomedical Engineering
Lund University

### Submitter
Melinda Rezeli

### Lab Head
Dr György Marko-Varga
Lund University, Dept. Biomedical Engineering


