### Accession
PXD006266

### Title
Sub-minute phosphoregulation of cell-cycle systems during Plasmodium gamete formation revealed by a high-resolution time course

### Description
As a first step in the transmission of malaria, Plasmodium parasites ingested by a mosquito must rapidly initiate a gametogenesis process prior to sexual reproduction. The phosphorylation-based signalling mechanisms underlying the initiation of this process remain largely unmapped. We have measured a high-resolution time course of phosphorylation in P. berghei gametocytes during the first minute of gametogenesis to elucidate the scope and dynamics of the response. The data reveals rapid phosphoregulation of microtubule motor proteins and DNA replication initiation proteins within the first 18 s and of DNA replication machinery by 60 s. The data also implicate several protein kinases and phosphatases in the gametogenesis signalling pathway. Through gene knock-out experiments, we verify that the protein kinases CDPK4 and SRPK1 have distinct influences over the phosphorylation of similar downstream targets. Together, the results show that key cell-cycle systems related to both replication and mitosis undergo simultaneous, rapid phosphoregulation.

### Sample Protocol
P. berghei strain ANKA derived clone 2.34 was maintained in CD1 outbred mice obtained from Harlan. Parasites were harvested at day four after infection in suspended animation and separated from uninfected erythrocytes on a Histodenz cushion. Purified gametocytes were washed twice in SA without FCS and resuspended. Activation was induced by adding exflagellation medium. Parasites were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen at 6, 12, 18 and 60 s after activation. For the initial time point, the exflagellation medium was replaced by SA. For each time point, four independent biological replicates were produced and analysed.  A lysis buffer was prepared with a Protease & Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Samples were split in half and lysis buffer was added to each half. The samples were vortexed and then heated at 95 ∘C for 10 min. DNA was sheared via pulses of sonication. The samples were centrifuged for 30min at 14000rpm and supernatant was collected. The samples were incubated with iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature. Protein digest used the FASP method with Amicon Ultra-15 30K filter units, Trypsin Gold was added at a 1:50 ratio and the digest was incubated at 37 ∘C overnight. The resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light cartridges.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on TiO2 tips. Both eluates were pooled, acidified and then desalted on Graphite Spin Columns. Each sample was split into two technical replicates.  The dried phosphopeptides were resuspended before LC-MS/MS analysis on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. The peptides were loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 trap column then separated on a PepMap C18 analytical column over a 240 min linear gradient. The Orbitrap operated in the standard “top 15” data-dependent acquisition mode, the preview mode was disabled. The MS full scan was set at m/z 380–1600 with the resolution at 30 000 at m/z 400 and a lock mass at m/z 445.120 025. The AGC was set at 1 × 106 with a maximum injection time at 200 ms. The 15 most abundant multiply-charged precursor ions, with minimal signals above 3000 counts, were selected for CID fragmentation (MS/MS) in the ion trap, which had the AGC set at 5000 with the maximum injection time at 100 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration time was set for 60 s with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. The isolation width was 2.0 Da and the normalised collision energy was 35 %. LC-MS/MS analyses of technical replicates were repeated sequentially.  The CDPK4KO and the SRPK1KO experiments consisted of 8 samples each: wild-type and knock-out samples measured at two time points, unactivated and activated, in two biological replicates. Lysis buffer was added to the parasite suspension, and then processed as described above. 300 µg proteins were taken and the volumes were equalised with 100 mM TEAB followed by alkylation with IAA. Proteins were precipitated by MTBE and then digested with trypsin. 100 µg peptides were taken from each replicate for TMT 10plex labelling, then mixed and dried in a SpeedVac. The labelled peptide mixture was fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column with a linear gradient in 30. Fractions were collected every 30 s and then concatenated into 12 fractions and dried in a SpeedVac.  Enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed using IMAC with PHOS-Select Iron Affinity Gel then TiO2 tips sequentially. All procedures followed the manufacturer’s instruction with some modification. The peptides were redissolved then added to pre-washed PHOS-Select Iron Affinity Gel and left binding at room temperature with end-to-end rotation for 30 min. The beads were washed three times. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice then dried in a SpeedVac. The flow-through and the first wash of IMAC beads were collected and dried in a SpeedVac, and then the phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 tips as described above.  The enriched phosphopeptides were redissolved before LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. The peptides were separated with a linear gradient in 120 min. The Fusion was operated using the “Top Speed” method with 2 s cycle time. The MS full scan was in the Orbitrap with the following settings: scan range at m/z 380–1500 with a lock mass at 445.120 025, resolution at 120 000 at m/z 200, and AGC at 4 × 105 with a maximum injection time at 50 ms. The multiply-charged precursor ions (2+ to 6+) at most intense, with a minimal signal above 10 000 counts, were dynamically selected for high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) (MS/MS) and detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution at 30 000 at m/z 200. The isolation width was 1.2 Da in quadrupole, and the collision energy was set at 40 %. The dynamic exclusion duration time was set for 60 s with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width, the AGC was set at 1 × 105 with the maximum injection time at 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
Time course experiment  Raw spectra from the time-course experiment were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) [49]. Technical replicates were treated as fractions. The minimum peptide length was set at seven and protein and site identification false discovery rates (FDR) were set at 0.01. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were searched against the P. berghei annotated protein database retrieved from PlasmoDB (http://www.plasmodb.org; version 13.0) and the M. musculus protein sequence database retrieved from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). Peptides were quantified using the iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) method [50], as implemented in MaxQuant, using a logarithmic fit and spectra-matching between runs. Acetylation, deamidation, oxidation and phosphorylation were included as modifications in the protein quantification. Only phosphosites with a localisation probability of 0.75 or greater were retained for further analysis. Time courses for the change in phosphorylation level for each phosphosite were calculated using the composite intensity scores estimated by MaxQuant from all peptide evidence for that site. For each time point (0, 6, 12, 18 and 60 s), these phosphosite intensities were quantile normalised between the four biological replicates [51]. For each site at each time point, the mean and standard error of the intensities were calculated if intensities were measured in at least two replicates, otherwise it was considered not to have been detected. The standard error of the site’s intensities at a given time point was compared to the distribution of standard errors of all sites’ intensities for that time point. If a site’s standard error of intensities at any time point was greater than the distribution’s upper quartile plus 1.5 times the interquartile range (IQR) (i.e. the upper “whisker” on a standard box-and-whisker plot), that site was discarded as unreliable.  Three time courses were then generated from these values: the “full” time course (0–60 s), for sites that were detected at all five time points; a “late” truncated time course (6–60 s), for sites that were not detected in unactivated parasites; and an “early” truncated time course (0–18 s), for sites that were not detected at the 60 s time point. For each site, ratios were calculated from its intensity at each time point against its intensity at the first time point and were logarithmically transformed (base 2) (e.g. log2 ). Only complete time courses, with no missing data, were retained for further analysis.    Phosphopeptide enrichment  Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD2.1; Thermo Fisher) using both SequestHT and Mascot search engines against a combined protein database of P. berghei and mouse as above. Trypsin maximum missed cleavage sites were set to 2. The dynamic modifications set in both Mascot and SequestHT were Acetyl (N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Phospho (STY) and Oxidation (M), while in SequestHT Camabidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. The remaining settings were the same in both: precursor mass tolerance at 20 ppm, fragment at 0.5 Da, and TMT6plex as fixed modification. All files acquired from same set of TMT10plex experiments, including from both IMAC and TiO2 purified samples, were set as fractions. The search result was validated by Percolate where the q-value was set at 0.01. The PSMs were identified, quantified and grouped to the peptides. Both PSMs and peptides were filtered with 1 % FDR, then further group to proteins with 1 % FDR where only peptides at high confidence were selected. Both unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification, and protein and peptide abundance values were calculated as summed PSM quan values (S/N values of reporter ions). The abundances were normalised on Total Peptide Amount, and then scaled with On Channels Average. The co-isolation threshold was set at 50 % to reduce the isolation interference. The phosphorylation sites were localised by phosphoRS as implemented in PD2.1 with site probability set at 75.

### Publication Abstract
The transmission of malaria parasites to mosquitoes relies on the rapid induction of sexual reproduction upon their ingestion into a blood meal. Haploid female and male gametocytes become activated and emerge from their host cells, and the males enter the cell cycle to produce eight microgametes. The synchronized nature of gametogenesis allowed us to investigate phosphorylation signaling during its first minute in Plasmodium berghei via a high-resolution time course of the phosphoproteome. This revealed an unexpectedly broad response, with proteins related to distinct cell cycle events undergoing simultaneous phosphoregulation. We implicate several protein kinases in the process, and we validate our analyses on the plant-like calcium-dependent protein kinase 4 (CDPK4) and a homolog of serine/arginine-rich protein kinases (SRPK1). Mutants in these kinases displayed distinct phosphoproteomic disruptions, consistent with differences in their phenotypes. The results reveal the central role of protein phosphorylation in the atypical cell cycle regulation of a divergent eukaryote.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Phosphorylation, Lc-msms. tmt

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


