### Accession
PXD011799

### Title
B cells sustain inflammation in human melanoma

### Description
This is the data to the melanoma-medium induction experiment. Tumor-associated and peripheral B cells from four patients were exposed to melanoma-conditioned medium (from one of the patients). This induced distinct phenotypic and functional changes in the B cells.

### Sample Protocol
All reagents were of analytical grade and obtained from SIGMA-Aldrich, unless specified otherwise. Cells were lysed in freshly prepared lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 7.6, 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1 mM sodium vanadate, 1 mM NaF, protease inhibitor (cOmpleteTm EDTA-free) and phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOPTm) cocktail tablets (both Roche). Cell extraction and DNA sharing was assisted by sonication and cell debris pelleted by centrifugation at 20.000 x g for 15 min at 20°C. The supernatant was collected and the total protein concentration determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology). Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters (Millipore) essentially according to the procedure described by54. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 0.1 M and the samples heated at 99°C for 5 minutes. 200 µL of each protein extract was mixed with 3.8 mL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 (UA) in the filter unit and centrifuged at 4000 g for 30 min at 20°C to remove SDS. Any remaining SDS was exchanged by urea in a second washing step with 4 mL of UA. Free thiols were alkylated with 2 mL of 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT. Afterwards, three washes with 3 mL of UA solution and then three washes with 3 mL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) were performed. Proteins were digested on filters with trypsin (1:50; Trypsin Gold, Promega) in 50 mM TEAB overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridges (50 mg, Waters Corporation) using 80 % acetonitrile containing 0.1 % TFA for the elution and evaporating the solvent in a vacuum centrifuge. TMT 10plex-labeling of peptides Isobaric labeling was performed using 10plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Off-line high-pH reversed phase fractionations was performed essentially according to (Batth et al. JPR 2014) Phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a modified TiO2 batch protocol. In short, titanium dioxide beads (5 µm; GL Sciences, Japan) were sequentially washed with 120 µl 50% methanol, 300 µl ddH2O and 2x 300 µl binding solvent (1M glycolic acid, 70 % MeCN, 3 % TFA). In between, beads were spun down and the supernatant was discarded. Dried peptides of each of the 12 fractions were individually resuspended in 150 µl binding solvent and incubated with the titanium dioxide beads at a bead to peptide ratio of 1:4 for 30 min at RT under continuous rotation. Bead-bound peptides were washed twice with binding solvent, 2x with washing solvent A (70 % MeCN, 3 % TFA) and 2x with washing solvent B (1 % MeCN, 0.1 % TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads with 2x 150µl 0.3M NH4OH. The eluates were acidified by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 2 % and desalted using C18 StageTips56. Global proteome and the phosphopeptide fractions were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm,) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, all Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient over for 2 hours from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230  nl/min. Eluting peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with EASY-Spray™ source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with a cycle time of 3 s. FTMS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120k, with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 200.000, and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (included charge states 2-6 z), and monoistopic peak assignment. Selected precursors were excluded from repeated fragmentation using a dynamic window (40 s, ± 10 ppm). The MS2 precursor were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.2 m/z. For FTMS2, the Orbitrap was operated at 50k resolution, with an AGC target of 100.000 and a maximal injection time of 150 ms for global proteome samples ad 250 ms for phosphopeptide samples. Precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 42 %.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to the MGF files using ProteoWizard’s msConvert tool using vendor libraries. Peak list files were search using MSGF+ (version 10089) and X!Tandem (version 2017.2.1.2). The precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment tolerance to 0.01 Da for X!Tandem and machine type to QExactive with HCD fragmentation in MSGF+, and 1 missed cleavage was allowed. TMT tags and Carbamidomethylation of C were set as fixed modifications, Oxidation of M and Deamidation of N and Q, and Phosphorylation of S, T, and Y (TiO2 enriched samples only) as variable modifications. Searches were performed against the human SwissProt database (version 17-02), combined with sequences of common contaminants and reversed decoy sequences. Search results were filtered based on the target-decoy strategy at 0.01 FDR if both search engines identified the same sequences, diverging results were discarded, and spectra only identified by one search engines filtered at 0.001 FDR (search engine specific). For quantitation all spectra with >30% interference based on total ion current were discarded. Isotope impurity correction and normalisation of intensity values was performed using the R Bioconductor package isobar61 (version 1.26). Protein abundance was estimated using the R Bioconductor package MSnbase62 (version 2.6.3) using the iPQF method and only peptides uniquely mapping to a single protein. Differential expression analysis was performed using the R Bioconductor package limma63 (version 3.35.3). The linear model included the MS run, patient, cell type (PBMCB vs. TAB) as factors next to the treatment group.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor associated inflammation predicts response to immune checkpoint blockade in human melanoma. Current theories on regulation of inflammation center on anti-tumor T cell responses. Here we show that tumor associated B cells are vital to melanoma associated inflammation. Human B cells express pro- and anti-inflammatory factors and differentiate into plasmablast-like cells when exposed to autologous melanoma secretomes in vitro. This plasmablast-like phenotype can be reconciled in human melanomas where plasmablast-like cells also express T cell-recruiting chemokines CCL3, CCL4, CCL5. Depletion of B cells in melanoma patients by anti-CD20 immunotherapy decreases tumor associated inflammation and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell numbers. Plasmablast-like cells also increase PD-1<sup>+</sup> T cell activation through anti-PD-1 blockade in vitro and their frequency in pretherapy melanomas predicts response and survival to immune checkpoint blockade. Tumor associated B cells therefore orchestrate and sustain melanoma inflammation and may represent a predictor for survival and response to immune checkpoint blockade therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Melanoma, Inflammatory tumor microenvironment

### Affiliations
EMBL-EBI
Derpartmen of Dermatology Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Johannes Griss

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan N Wagner
Derpartmen of Dermatology Medical University of Vienna


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: B cells
- disease: melanoma
- cell type: not available
- label: TMT126, TMT127N, TMT127C, TMT128N, TMT128C, TMT129N, TMT129C, TMT130N, TMT130C, TMT131
- instrument: NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
- modification parameters: NT=TMT6plex;PP=Any N-term;AC=UNIMOD:737;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;AC=UNIMOD:4;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.2: NT=Oxidation;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=variable
- modification parameters.3: NT=Deamidation;TA=N,Q;AC=UNIMOD:7;MT=variable
- modification parameters.4: not available, NT=Phosphorylation;TA=S,T,Y;AC=UNIMOD:21;MT=variable

