### Accession
PXD013435

### Title
RST1 and RIPR connect the cytosolic RNA exosome to the SKI complex in Arabidopsis

### Description
The RNA exosome is a key 3’-5’ exoribonuclease with evolutionary conserved structure and roles. Its cytosolic functions require the co-factors SKI7 and the Ski complex. Here we demonstrate by co-purification experiments that the ARM repeat protein RESURRECTION1 (RST1) and RST1 INTERACTING PROTEIN (RIPR) connect the cytosolic Arabidopsis RNA exosome to the Ski complex. rst1 and ripr mutants accumulate small RNAs many of which are quality control siRNAs (rqc-siRNAs) produced by the postranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS) machinery when mRNA degradation is compromised. Indeed, quasi identical small RNA populations are observed in mutants lacking the RRP45B/CER7 subunit of the core exosome. This biochemical and genetic evidence supports a physical and functional link between RST1, RIPR and the RNA exosome. Our data reveal the existence of additional cytosolic exosome co-factors besides the known SKI subunits. Interestingly, RST1 is not restricted to plants, as homologues with a similar domain architecture exist in animals, including humans.

### Sample Protocol
Plants were selected by testing crude flower extracts by western blots using homemade antibodies specific to GFP. For each IP, 200-500 mg of Arabidopsis thaliana flower buds were ground in liquid nitrogen or directly in 2 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCL pH 7.5, 25 or 50 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, protease inhibitors (Complete - EDTA, Roche). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation (2 times 5 min, 16000 x g, 4 °C) the cleared supernatants were incubated for 30 min with GFP antibodies coupled to magnetic microbeads (Miltenyi). Beads were loaded on magnetized MACS separation columns equilibrated with lysis buffer and washed 5 times with 300 µl washing buffer (50mM Tris HCL pH 7.5, 25 or 50 mM NaCl, 0,1 % Triton). Samples were eluted in 50 µl of prewarmed elution buffer (Miltenyi).  Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described in Chicois et al., 2018.  The RST1 dataset comprised the data collected from 15 immunoprecipitation experiments performed in 6 biological replicates of each GFP-RST1 and RST1-GFP. 14 IPs from 4 biological replicates were performed with RRP45A. 6 experiments from 2 biological replicates were used for each of RRP41-GFP and CER7-GFP, and the RIPR dataset contained 4 IPs from 2 biological replicates of each RIPR-GFP and GFP-RIPR. Control IPs included 4 biological replicates of Col-0 incubated with GFP antibodies, 6 IPs from 4 biological replicates of GFP-expressing plants treated with GFP antibodies, and 10 IPs performed with anti-HA antibodies in 3 biological replicates RST1-GFP, 3 replicates GFP-RST1 and in 1 RFP sample.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the TAIR 10 database with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were imported into Proline 1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA exosome is a key 3'-5' exoribonuclease with an evolutionarily conserved structure and function. Its cytosolic functions require the co-factors SKI7 and the Ski complex. Here we demonstrate by co-purification experiments that the ARM-repeat protein RESURRECTION1 (RST1) and RST1 INTERACTING PROTEIN (RIPR) connect the cytosolic Arabidopsis RNA exosome to the Ski complex. rst1 and ripr mutants accumulate RNA quality control siRNAs (rqc-siRNAs) produced by the post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) machinery when mRNA degradation is compromised. The small RNA populations observed in rst1 and ripr mutants are also detected in mutants lacking the RRP45B/CER7 core exosome subunit. Thus, molecular and genetic evidence supports a physical and functional link between RST1, RIPR and the RNA exosome. Our data reveal the existence of additional cytosolic exosome co-factors besides the known Ski subunits. RST1 is not restricted to plants, as homologues with a similar domain architecture but unknown function exist in animals, including humans.

### Keywords
Ski7, Exosome complex, Rna exosome, Ski complex, Rst1, Exo9

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UPR 2357, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Gagliardi
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UPR 2357, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.


