### Accession
PXD026480

### Title
human breast cancer cell line LC-MS/MS

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) have been identified as key regulators of tumorigenesis and development. We aim to explore the biological functions and molecular mechanisms of lncRNA MIR200CHG in breast cancer. We found that MIR200CHG is highly expressed in breast cancer tissues and is related to the tumor size and histopathological grade. In vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that MIR200CHG can promote breast cancer proliferation, invasion, and drug resistance. MIR200CHG directly binds to the transcription factor Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1), and inhibits its ubiquitination and degradation. MIR200CHG regulates YB-1 phosphorylation at serine 102, thereby affecting the expression of genes related to tumor cell proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, and drug resistance. Additionally, MIR200CHG partially affects the expression of miR-200c/141-3p encoded by its intron region. Therefore, MIR200CHG can promote the proliferation, invasion, and drug resistance of breast cancer by interacting with and stabilizing YB-1, and has the potential to become a target for breast cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The sense and antisense MIR200CHG were amplified in vitro, and labeled with desulfurization biotinylation, followed by incubation with streptavidin magnetic beads. All experiments were performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and the proteins that interacted with the sense or antisense MIR200CHG were separated. The proteins were detected by Triple TOF 5600-plus instrument (AB Sciex, Redwood City, California, USA) and analyzed by Proteinpilot software.

### Data Protocol
Analyze the pull-down protein solution of the sense and antisense MIR200CHG by mass spectrometry, and process the data by the Proteinpilot software. Using strict parameters, including ≥95% confidence intervals and ≥1 unique peptides, we obtained proteins that bind to the sense and antisense MIR200CHG.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mass spectrometric detection, Breast cancer cell

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital
 Jiangsu Cancer Hospital

### Submitter
li tang

### Lab Head
Dr feng yan
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital


