### Accession
PXD014049

### Title
Addition of RND1 peptide to E. coli BW25113 DELserB, his operator to lacZ transcription fusion.

### Description
Addition of RND1 peptide to E. coli BW25113 (DELserB, his operator to lacZ transcription fusion.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Protein lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into six separate pieces, and proteins were reduced in-gel with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3, and finally digested with 17 ng/μl sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 using a slightly modified in-gel digestion protocol. The produced peptides were eluted from the gel pieces using 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (ThermoSavant SPD SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific), and finally dissolved in 1% (v/v) FA.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Peptide samples were desalted using Stage Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific nLC-1000 with a two-column setup; an Acclaim PepMap 100 (2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) pre-column was connected in front of an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 reversed phase column (50 cm x 75 μm, 2 μm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated to 35°C, running solvent A (H2O and 0.1% (v/v) FA). A gradient of 2–40% solvent B (acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) FA) was run at 250 nL/min over a period of 3 h. The eluted peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, operated at a Top Speed data-dependent acquisition scan mode, ion-transfer tube temperature of 275°C, and a spray voltage of 2.4 kV. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 400 – 2000) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, and analyzed in the Orbitrap with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Ions with an intensity above 5.0e3 were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a collision energy of 30%. The linear ion trap AGC target was set at 1.0e4 with a maximum injection time of 40 ms, and data was collected at centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s after the first MS1 of the peptide. The system was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63.3, Thermo Scientific). Instrument quality control was monitored using the Promega 6x5 LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix (Promega) before and after each MS experiment run, and analyzed using PReMiS software (version 1.0.5.1, Promega).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data analysis. Data analysis of raw files was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3) and the Andromeda search engine, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. First search peptide MS1 Orbitrap tolerance was set to 20 ppm and iontrap MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Match between runs was enabled to identify peptides in fractions where only MS1 data were available. Minimum LFQ ratio count was set to 2, and the advanced ratio estimation option was enabled. Peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Echerichia coli K12 proteome database (UP000000625, version 2019-03-27) with a maximum of two trypsin miscleavages per peptide. The contaminants database of MaxQuant was also utilized. A decoy search was made against the reversed database, where the peptide and protein false discovery rates were both set to 1%. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides of at least 7 amino acids in length were considered reliable. The peptide output from MaxQuant was filtered by removing reverse database hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site (PTMs). Differential expression analysis was performed by the DEP 1.7.0 package for Bioconductor and R. The LFQ intensity data was normalized by the variance stabilizing transformation (vsn) method, and missing values was imputed by a maximum likelihood-based imputation method using the EM algorithm. Protein-wise linear models and empirical Bayes statistics using limma was used for the differential expression calculation. The P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Orbitrap, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, PO Box 582, SE-751 23, Uppsala, Sweden
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Mårten Larsson

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Andersson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, PO Box 582, SE-751 23, Uppsala, Sweden


