### Accession
PXD030504

### Title
The permanently chaperone-active small heat shock protein Hsp17 from C. elegans exhibits topological separation of its N-terminal regions

### Description
Small Heat shock proteins (sHsps) are a family of molecular chaperones that bind non-native proteins in an ATP-independent manner. C. elegans encodes 16 different sHsps, among them Hsp17, which is evolutionarily distinct from other sHsps in the nematode. The structure and mechanism of Hsp17 and how these may differ from other sHsps remain unclear. Here, we find that Hsp17 has a distinct expression pattern, structural organization, and chaperone function. Consistent with its presence under non-stress conditions, and in contrast to many other sHsps, we determined that Hsp17 is a mono-disperse, permanently active chaperone in vitro, which interacts with hundreds of different C. elegans proteins under physiological conditions. Additionally, our cryo-EM structure of Hsp17 reveals that in the 24-mer complex, 12 N-terminal regions are involved in its chaperone function. These flexible regions are located on the outside of the spherical oligomer, whereas the other 12 N-terminal regions are engaged in stabilizing interactions in its interior. This allows the same region in Hsp17 to perform different functions depending on the topological context. Taken together, our results reveal structural and functional features that further define the structural basis of permanently active sHsps.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking reactions were carried out based on a recent published protocol (Mühlhofer et al., 2021) with slight modifications. Each sample, containing 20 µg Hsp17 in 40 µL volume, was pre-incubated for 1 h at 20 °C. To start the reaction, 4 µL of freshly solubilized (DMSO) 30 mM disuccinimidyl glutarate (Thermo ScientificTM) were added. The incubation was continued for 1 h at 20 °C. Subsequently, the reaction was stopped by the addition of 6 µL 1 M Tris (pH 7.4). Next, 29.5 µL denaturation buffer (50 mM Tris; pH 7.4, 6 M Urea) and 2.7 µL 100 mM DTT were added to the samples, followed by a 30 min incubation step at 56 °C to denature the cross-linked proteins. After cooling the samples back to RT, 6.3 µL 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added and the samples were incubated for 20 min in the dark. For digestion, 1 µL trysin (sequencing grade 500 ng; Promega) were added and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. To stop the digestion, 1 µL formic acid (FA) were added.  Afterwards, samples were desalted using self-packed stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Stage tips were prepared by cutting out small round pieces of a double layer of EmporeTM C18 material (3M) with a diameter of 1 mm and transferring it into the tip. The self-packed stage tips were pre-equilibrated with 70 µL of methanol and pre-washed three times with 70 µL 0.5 % formic acid with centrifugation step at 960 x g in between. Next, 150 µL supernatant from the on-bead digested samples were added. Samples were again centrifuged and washed three times with 70 µL 0.5 % formic acid. As final step the bound peptides were eluted by adding two times 30 µL buffer III (80 % acetonitrile, 0.5 % formic acid). Samples were dried after the elution in a speed vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at -80 °C. On the day of the measurement, samples were dissolved in 25 µL 1 % formic acid, sonicated for 15 min and then filtered through a Ultrafree® PVDF membrane (0.22 µM, Merck Millipore) by centrifugation for 2 min at 7,000 g. Finally, the samples were transferred into Chromacol vials (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS measurement MS measurements were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion that is coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data acquisition Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 3.0sp2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Next, for separation a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C was used. Each measurement was done with a flow rate of 400 nL/min and a gradient over 135 min, 5-90 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (7 min 5 % acetonitrile, 105 min to 22 %, 10 min to 32 %, 10 min to 90 %, 10 min wash at 90 %, 10 min equilibration at 5 %). Survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (AGC target 2.0e5). The HCD collision energy was set to 30 % and charge states 2-7 were selected. The maximum injection time in the ion trap was set to 100 ms with an AGC target of 1.0e4. At all available parallelization time injection of ions was allowed and dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 1 min.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw files were converted with ProteoWizard (version 3.0.21278) (Chambers et al., 2012) into mzML files, which were needed for further evaluation with Kojak (version 2.0.0 alpha2) (Hoopmann et al.,2015). As database for the analysis, the protein sequence as well as the reverse sequence (as decoy sequence) were provided. The following parameters were set: Up to 2 missed cleavages were accepted, the maximum peptide mass was set to 8000 Da and the minimum was set to 500 Da. The mass tolerance of the precursor was set to 1 ppm. Obtained files were transferred into XML files which are suitable for ProXL (online tool) (Riffle et al., 2016) visualization. Data from different attempts were combined, the minimum score (Kojak) was set to 2.0 and minimum PSM value was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
Small Heat shock proteins (sHsps) are a family of molecular chaperones that bind nonnative proteins in an ATP-independent manner. Caenorhabditis elegans encodes 16 different sHsps, among them Hsp17, which is evolutionarily distinct from other sHsps in the nematode. The structure and mechanism of Hsp17 and how these may differ from other sHsps remain unclear. Here, we find that Hsp17 has a distinct expression pattern, structural organization, and chaperone function. Consistent with its presence under nonstress conditions, and in contrast to many other sHsps, we determined that Hsp17 is a mono-disperse, permanently active chaperone in&#xa0;vitro, which interacts with hundreds of different C.&#xa0;elegans proteins under physiological conditions. Additionally, our cryo-EM structure of Hsp17 reveals that in the 24-mer complex, 12 N-terminal regions are involved in its chaperone function. These flexible regions are located on the outside of the spherical oligomer, whereas the other 12 N-terminal regions are engaged in stabilizing interactions in its interior. This allows the same region in Hsp17 to perform different functions depending on the topological context. Taken together, our results reveal structural and functional features that further define the structural basis of permanently active sHsps.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Cehsp17, Shsps, Chaperone, Hsp17, Small heat shock protein, Hsp-17

### Affiliations
Technical University Munich (TUM)
Center for Protein Assemblies, Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8, 85747 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Annika Strauch

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Buchner
Center for Protein Assemblies, Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8, 85747 Garching, Germany


