### Accession
PXD014358

### Title
Zygote/2-celled proembryo specific protein TaMAB2 is involved in proteosomal degradation of translation initiation factors via a cytoskeleton related mechanism

### Description
A family of MATH-BTB proteins is known to act as substrate-specific adaptors of CUL3-based E3 ligases in the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. The BTB domain binds a CUL3 scaffold protein and the less conserved MATH domain targets a highly diverse collection of substrate proteins to promote their ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. Among plants, a significant expansion of the MATH-BTB family occurred in grasses. Here, we functionally describe TaMAB2, a wheat MATH-BTB protein expressed exclusively in the zygote and two-celled proembryo. The overexpression of TaMAB2 in Arabidopsis plants provoked microtubular bundling and re-orientation together with retarded growth.  In model BY-2 cells, TaMAB2 showed a microtubule and a ubiquitin-related localization which together with  direct interaction with CUL3 pointed out its function in targeting specific substrates for ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Results of protein interaction analyses indicated eukaryotic translation initiation factors 3 and 4 as the most likely substrates of TaMAB2, while the interaction with cytoskeletal element, particularly actin 11 hints at the possible TaMAB2 mediated intreplay between cytoskeleton and translation initiation machinery during the first division of the zygote.

### Sample Protocol
TaMAB2-TAP interaction partners were enriched by tandem affinity purification from plant 12-day old seedlings or cell suspensions harvested 7 days after subculturing. Enirched proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested in-gel. Resulting peptides were cleaned on StageTips, separated on C18 nano column, and measured and fragmented by Orbitrap Discovery MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by MaxQuant software. Proteins were identified by Andormeda or X!Tandem search engine using A. thaliana complete proteome and TaMAB2 sequence.

### Publication Abstract
MATH-BTB proteins are known to act as substrate-specific adaptors of CUL3-based E3 ligases in the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. Their BTB domain binds to CUL3 scaffold proteins and the less conserved MATH domain targets a highly diverse collection of substrate proteins to promote their ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. In plants, a significant expansion of the MATH-BTB family occurred in the grasses. Here, we report analysis of TaMAB2, a MATH-BTB protein transiently expressed at the onset of embryogenesis in wheat. Due to difficulties in studying its role in zygotes and early embryos, we have overexpressed <i>TaMAB2</i> in <i>Arabidopsis</i> to generate gain-of-function mutants and to elucidate interaction partners and substrates. Overexpression plants showed severe growth defects as well as disorganization of microtubule bundles indicating that TaMAB2 interacts with substrates in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. In tobacco BY-2 cells, TaMAB2 showed a microtubule and ubiquitin-associated cytoplasmic localization pattern in form of foci. Its direct interaction with CUL3 suggests functions in targeting specific substrates for ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Although direct interactions with tubulin could not be confimed, tandem affinity purification of TaMAB2 interactors point towards cytoskeletal proteins including tubulin and actin as well as the translation initiation machinery. The idenification of various subunits of eucaryotic translation initiation factors eIF3 and eIF4 as TaMAB2 interactors indicate regulation of translation initiation as a major function during onset of embryogenesis in plants.

### Keywords
Proteasomal degradation, Ubiquitin, Eif3, Eif4, Math-btb, Translation initiation, Lc-ms/ms, Cytoskeleton, Triticum aestivum, Actin11

### Affiliations
Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Croatia
Genos ltd

### Submitter
Genadij Razdorov

### Lab Head
Dr Dunja Leljak
Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Croatia


