### Accession
PXD028928

### Title
Long-term nutritional regulation of liver proteome

### Description
Nutrient sensing pathways influence metabolic health and aging, offering the possibility that diet might be used therapeutically, alone or with drugs targeting these pathways. We used the Geometric Framework for Nutrition to study interactive and comparative effects of diet and drugs on the hepatic proteome in mice across 40 dietary treatments differing in macronutrient ratios, energy density, and drug treatment (metformin, rapamycin, resveratrol).

### Sample Protocol
Liver was lysed in 6 M guanidine in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide by tip-probe sonication. The samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone overnight and protein centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone and resuspended in 10% trifluoroethanol in 100 mM HEPEs, pH 7.9. Protein determination was performed with BCA, normalized to 20 µg/20 µl and digested with 0.4 µg of sequencing grade trypsin and 0.4 µg of LysC (Wako, Japan). Peptides were labelled with 40 µg of 10-plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) in a final concentration of 50% acetonitrile at room temperature for 1.5 h followed by de-acylation with a final concentration of 0.3% hydroxylamine and quenching with a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Isotopically labelled peptides for each individual TMT 10-plex experiment were pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation to ~50 µl. A total of fifteen TMT 10-plex experiments were performed containing nine channels of individual livers and the 10th channel (label 131) a pooled internal control that was identical across all experiments. The dried peptides were desalted by SDB-RPS microcolumns and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Thirty micrograms of peptide were fractionated on an in-house fabricated 25 cm x 320 µm column packed with C18BEH particles (3 µm, Waters). Peptides were separated on a gradient of 0 – 30% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 7.9) over 60 min at 6 µl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC and detection at 210 nm with a total of 48 fractions collected and concatenated down to 12.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Dionex ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptides were separated on 40 cm x 75 µm column containing 1.9 um C18AQ Reprosil particles on a linear gradient of 2- 30% acetonitrile over 2 h. Electrospray ionisation was performed at 2.3 kV and positively charged peptides detected via a full scan MS (350-1550 m/z, 1e6 AGC, 60K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-dependent MS/MS analysis performed with CID of 35% normalised collision energy (NCE) (rapid scan rate, 2e4 AGC, 50 ms injection time, 10 ms activation time, 0.7 m/z isolation) of the top 10 most abundant peptides. Synchronous-precursor selection with MS3 (SPS-MS3) analysis was enabled with HCD of 60 NCE (50K resolution, 1e5 AGC, 105 ms injection time). Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.3 and searched against the Mouse UniProt database (November 2018) using SEQUEST. The precursor MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da with a maximum of 2 miss-cleavage. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification, and TMT tags on peptide N-terminus / lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. All data was searched as a single batch and the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) of each database search filtered to 1% FDR using a target/decoy approach with Percolator. The filtered PSMs from each database search were grouped and q-values generated at the peptide level with the Qvality algorithm. Finally, the grouped peptide data was further filtered to 1% protein FDR using Protein Validator. Quantification was performed with the reporter ion quantification node for TMT quantification in Proteome Discoverer. TMT precision was set to 20 ppm and corrected for isotopic impurities. Only spectra with <50% co-isolation interference were used for quantification with an average signal-to-noise filter of >10.

### Publication Abstract
Nutrient sensing pathways influence metabolic health and aging, offering the possibility that diet might be used therapeutically, alone or with drugs targeting these pathways. We used the Geometric Framework for Nutrition to study interactive and comparative effects of diet and drugs on the hepatic proteome in mice across 40 dietary treatments differing in macronutrient ratios, energy density, and drug treatment (metformin, rapamycin, resveratrol). There was a strong negative correlation between dietary energy and the spliceosome and a strong positive correlation between dietary protein and mitochondria, generating oxidative stress at high protein intake. Metformin, rapamycin, and resveratrol had lesser effects than and dampened responses to diet. Rapamycin and metformin reduced mitochondrial responses to dietary protein while the effects of carbohydrates and fat were downregulated by resveratrol. Dietary composition has a powerful impact on the hepatic proteome, not just on metabolic pathways but fundamental processes such as mitochondrial function and RNA splicing.

### Keywords
Diet, Liver, Resveratrol, Proteomics, Rapamycin, Metformin

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


