### Accession
PXD030484

### Title
Adrenaline-mediated activation of antibiotic production in Streptomyces highlights catechol as elicitor of specialized metabolism

### Description
Actinobacteria are a rich source of bioactive molecules, and genome sequencing has shown that the vast majority of their biosynthetic potential has yet to be explored. However, many of their biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) are poorly expressed in the laboratory, which prevents discovery of their cognate natural products. To exploit their full biosynthetic potential, better understanding of the signals that promote the expression of BGCs is needed. Here, we show that the human stress hormone epinephrine (adrenaline) elicits antibiotic production by Actinobacteria. Catechol was established as the likely eliciting moiety, since similar responses were seen for catechol and for the catechol-containing molecules dopamine and catechin but not for related molecules. Exploration of the catechol-responsive strain Streptomyces sp. MBT84 using mass spectral networking revealed elicitation of a BGC that produces the angucycline glycosides aquayamycin, urdamycinone B and galtamycin C. Heterologous expression of the catechol-cleaving enzymes catechol 1,2-dioxygenase or catechol 2,3 dioxygenase counteracted the eliciting effect of catechol. Thus, for the first time we show the activation of natural product biosynthesis by a human hormone, leading to the identification of the ubiquitous catechol moiety as elicitor of BGCs for siderophores and antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
MM agar plates with and without 100 μM catechol were covered with cellophane. MBT84 spores were spread on the plates using glass beads and incubated for five days at 30 °C.  Biomass was scraped off and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, lysed in a precooled TissueLyser adaptor (Qiagen, The Netherlands) and proteins extracted using lysis buffer [4% SDS, 100 mM tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 50 mM EDTA]. The final peptide concentration was adjusted to 40 ng·μL-1 using sample solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for analysis. Quantitative proteomics was used to analyse the expression of catechol dioxygenases and the expression profile of BGC1.4 in recombinant strains of Streptomyces sp. MBT84 as described previously 41. Briefly, the desalted peptide solution was separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) set in a trap-elute configuration, coupled to QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The LC system used a Waters nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 trap column (5 μm, 100 Å, 180 μm × 20 mm) for peptide loading/retention, and Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 C18 analytical column (1.8 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 250 mm) for peptide separation. The MS was operated in positive mode with data dependent acquisition and default charge of 2.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS files were analysed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.17.0)52 with label free quantification (LFQ) method applied. Proteins were considered significantly altered in expression when FDR-adjusted p < 0.1 were obtained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mbt84, Streptomyces, Bgcs, Catechol, Antibacteria

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University

### Submitter
Chao DU

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr. G.P. van Wezel
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University


