### Accession
PXD033824

### Title
Cx43 purified protein analysis (N-term analysis)

### Description
Purified Cx43 was analyzed to check for modifications of its N-terminus to aid structural studies.

### Sample Protocol
25 ug of affinity and SEC purified Cx43 were digested using a ProtiFi S-trap micro column according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA. The peptides were separated on a C18 column with a linear gradient from 3-30% B (A: 0.1% FA, B: 95% ACN, 0.1% FA) and measured in DIA on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut v 14.5 in directDIA mode. Minimum peptide length was set to 5 amino acids and Phospho (STY) was included as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Gap junction channels (GJCs) mediate intercellular communication by connecting two neighbouring cells and enabling direct exchange of ions and small molecules. Cell coupling via connexin-43 (Cx43) GJCs is important in a wide range of cellular processes in health and disease (Churko and Laird, 2013; Liang et al., 2020; Poelzing and Rosenbaum, 2004), yet the structural basis of Cx43 function and regulation has not been determined until now. Here, we describe the structure of a human Cx43 GJC solved by cryo-EM and single particle analysis at 2.26 &#xc5; resolution. The pore region of Cx43 GJC features several lipid-like densities per Cx43 monomer, located close to a putative lateral access site at the monomer boundary. We found a previously undescribed conformation on the cytosolic side of the pore, formed by the N-terminal domain and the transmembrane helix 2 of Cx43 and stabilized by a small molecule. Structures of the Cx43 GJC and hemichannels (HCs) in nanodiscs reveal a similar gate arrangement. The features of the Cx43 GJC and HC cryo-EM maps and the channel properties revealed by molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the captured states of Cx43 are consistent with a closed state.

### Keywords
Purified protein, Lc-ms/ms, Dia

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr Korkhov
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland


