### Accession
PXD025859

### Title
Structural Interpretation of Glycosite-specific N-Glycans Using Tandem Mass Spectrometry

### Description
In this project we developed a new algorithm termed StrucGP, for large-scale interpretation of N-glycan structures on intact glycopeptides from tandem mass spectrometry data. StrucGP is able to reveal the glycan structure heterogeneity for individual glycosites. The StrucGP also has high performance in distinguishing various structure isoforms and identifying new and rare glycan structures from complex samples.

### Sample Protocol
1)Protein digestion: Both bovine fetuin (Sigma-Aldrich), drosophila cell and proteins from mouse brain tissue were reduced by 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h, and then alkylated by 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding another 2.5 mM DTT and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The protein solutions were first diluted 2-fold with deionized water and incubated with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; protein: enzyme, 100:1, w/w) at 37 °C for 2 hours with shaking. Then a second trypsin digestion was performed (protein: enzyme, 100:1, w/w) after the solutions were further diluted 4 times with deionized water. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min to remove any particulate matter and then purified by a C18/HLB solid phase extraction. Peptides were eluted from the C18/HLB column in 60% ACN/0.1% TFA and the peptide concentrations were measured by BCA reagent. 2)Enrichment of glycopeptides: The intact glycopeptides from mouse brain tissues were enriched using different combinations of desalting column (C18 and HLB column) and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) methods (Oasis MAX SPE column, Waters and in-house ZIC-HILIC micro-column, SeQuant)6. Briefly, the tryptic peptides eluted from C18/HLB column were diluted by 95% ACN/0.1% TFA to a final solvent composition of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Prior to sample loading, the MAX column was sequentially conditioned three time each in 100% ACN, 100 mM triethylammonium acetate, water and finally 95% ACN 1% TFA while the in-house HILIC micro-column was washed twice each by 0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. After samples were loaded, the columns were washed three times with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The glycopeptides bound to the column were eluted in 0.4 ml 0.1% TFA solution. In addition, the flow through of the first column was loaded onto a different second column to maximize the glycopeptide enrichment. In total, eight fractions of glycopeptides were collected. All samples were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were first converted into ‘mzML’ format by Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP)4 and then were preprocessed. The intact glycopeptide analyses were performed using the built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGP and the following protein databases: (a) the bovine fetuin sequence (UniProt Accession: P12763) for the analysis of fetuin; (b) mouse proteome database (UP000000589, downloaded on 13 Mar. 2018) for the analysis of mouse brain. The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin with max 2 missing cleavage sites and the potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The mass tolerance for MS1 and MS2 were set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For the Y ions determination, an optional mass shift of ±1 Da or ±2 Da was allowed in addition to the 20 ppm mass tolerance in MS2. Finally, 1% FDR was set for both peptides and glycans was applied to the quality control of the intact glycopeptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intact glycopeptides, N-glycans, Glycan structure

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, China
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, 710069, P. R. China

### Submitter
Jiechen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Shisheng
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, China


