### Accession
PXD000149

### Title
The potato tuber mitochondrial proteome

### Description
The potato tuber mitochondrial proteome Three biological replicates, 40 gel sections each (120 files) MS raw files (.raw) and peptide search files [MASCOT (.msf), MSGFBD (.txt), PROLUCID (.sqt) and SEQUEST (_sequest.msf)]  Mitochondria were isolated from dormant potato tubers (Solanum tuberosum) and proteins (0.25 mg) resolved by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis , sectioned into 40 equal segments, and tryptic peptides analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap XL. Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using different algorithms against the potato protein database (http://www.potatogenome.net). To estimate the protein false discovery rate (FDR), randomized sequences were combined with the forward database in a concatenate format. MASCOT server 2.3.01, SEQUEST, MS-GFDB and ProLuCID software were used to interpret the data set using very similar parameters. MASCOT and SEQUEST were used integrated within Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software package (Thermo Scientific). Raw files (Thermo) were converted to ms2 and mzXML files to run ProLuCID and MS-GFDB softwares. All search engines were configured to the following parameters: MW range between 200 and 2,000; 1,000 ppm of precursor ion tolerance; oxidation of methionine and asparagine deamidation as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a static modification; trypsin; 2 allowed missed cleavages. After searches, the PSMs were filtered out at 5ppm of precursor ion tolerance achieving a false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 1% at the protein level for each biological replicate. Filtered data were uploaded on Protein Herder module within Compass package for protein grouping. At this step, all sets of indistinguishable proteins, which were assigned by the same peptides, are combined into protein groups.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are called the powerhouses of the cell. To better understand the role of mitochondria in maintaining and regulating metabolism in storage tissues, highly purified mitochondria were isolated from dormant potato tubers (Solanum tuberosum 'Folva') and their proteome investigated. Proteins were resolved by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and tryptic peptides were extracted from gel slices and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap XL. Using four different search programs, a total of 1,060 nonredundant proteins were identified in a quantitative manner using normalized spectral counts including as many as 5-fold more "extreme" proteins (low mass, high isoelectric point, hydrophobic) than previous mitochondrial proteome studies. We estimate that this compendium of proteins represents a high coverage of the potato tuber mitochondrial proteome (possibly as high as 85%). The dynamic range of protein expression spanned 1,800-fold and included nearly all components of the electron transport chain, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and protein import apparatus. Additionally, we identified 71 pentatricopeptide repeat proteins, 29 membrane carriers/transporters, a number of new proteins involved in coenzyme biosynthesis and iron metabolism, the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, and a type 2C protein phosphatase that may catalyze the dephosphorylation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Systematic analysis of prominent posttranslational modifications revealed that more than 50% of the identified proteins harbor at least one modification. The most prominently observed class of posttranslational modifications was oxidative modifications. This study reveals approximately 500 new or previously unconfirmed plant mitochondrial proteins and outlines a facile strategy for unbiased, near-comprehensive identification of mitochondrial proteins and their modified forms.

### Keywords
Potato; mitochondria; proteome; solanum tuberosum

### Affiliations
Yenepoya University

### Submitter
RSP RAO

### Lab Head


