### Accession
PXD009505

### Title
Use of lymph-circulating extracellular vesicles as surrogates of melanoma progression markers and BRAFV600E mutation.

### Description
Liquid biopsies are becoming imperative on early patient diagnosis, prognosis and evaluation of residual disease. The use of circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) as surrogate markers of tumor progression could be a powerful tool in the clinical setting. EVs in plasma have emerged as a non-invasive option to detect metastatic outcome, however sensitivity is low. Here we have characterized the lymph obtained after postoperative lymphadenectomy as a novel biological fluid enriched in EVs. Our proteomic profiling and BRAFV600E/K status determination demonstrate for the first time that EVs from the lymph of melanoma patients are enriched in melanoma-associated proteins and are useful for BRAF mutations detection. Melanoma oncogenic pathways, immunomodulation and platelet activating proteins are enriched in lymph-derived exosomes from patients with distal lymph node spread compared to local/early spreading. Furthermore, patients positive for BRAFV600E mutation on lymph-circulating vesicles had a shorter time of relapse. These data encourage the analysis of lymph-circulating EVs for detection of residual disease and recurrence.ADDENDUM: After the proper verification of the cell lines analysed in this dataset where it is written "SKMel103" or "SK103", it should be read as "SKMel147". This affects not only the raw files but also all the search results files. Sorry for the inconveniences.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  Proteins were solubilized using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Samples (7.5 µg) were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT, 30 min, RT), alkylated (55 mM IA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 µm, 20 mm length, Nanoseparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2.5 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 2.4 µm, 500 mm length and 0.075 mm ID) and separated using a 120 min linear gradient (buffer A: 4% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-2 min 6% B, 2-103 min 30% B, 103-113 min 98% B, 113-120 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.8 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a PicoTip emitter (360/20 Tube OD/ID µm, tip ID 10 µm) (New Objective), a heated capillary temperature of 325°C and S-Lens RF level of 60%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (threshold signal ≥ 800 counts and dynamic exclusion of 60 sec). MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (400 m/z). Peptides were isolated using a 1.5 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with linear ion trap read out at a NCE of 35% (0.25 Q-value and 10 ms activation time). The ion target values were 1E6 for MS (500 ms max injection time) and 5000 for MS/MS (100 ms max injection time).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.1.2) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, August 2014, 20,187 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.1.6) for further statistical analysis. A minimum of five LFQ valid values per group was required for quantification. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >1.32 or < -1.32 were considered as regulated. Analysis of GOterms and Reactome Pathways was performed by PANTHER. Fisher's Exact with FDR multiple test correction was performed on selected protein lists. Only results with FDR < 0.05 were considered.  Additional analisis of exosome-associated Reactome Pathways was performed by ClueGo. Bonferroni stepdown test was applied to the analyses and only pathway groups with a corrected Group Pvalue<0.001 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid biopsies from cancer patients have the potential to improve diagnosis and prognosis. The assessment of surrogate markers of tumor progression in circulating extracellular vesicles could be a powerful non-invasive approach in this setting. We have characterized extracellular vesicles purified from the lymphatic drainage also known as exudative seroma (ES) of stage III melanoma patients obtained after lymphadenectomy. Proteomic analysis showed that seroma-derived exosomes are enriched in proteins resembling melanoma progression. In addition, we found that the <i>BRAF<sup>V600E</sup></i> mutation can be detected in ES-derived extracellular vesicles and its detection correlated with patients at risk of relapse.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Lymphatic fluid, Braf, Metastasis, Exosomes

### Affiliations
CNIO

### Submitter
Javier Munoz

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
CNIO


