### Accession
PXD028020

### Title
Bacteria proteomics under antidepressants exposure

### Description
This project conducted proteomics on A.baylyi ADP1, E. coli K12 and P. putita KT2440 after treated with a few commonly-prescribed antidepressant (duloxetine, sertraline, fluoxetine, bupropion, escitalopram and agomelatine). The results with help to reveal how those antidepressants can promote the transfer of antibiotic resistance genes in those treated bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were collected by centrifuging at 8000 × g for 5 min and were washed by PBS twice. This is followed by resuspending cell pellets in 0.5 mL PBS solution. Afterwards, the samples were stored in freezer at -80℃ before analysis. The prepared bacterial cells were lysed by with 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and were thoroughly sonicated to remove DNA residues. This was followed by addition of dithiothreitol (20 mM, final concentration) in order to reduce disulfides. The samples were heated at 70℃ for 60 min and were cooled down to room temperature. After that, the samples were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) in the dark for 30 min. The alkylated samples were treated with a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and six volumes of S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final concentration of ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.1).  Total bacterial protein was digested in S-Trap filters (ProtiFi, Huntington, USA) according to the manufacturer’s procedure and previous research 1. Briefly, bacterial cells were lysed in 5% SDS, and sonicated thoroughly to remove DNA. Samples were then added 20 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration) to reduce the disulfides, heated at 70 oC for 60 min, cooled down to room temperature, and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) in the dark for 30 min. Afterwards, a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and six volumes of S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final concentration of ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.1) were added. The protein solution was loaded on the S-Trap filter and centrifuged at 4,000 g until all solution passed through, and the filter was then washed with 150 μL S-Trap binding buffer for three times. Samples on the S-Trap filter were digested with 1 μg sequencing-grade trypsin at 47 oC for 1 h (ensure no bubble on the filter). The digested peptides were eluted with 40 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and finally with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in H2O, respectively. The peptide solutions were lyophilized before resuspended in 20 µl of 5% acetonitrile in H2O. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-LC system coupled to a Q-ExactiveTM H-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo ScientificTM).

### Data Protocol
Raw sequencing data were processed by applying Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) towards the database of E. coli MG1655 (received from Uniprot on 12th of July 2019). Abundance ratios of each protein between experimental and the control sample were calculated. A stringency cut-off of false discovery rate (FDR, q value) less than 0.01 was applied to identify the proteins with significant different expression levels.

### Publication Abstract
The development of antibiotic resistance as an unavoidable consequence of the application of antimicrobials is a significant concern for human health. Antidepressants are being increasingly consumed globally. Human gut microbial communities are frequently exposed to antidepressants, yet little is known about the interaction between antidepressants and antibiotic resistance. This study aimed to investigate whether antidepressants can accelerate the dissemination of antibiotic resistance by increasing the rate of the horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). Results demonstrated that some of the commonly-prescribed antidepressants (Duloxetine, Sertraline, Fluoxetine and Bupropion) at clinically relevant concentrations can significantly (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9; p<sub>adj</sub>&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) promote the transformation of extracellular ARGs into Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 for a maximum of 2.3-fold, which is primarily associated with the overproduction of reactive oxygen species. The increased cell membrane permeability and porosity, stimulated transcription and translation of competence, SOS response, universal stress response and ATP synthesis-related genes are also associated with antidepressants-enhanced transformation. This study demonstrated that some antidepressants can speed up the spread of antibiotic resistance by promoting the&#xa0;transformation&#xa0;of ARGs, which emphasizes the necessity to assess the potential risks of antidepressants in spreading antibiotic resistance during clinical antidepressant applications.

### Keywords
A.baylyi adp1; e. coli k12; p. putita kt2440; antibiotic resistance genes; conjugation; transformation

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia

### Submitter
Jianhua Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Guo
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia


