### Accession
PXD022067

### Title
The methyltransferase METTL9 mediates pervasive 1-methylhistidine modification in mammalian proteomes

### Description
Post-translational methylation plays a crucial role in regulating and optimizing protein function. Protein histidine methylation, occurring as the two isomers 1- and 3- methylhistidine (1MH and 3MH), was first reported five decades ago, but remains largely unexplored. Here we report that METTL9 is a broad-specificity methyltransferase (MTase) that mediates the formation of the majority of 1MH present in mouse and human proteomes. The minimal requirement for METTL9-catalyzed methylation is a His-x-His (HxH) motif, where "x" is preferably a small amino acid, allowing METTL9 to methylate a number of HxH-containing proteins. Here, we show that the immunomodulatory protein S100A9 and the NDUFB3 subunit of mitochondrial respiratory Complex I are methylated at HxH motif using MALDI-TOF MS.

### Sample Protocol
The SDS-PAGE-separated bands were excised and destained. The gel slices were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol and 4 M guanidine-HCl at 37 °C for 2 h, followed by alkylation with 100 mM acrylamide at 25 °C for 30 min. The NDUFB3 and S100A9 were digested with trypsin (TPCK-treated, Worthington Biochemical) and Achromobacter protease I (a gift from Dr. T. Masaki, Ibaraki University, Ibaraki), respectively. The reaction was carried out at 37°C for 12 hours in a digestion buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.0) / 0.03% n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside)  An α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Brucker Daltonics)–saturated solution in 33% acetonitrile/67% water containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was prepared. A 0.5 μl volume of each sample was mixed with 1.0μl of the matrix solution and air-dried at room temperature on an MTP AnchorChip Targets plate (Brucker Daltonics). The MS and MSMS spectra were acquired with a rapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper (Brucker Daltonics). The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode and reflector mode the following high voltage conditions (Ion Source1:20.000 kV, PIE: 2.680 kV, Lens: 11.850 kV, Reflector 1: 20.830 kV, Reflector 2: 1.085 kV, Reflector 3: 8.700 kV). The MSMS spectra were obtained using LIFT method the following high voltage conditions (Ion Source1:20.000 kV, PIE: 2.680 kV, Lens: 11.850 kV, Reflector 1: 20.830 kV, Reflector 2: 1.085 kV, Reflector 3: 8.700 kV, Drift tube 1: 14.000 kV, Drift tube 2: 18.700 kV, MS/MS pulse: 2.600 kV).

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using FlexAnalysis (version 4.0, Brucker Daltonics) and BioTools (3.2 SR5, Brucker Daltonics). The processed data were used to search with MASCOT (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science) against the in-house database including the amino acid sequences of NDUFB3 and S100A9, using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin (NDUFB3) or Lys-C/P (S100A9); maximum missed cleavages = 1; variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Methyl (H), Propionamide (C); product mass tolerance = ± 50 ppm; product mass tolerance = ±0.5 Da (LIFT mode); instrument type =MALDI-TOF-TOF.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metylation histidine mettl9

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


