### Accession
PXD010607

### Title
Streptomyces sp. M7 LC-MS - Streptomyces sp. M7 has demonstrated ability to remove lindane from culture media and soils

### Description
Streptomyces sp. M7 has demonstrated ability to remove lindane from culture media and soils. In this study, we used MS-based label-free quantitative proteomic to understand lindane degradation and its metabolic context in Streptomyces sp. M7. We identified the proteins involved in the up-stream degradation pathway. Our results demonstrated that mineralization of lindane is feasible since proteins from an unusual down-stream degradation pathway were also identified. Degradative steps were supported by an active catabolism that supplied energy and reducing equivalents in the form of NADPH. This is the first study in which degradation steps of an organochlorine compound and metabolic context are elucidate in a biotechnological genus as Streptomyces. These results serve as basement to study other degradative actinobacteria and to improve the degradation processes of Streptomyces sp. M7.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts for label-free quantitative proteomic analysis. Cells were washed with washing buffer (25 mM Tris buffer pH 7, 2 mM EDTA), resuspended in the same buffer and crushed with liquid nitrogen. After centrifugation (16,100 g, 30 min, 4 °C) concentration of proteins was measured and 50 µg of proteins were treated with 20 µl of reducing solution (200 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.8) and alkylation solution (200 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.8). Samples were incubated 1 h at RT with each solution and proteins were then precipitated with TCA 10%. After centrifugation (16,100 g, 30 min, 4 °C), protein pellet was washed three times by rinsing with pre-chilled (-20 °C) acetone. Protein pellet was then resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate up to a concentration of 10 µg µl-1 and 50 µg of proteins were digested with trypsin. Finally, digested proteins were purified with a Zip-Tip C18 column stored at -80 °C until subjected to MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis of protein extracts. Samples were dissolved in trifluoroacetic acid and LC of the peptide samples were performed using a Thermo Scientific-EASY-nLC 1000 equipped with an Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (C18, 2 µm, 100A, 50 µm x 150 mm). A gradient with two solutions was used (Solution A, 0.1% formic acid (v/v); Solution B, ACN with 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 7% B to 95% B over 135 min at flow rate of 0.300 µl min-1. Mass spectra were obtained by a Q-Exactive Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument configuration allowed the identification of peptides to be carried out at the same time that they were separated by chromatography, obtaining Full MS and MS/MS. The 20 most intense peaks in each MS spectrum were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. LC-MS/MS of protein extract was performed in CEQUIBIEM-University of Buenos Aires-Argentina.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis – protein quantification. Data analysis was performed using the softwares Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and Perseus. Samples obtained from Lindane were compared to the corresponding Glucose samples. Protein database of Streptomyces sp. M7 was used for peptide identification. Proteins were considered significantly regulated when: (1) they showed on average an increase ˃2-fold in their abundance; (2) t-test showed a ρ-value below 0.05. ρ-value and statistical parameters were calculated by Perseus software. To estimate the limit of detection of our instrument on the protein level, we considered the ninety-ninth percentile of the area of all proteins identified by Proteome Discoverer passing the identification score threshold with a false discovery rate of 0.01. This value was 590898. We then used this value to impute missing area values in our label-free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Lindane, Streptomyces sp. m7

### Affiliations
PROIMI-CONICET
Actinobacteria Laboratory, PROIMI-CONICET, Tucuman-Argentina

### Submitter
Jose Davila Costa

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Sebastian Davila Costa
Actinobacteria Laboratory, PROIMI-CONICET, Tucuman-Argentina


