### Accession
PXD034937

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of MMV897615

### Description
The target deconvolution of MMV897615 was evaluated using thermal proteome profiling (TPP), a chemical proteomics approach based on the stabilisation of protein targets upon ligand binding. In these TPP experiments we used a whole-cell strategy, exposing cells rather than lysates to the drug

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing and fractionation Protein digestion was performed ad previously described (Corpas-Lopez and Wyllie, 2021). Samples were then vacuum-dried, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (100 µL) prior to incubation with their respective Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT pro) 16-plex reagents (Thermo) for 1 hour at RT with agitation. Reactions were quenched by the addition of 5% (v/v) hydroxylamine for 15 min, each set of samples (treated and vehicle) were then pooled and dried overnight. The TMT-labelled samples were dried and desalted  as previously described (Corpas-Lopez and Wyllie, 2021), then kept at -80 ºC until further analysis. Sample fractionation was perfomed as previously described (Corpas-Lopez and Wyllie, 2021), but with a different gradient adapted to TMT pro-labelled peptides: 2% Buffer B to 20% B in 8 min then from 20% B to 40% B in 37 min. The column was washed for 15 min at 100% Buffer B and re-equilibrated at 2% buffer B for 20 min. LC-MS/MS analysis  Analysis of peptides was performed on a Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). Online HPLC was performed as previously described (Corpas-Lopez and Wyllie, 2021). Orbitrap Eclipse was used in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 380-1500, with an automatic maximum ion injection time, a resolution of 120,000 and a standard automatic gain control (AGC) target value) followed by sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, maximum ion injection time at 50 ms and standard AGC target) and MS3 scans (with a resolution of 50,000, an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, maximum injection time at 120 ms and 400% AGC target). The real-time search feature was active during the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Analysis of the resulting MS data was performed using the software MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 2.0.3.0). Modifications, digestions, and database search settings were as previously described. Reporter ion MS3 mode was selected using the TMT-16plex labels on N-terminus and lysine. FTMS MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and ITMS MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. All MS data associated with chemical pulldowns have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXDXXXXX. TPP experiments were analysed using the TPP Package available in Bioconductor, as previously described (Corpas-Lopez et al., 2019; Corpas-Lopez and Wyllie, 2021; Franken et al., 2015). Briefly, raw protein abundance, calculated from the normalized reporter ion intensities of all quantified proteins, were normalised to the protein abundance at the lowest temperature for each condition and replica. Melting curves were calculated using a sigmoidal fitting algorithm in the R program of the TPP Package. This fitting was used to determine the melting point (Tm), which is defined as the temperature that half of the protein was denatured. The melting point differences (ΔTm) were calculated by subtracting the Tm values of treated and untreated sample. The sigmoidal melting curves were filtered according to the following criteria: melting curves must reach a relative abundance plateau < 0.3 and the coefficient of determination (R2) must be >0.8. The statistical significance was calculated using a z-test and only proteins with a p-value <0.2 in both technical replicates were considered hits. Hits found in two biological replicas were considered putative targets. Alternatively, we used the NPARC method (non-parametric analysis of response curves), a strategy that compares the experimental data to two models: a null model that assumes that drug has no influence on the protein melting behaviour, and an alternative model that assumes that drug affects the melting behaviour. Then the adjustment to these models is calculated and a F-test is executed to determine if the data is significantly adjusted to one of them, generating a p-value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Thermal proteome profiling, Acyl-coa synthetases, Drug target

### Affiliations
WCAIR, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Victoriano Corpas-Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Wyllie
WCAIR, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


