### Accession
PXD026658

### Title
Surface proteome of large extracellular vesicles

### Description
The extracellular vesicle (EV)  surface proteome (surfaceome) acts as a fundamental signalling gateway by bridging intra-and extracellular signalling networks, dictates EVs’ capacity to communicate and interact with its the/their environment, and is a source of potential disease biomarkers and therapeutic targets. However, our understanding of surface protein composition of large EVs (100-1000 nm), a major EV-subtype remains limited. Our study provides critical insights into proteins operating at the large interactive platform of L-EVs, and molecular leads for future studies seeking to decipher relatively-understudied L-EV form, heterogeneity and function.

### Sample Protocol
1 - Global proteomic sample preparation of EVs Global mass spectrometry-based proteomics of EVs (10 ug in 50 uL) was performed as previously described using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method  2 - Surface biotin-labelling of EVs and proteomic sample preparation EV surface proteins were biotinylated using Pierce Cell Surface Biotinylation and Isolation Kit (844390, Thermo Scientific) as per manufacturer’s recommendation. Briefly, 100 µg EVs (L-EVs or S-EVs) were labeled with 0.25 mg/ml EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin for 10 mins at room temperature. EVs were then washed twice with ice-cold TBS (10,000 g for 30 mins for L-EVs or 100,000 g for 1 h for S-EVs). Labelled EVs were then lysed (30 mins on ice) as per manufacturer’s instructions. To assess bound and released EV surface proteins, biotinylated EVs in PBS were treated with 5 mM EDTA for 15 min at room temperature43. Samples were centrifuged at either 10,000 g (30 min, 4 °C, Eppendorf 5430R) or 100,000 g (1 h, 4 °C, TLA-55 rotor; Optima MAX-MP Tabletop Ultracentrifuge) to collect L-EV and S-EV with their membrane bound proteins (pellet fraction), respectively. Supernatants (containing the released proteins) were processed for SP3-based tryptic protein digestion (as above). The pellets fractions were resuspended in 1 ml PBS, re-centrifuged and pellet fractions in 50 ul of PBS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda 47 was used to perform peptide identification and quantification as described45. Human-only (UniProt #74,823 entries) sequence database (Jan 2020) with a contaminants database was employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications; for biotin surface proteome analysis additional Thioacyl (DSP) (C(3)H(4)OS)) was employed. False discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 for protein and peptide levels. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine using trypsin protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Contaminants, and reverse identification were excluded from further data analysis. ‘Match between run algorithm’ in MaxQuant48 and label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Large extracellular vesicles, Surface

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute


