### Accession
PXD048915

### Title
Mechanism of Jianxin granules in the Treatment of Heart Failure Based on Proteomics and Metabolomics

### Description
The study aimed to investigate the mechanisms of Jianxin (JX) granules, a Traditional Chinese Medicine formulation, in the treatment of heart failure (HF) using metabolomic profiling. The HF model was established by ligation of left coronary artery. The successfully modeled rats were randomly divided into three groups: the model group, the JX granules group, and Sacubitril/Valsartan (S/V) group. Four weeks after treatment, LV tissue samples were collected. Proteomics was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins and potential pathways. The differential expressed proteins (DEPs) were obtained with Tandem Mass Tags approach. As compared to the control group, 150 DEPs were identified in model rats, comprising 112 up-regulated and 38 down-regulated proteins. Notably, in the JX granules group, 25 DEPs were identified compared to the model rats, encompassing 18 up-regulated and 7 down-regulated proteins. In comparison with the control group, 228 DEPs in the JX granules group were obtained, which comprised of 128 up-regulated and 100 down-regulated proteins. As compared with the control group, BP in the model group was mainly enriched in humoral immune response, positive regulation of apoptotic cell clearance, and the response to metal ions; Meanwhile, CC was mainly related to contractile and stress fibers, actin filaments, and extracellular space; MF was mainly enriched in the serine-type peptidase activity, actin binding, and peptidase activity. Furthermore, DEPs indicated by KEGG analysis were primarily linked to pathways such as the complement and coagulation cascades, regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, and adrenergic signaling. In contrast to the model group, BP in JX granules group was primarily associated with processes involving nucleosome organization, chromatin assembly or disassembly, DNA conformation change and small molecule catabolic processes; CC was primarily related to the protein-DNA complex, mitochondrion, intracellular, nucleosome, cytoplasm; MF displayed significant enrichment in protein dimerization and homodimerization activity, catalase activity, chromatin and nucleosomal DNA binding. Considering KEGG enrichment information, DEPs in the JX granules group were mainly enriched in metabolic pathways and ribosome pathway. The key differential genes, such as triosephosphate isomerase 1 (TPI1), lactate dehydrogenase B (LDHB), pyruvate kinase M (PKM), protein kinase B (Akt), and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) were identified. The vital pathways including carbon metabolism, the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, pyruvate metabolism, and HIF-1α signaling pathway were obtained.

### Sample Protocol
Forty healthy male Sprague–Dawley (SD) rats (190 g~210 g) were obtained from Beijing Huafukang Biotechnology Co., Ltd (China). The heart failure model was established according to the previous literature. All the rats were anesthetized using isoflurane (5 ml/min×5% initially, followed by maintenance at 3 ml/min×3%; Shenzhen Rayward Life Technology Co., Ltd). The ligation of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery resulted in immediate myocardial infarction onset. Left ventricular function was assessed by echocardiography one-week post-infarction. During this period, the animals did not receive any pharmacological treatment and their diet of standard lab chow and distilled water was maintained as before. Rats with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) below 50% were included in the subsequent study. They were randomly assigned to the model group, JX granules group, and Sacubitril/Valsartan (S/V) group. The sham group functioned as the negative control. S/V was utilized as the positive control due to its supremacy over other traditional HF treatments and its multifaceted mechanism of action. Its efficacy is well-documented in clinical literature.

### Data Protocol
Vendor’s raw MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer(PD) software (Version 2.4.0.305) and the built-in Sequest HT search engine . MS spectra lists were searched against their species-level UniProt FASTA databases (uniprot-Rattus norvegicus-10116-2021-8.fasta), with Carbamidomethyl [C] , TMT Pro (K) and TMT Pro (N-term)as a fixed modification and Oxi- dation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as proteases. A maximum of 2 missed cleavage(s) was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both PSM and peptide levels. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 10 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 0.02Da . Unique peptide and Razor peptide were used for protein quantification and total peptide amount for normalization. All the other parameters were reserved as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myocardium, Traditional chinese medicine, Heart failure; jx granules; proteomics; rats

### Affiliations
Ultrasound Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
company

### Submitter
pan yichun

### Lab Head
Dr Ouyang Qiufang
Ultrasound Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


