### Accession
PXD012039

### Title
Heparin-binding proteome in normal pancreas and murine experimental pancreatitis_C4PR_LIV

### Description
Acute pancreatitis (AP) is acute inflammation of the pancreas, mainly caused by gallstones and alcohol, driven by changes in communication between cells. Heparin-binding proteins (HBPs) play a central role in cell communication. Therefore, we used heparin affinity proteomics to identify extracellular HBPs in pancreas and plasma of normal mice and in a caerulein mouse model of AP. Many new extracellular HBPs (360) were discovered in the pancreas, taking the total number of HBPs known to 786. Extracellular pancreas HBPs form highly interconnected protein-protein interaction networks in both normal pancreas (NP) and AP. Thus, HBPs represent an important set of extracellular proteins with significant regulatory potential in the pancreas. HBPs in NP are associated with biological functions such as molecular transport and cellular movement that underlie pancreatic homeostasis. However, in AP HBPs are associated with additional processes such as acute phase response signalling, complement activation and mitochondrial dysfunction. Plasma HBPs in AP included known AP biomarkers such as serum amyloid A, as well as emerging targets such as histone H2A. Pancreas HBPs are extracellular and so easily accessible and are potential drug targets in AP, whereas plasma HBPs represent potential biomarkers for AP.

### Sample Protocol
Heparin affinity chromatography of murine plasma. 100 micrograms of the heparin-bound fraction was bound to Strataclean beads. On-bead digestion with trypsin was carried out and the digest mixed with a 50fmol/microlitre solution of yeast enolase. Samples were analysed by a top10 data-dependent 2h LC-MS/MS method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were imported into Progenesis and automatic alignment and peak picking was carried out.Data was searched in Mascot against the UniProt mouse reviewed database using a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine and a variable modification of oxidised methionine. A 1% peptide false discovery rate was set before data was re-imported into Proigenesis. A Hi-N analysis was performed using yeast enolase as the standard.

### Publication Abstract
Acute pancreatitis (AP) is acute inflammation of the pancreas, mainly caused by gallstones and alcohol, driven by changes in communication between cells. Heparin-binding proteins (HBPs) play a central role in health and diseases. Therefore, we used heparin affinity proteomics to identify extracellular HBPs in pancreas and plasma of normal mice and in a caerulein mouse model of AP. Many new extracellular HBPs (360) were discovered in the pancreas, taking the total number of HBPs known to 786. Extracellular pancreas HBPs form highly interconnected protein-protein interaction networks in both normal pancreas (NP) and AP. Thus, HBPs represent an important set of extracellular proteins with significant regulatory potential in the pancreas. HBPs in NP are associated with biological functions such as molecular transport and cellular movement that underlie pancreatic homeostasis. However, in AP HBPs are associated with additional inflammatory processes such as acute phase response signalling, complement activation and mitochondrial dysfunction, which has a central role in the development of AP. Plasma HBPs in AP included known AP biomarkers such as serum amyloid A, as well as emerging targets such as histone H2A. Other HBPs such as alpha 2-HS glycoprotein (AHSG) and histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) need further investigation for potential applications in the management of AP. Pancreas HBPs are extracellular and so easily accessible and are potential drug targets in AP, whereas plasma HBPs represent potential biomarkers for AP. Thus, their identification paves the way to determine which HBPs may have potential applications in the management of AP.

### Keywords
Pancreatitis, Murine, Heparin-binding proteins (hbps)

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Professor of Biological Chemistry, Dept of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool.

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor David G Fernig
Professor of Biological Chemistry, Dept of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool.


