### Accession
PXD001937

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Catharanthus roseus  with Induction of Indole Alkaloids

### Description
Catharanthus roseus produces a variety of indole alkaloids with significant biological activities. The indole alkaloids including catharanthine, vindolinine, ajmalicine and the precursor strictosidine were dramatically induced in the leaves following binary stress. To profile the modification of indole alkaloids in C. roseus seedlings under the binary stress of ultraviolet-B irradiation and dark incubation, gel-free proteomic analysis was carried out to uncover the underlying molecular mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were ground to a powder in liquid nitrogen and then transferred into a solution of 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. After vortexing the suspension, it was then sonicated for 5 min at 4°C and incubated for 1 h at -20°C. After incubation, the suspension was centrifuged at 9,000xg for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed twice with a solution consisting of 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The final pellet was dried and re-suspended by vortexing for 1 h at room temperature in lysis buffer. The extracted proteins were washed by adding methanol, chloroform and water at a ratio of 4:1:3, following which the mixture was separated to two phases by centrifugation at 15,000xg for 5 min. The upper phase was discarded, keeping the white precipitated disc, which was gently washed with methanol and the supernatant was removed. The disc was then dried. The dried pellets were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 25°C in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase at a 1:100 enzyme/protein concentration for 16 h at 37°C. The resulting peptides were acidified with formic acid to pH < 3. Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed XCalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using an Ultimate 3,000 NanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Gemany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8-30% for 120 min) in 0.1% formic acid and at a flow rate of 200 nL·min-1. The peptides that were eluted from the trap column were separated and sprayed on a C18 NANO HPLC NTTC-360/75-3 capillary tip column (75 μm ID × 120 mm, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap MS over 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used for high mass accuracy. The ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 s to prevent repetitive selection of peptides.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were converted to individual DTA files using BioWorks software (version 3.3.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The file format of the DTA files was converted to Mascot generic format and then searched by Mascot software against the NCBInr viridiplantae database.  Parameters used in Mascot searches were as follows: Carbamido methylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and the peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search process. Mascot results were filtered with the Mascot Percolator package to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification]. False discovery rates for peptide identification of all search strategies were less than 1.0%.  For quantitative analyses, a commercial gel-free quantification package, SIEVE, was used for comparing relative abundance of peptides and proteins between the control and experimental groups. The chromatographic peaks that were detected by mass spectrometry were aligned and the peptide peaks were detected as frames using the following settings: a frame time width of 2.5 min; a frame m/z width of 0.02; produce frames on all parent ions subjected to the MS/MS scan. The frames with the MS/MS scan were matched to imported Mascot results to identify peptides. In the differential analyses, total ion current was used as a normalization factor. In all differential analyses, data from three biological replicates with two technical replicates were analyzed, and proteins with at least two peptide matches across the data for all of the sample groups containing replicates in a differential analysis were defined as the identified proteins.  Paired Student’s T-test was performed between treated and control group. In identifying differentially changed proteins, the minimum requirements for the identification of a protein were more than two matched peptides and the significant difference for protein abundance levels in UV-B irradiated and dark treated samples against the control samples (P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Catharanthus roseus is an important medicinal plant, which produces a variety of indole alkaloids of significant pharmaceutical relevance. In the present study, we aimed to investigate the potential stress-induced increase of indole alkaloid biosynthesis in C. roseus using proteomic technique. The contents of the detectable alkaloids ajmalicine, vindoline, catharanthine, and strictosidine in C. roseus were significantly increased under binary stress. Proteomic analysis revealed that the abundance of proteins related to tricarboxylic acid cycle and cell wall was largely increased; while, that of proteins related to tetrapyrrole synthesis and photosynthesis was decreased. Of note, 10-hydroxygeraniol oxidoreductase, which is involved in the biosynthesis of indole alkaloid was two-fold more abundant in treated group compared to the control. In addition, mRNA expression levels of genes involved in the indole alkaloid biosynthetic pathway indicated an up-regulation in their transcription in C. roseus under UV-B irradiation. These results suggest that binary stress might negatively affect the process of photosynthesis in C. roseus. In addition, the induction of alkaloid biosynthesis appears to be responsive to binary stress.

### Keywords
Biosynthesis pathway, Gel-free proteomics, Dark incubation, Catharanthus roseus, Indole alkaloids, Uv-b irradiation

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


