### Accession
PXD030118

### Title
Bacillus cereus  strain proteomics grown in glucose containing medium, cellular proteome

### Description
This project provides tandem mass spectrometry data of Bacillus cereus AH187 strain. The strain was grown on liquid MOD medium supplemented with glucose and harvested at three growth stages.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from cell pellets were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for a short electrophoretic migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT. The results were then parsed with IRMA.

### Publication Abstract
The branched aerobic respiratory chain in <i>Bacillus cereus</i> comprises three terminal oxidases: cytochromes <i>aa3</i>, <i>caa3</i>, and <i>bd</i>. Cytochrome <i>caa3</i> requires heme A for activity, which is produced from heme O by heme A synthase (CtaA). In this study, we deleted the <i>ctaA</i> gene in <i>B. cereus</i> AH187 strain, this deletion resulted in loss of cytochrome <i>caa3</i> activity. Proteomics data indicated that <i>B. cereus</i> grown in glucose-containing medium compensates for the loss of cytochrome <i>caa3</i> activity by remodeling its respiratory metabolism. This remodeling involves up-regulation of cytochrome <i>aa3</i> and several proteins involved in redox stress response-to circumvent sub-optimal respiratory metabolism. <i>CtaA</i> deletion changed the surface-composition of <i>B. cereus,</i> affecting its motility, autoaggregation phenotype, and the kinetics of biofilm formation. Strikingly, proteome remodeling made the <i>ctaA</i> mutant more resistant to cold and exogenous oxidative stresses compared to its parent strain. Consequently, we hypothesized that <i>ctaA</i> inactivation could improve <i>B. cereus</i> fitness in a nutrient-limited environment.

### Keywords
Heme a synthase, Respiratory metabolism, Bacillus cereus, Proteomics, Cellular proteome, Ah187

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


