### Accession
PXD016844

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the secretome of Schistocephalus solidus LC-MS/MS

### Description
Schistocephalus solidus is a cestode parasite that is thought to manipulate the behaviour of its threespine stickleback host Gasterosteus aculeatus. It has been hypothesized that the worm could liberate in its external environment “manipulation factors” that would ultimately interfere with the host’s physiology and behaviour. The objective of this project is to describe the whole proteomic content of the proteome and of the secretome of a putative manipulative parasite, Schistocephalus solidus, with the aim to identify proteins that could be involved in the behavioural perturbations of the threespine stickleback.

### Sample Protocol
5 worms were individually put in 2 mL tube of PBS for 2 hours to collect their secretomes. Then, for each worm, tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored dried at -80°C for proteomic analysis. The liquid in which the worm was incubated (PBS+potential secretome collected) was stored at -20°C.  Proteins were extracted from tissues using SDS lysis while proteins from secretomes were precipitated with TCA. Samples were migrated on SDS-Page gels. In gel-digestion was performed. After a desalting procedure, proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
To detect proteins present in the proteome and the secretome of S. solidus, we searched the detected mass spectra against the S. solidus genome using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Two searches were independently performed: The first search used  the larger proteome of S. solidus (39 876 entries, downloaded June 21, 2018) from the Universal Protein Resource release 2018-05 (UniProt https://www.uniprot.org/) as a reference database, which includes proteins predicted from the partial genome of S. solidus currently available, as well as proteins predicted from the de novo transcriptome. For the second search, we used unmatched sequences that we reported to be specific to our genome assembly as a reference database (36,140 sequences). We included the larger proteome of the threespine stickleback host (29,032 entries) from the Universal Protein Resource release 2018-05 (UniProt https://www.uniprot.org/) in the search in order to include proteins originating from the fish host during the MaxQuant data search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Schistocephalus solidus, Worm, Secretome

### Affiliations
1. Département de Biologie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada 2. Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes (IBIS), Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Nadia Aubin-Horth
1. Département de Biologie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada 2. Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes (IBIS), Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada


