### Accession
PXD043384

### Title
Cardiac phosphoproteome of the mouse model of propionic acidemia

### Description
Ventricular tissue of 8 week female PA mice (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23648696/) and their female wild-type littermates were processed for phosphoproteomics

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific Ultimate RSLC 3000 or Easy-nLC)  coupled in line a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated onto an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75um i.d., 50cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a 60 minutes linear gradient (15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile)) at a flow rate 200nl/min. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350-1500m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 50ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% of normalized collision energy. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 60ms with fixed mass at 180m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions. The dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome discoverer software version 1.4 as follows: MS/MS data from TiO2 enriched samples were searched against a protein sequence database containing 17,962 protein entries, including 17,679 Mus musculus proteins (Uniprot release from 2023-03-28) and 283 common contaminants. During database searching cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), all N-terminal residues to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added) and Serine (S), Threonine (T) and Threonine (Y) to be phosphorylated (+79,966, dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 20ppm on the precursor and 0.6 Da on the fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiac, Propionic acidemia

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Pawel Swietach

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Swietach
University of Oxford


