### Accession
PXD044397

### Title
Adapting an isobaric tag-labeled yeast peptide standard to develop targeted proteomics assays

### Description
Quantitative targeted proteomics strategies present a streamlined hypothesis-driven approach to analyze specific sets of pathways and/or disease related proteins. goDig is a targeted tandem mass tag (TMT)-based assay that can measure the expression differences for hundreds of proteins directly from unfractionated mixtures. Specific protein groups or entire pathways of up to 200 proteins can be selected for quantitative profiling, while leveraging sample multiplexing permits the simultaneous analysis of up to 18 samples. Despite these benefits, implementing goDig is not without challenges as it requires access to an instrument application programming interface (iAPI), an elution order and spectral library, a web-based method builder, and dedicated companion software. In addition, the absence of an example test assay may dissuade a researcher from testing or implementing goDig. Here, we repurpose the TKO11 standard - which is commercially available but may also be assembled in-lab – and establish it as a de facto test assay for goDig. We build a proteome-wide goDig yeast library, quantify protein expression across several gene ontology (GO) categories, and compare results to a fully-fractionated yeast gold-standard data set. Essentially, we provide a guide detailing the goDig-based quantification of TKO11, which can be used also as a template for user-defined assays in other species.

### Sample Protocol
Pierce™ TMT11plex Yeast Digest Standard (commonly referred to asTKO11) was purchased from Pierce Biotechnology. We fractionated 100µg of TKO11 using basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) HPLC8 8 on an Agilent 1250 pump equipped with a degasser and a UV detector (set at 280 nm wavelength). Peptides were subjected to a 50-min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min over an Agilent ZORBAX 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 2.1 mm ID and 250 mm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions, which were consolidated into 24 “super-fractions”. From these superfractions we constucted our goDig library and performed RTS-MS3. Unfractionated TKO11 was used for goDig experiments.

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all entries from the yeast UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2022). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were selected to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). TMT11 labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and deamidation (for fractionated only) of asparagine and glutamine (+0.9840 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using LDA and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted proteomics strategies present a streamlined hypothesis-driven approach to analyze specific sets of pathways or disease related proteins. goDig is a quantitative, targeted tandem mass tag (TMT)-based assay that can measure the relative abundance differences for hundreds of proteins directly from unfractionated mixtures. Specific protein groups or entire pathways of up to 200 proteins can be selected for quantitative profiling, while leveraging sample multiplexing permits the simultaneous analysis of up to 18 samples. Despite these benefits, implementing goDig is not without challenges, as it requires access to an instrument application programming interface (iAPI), an elution order and spectral library, a web-based method builder, and dedicated companion software. In addition, the absence of an example test assay may dissuade researchers from testing or implementing goDig. Here, we repurpose the TKO11 standard&#x2500;which is commercially available but may also be assembled in-lab&#x2500;and establish it as a <i>de facto</i> test assay for goDig. We build a proteome-wide goDig yeast library, quantify protein expression across several gene ontology (GO) categories, and compare these results to a fully fractionated yeast gold-standard data set. Essentially, we provide a guide detailing the goDig-based quantification of TKO11, which can also be used as a template for user-defined assays in other species.

### Keywords
Godig, Tko, Tmt, Api, Targeted assay, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Boston, MA, USA


