### Accession
PXD020395

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of the developing heart identifies PERM1 - an outer mitochondrial membrane protein

### Description
Heart development relies on PTMs that control cardiomyocyte proliferation, differentiation and cardiac morphogenesis. We generated a map of phosphorylation sites during the early stages of cardiac postnatal development in mice; we quantified over 10,000 phosphorylation sites and 5000 proteins that were assigned to different pathways. Analysis of mitochondrial proteins led to the identification of PGC-1- and ERR-induced regulator in muscle 1 (PERM1), which is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle and heart tissue and associates with the outer mitochondrial membrane. We demonstrate PERM1 is subject to rapid changes mediated by the UPS through phosphorylation of its PEST motif by casein kinase 2. Ablation of Perm1 in mice results in reduced protein expression of lipin-1 accompanied by accumulation of specific phospholipid species. Isolation of Perm1-deficient mitochondria revealed significant downregulation of mitochondrial transport proteins for amino acids and carnitines, including SLC25A12/13/29/34 and CPT2. Consistently, we observed altered levels of various lipid species, amino acids and acylcarnitines in Perm1-/- mitochondria. We conclude that the outer mitochondrial membrane protein PERM1 regulates homeostasis of lipid and amino acid metabolites in mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion: Heart tissue and isolated mitochondria samples were processed using in-gel digestion. Briefly, lysates were precipitated ON in acetone. Protein pellets were dissolved in Bolt LDS sample buffer. DTT was added to 10 mM and IAA was added to 55 mM. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and the chopped gel pieces were destained with 50% ACN and dehydrated with 100% ACN. 3 ng/µL trypsin/LysC solution (90% trypsin/10% LysC) was added, incubated for 30 min at 4 °C, 50 mM ABC was added to gel pieces, incubated ON at 37 °C and acidified with TFA. Samples were desalted using Stop and Go extraction tips.  Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP): For phosphoproteomics, the FASP method of protein digestion was used.  Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography (SCX): Peptides  were loaded onto a 1 mL Resource S column. Peptides bound to the column were eluted using a 30-min increasing salt gradient in buffer containing 30% ACN, 7 mM KH2PO4 and 350 mM KCl pH 2.65. Eluted fractions were pooled based on the chromatogram to obtain nine fractions.  Phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 Beads: To enrich for phosphorylated peptides, ~15 mg of labelled and non-labelled lysates were digested with LysC and SCX. Each fraction was subjected to sequential enrichment using TiO2 beads. The flow-through and fractions obtained from SCX were vacuum concentrated on a SpeedVac and adjusted to 80% ACN/6% TFA. The multiple extractions of each sample were pooled and loaded onto one layer stacked-C8 StageTips for washing.  In-solution digestion: Samples from subcellular fractionation were prepared for MS analysis by in-solution digestion. Urea-containing samples were reduced by adding DTT at 5 mM for 1 h at RT. Alkylation with IAA at 40 mM was performed for 30 min in the dark at RT. Next, the samples were digested with 1 µL LysC for 2-3 h at RT. Finally, the samples were diluted with 50 mM ABC to a urea concentration of 2 M and incubated with 1 µL 0.5 mg/mL trypsin ON at RT, acidified to 1% FA and purified on StageTips.  MS-based proteome analysis: Proteome samples were analyzed using a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on a Q-Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™. Chromatographic peptide separation was achieved on PoroShell 120 packed 50 cm analytical columns coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system and a system consisting of buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN/0.1% FA). In-gel digested samples were analyzed over a 150 min gradient, raising the content of buffer B from 9 to 29% over 119 min, from 29 to 68% over 5 min, and from 68% to 95% over 16 min. The column was washed with 95% buffer B, then buffer B was reduced to 5% over 5 min and the column was re-equilibrated with 5% buffer B for 5 min. Full MS spectra (300–1,750 m/z) were recorded at a resolution (R) of 70,500, maximum injection time (max. IT) of 20 ms and AGC target of 3e6. The ten most abundant ion peptides in each full MS scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at NCE of 25. MS2 spectra were recorded at R = 17,500, a maximum IT of 60 ms and an AGC target of 5e5. In-solution digested whole homogenate samples from the subcellular fractionation were analyzed over a 240 min gradient. Buffer B was increased from 5% to 34% over 215 min, from 34% to 55% over 5 min, and from 55% to 90% over 5 min. This was followed by washing with 90% buffer B for 5 min, reducing buffer B to 5% over 5 min and re-equilibration with 5% buffer B for 5 min. Samples from the other fractions were analysed using the same 150 min gradient used for in-gel digested samples.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and analysis The generated MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant analysis software and the implemented Andromeda software (1.5.3.8). Peptides and proteins were identified using the mouse UniProt database with common contaminants. All parameters in MaxQuant were set to the default values. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. For SILAC, peptide pairs were quantified by setting Lys6 as the heavy label. Enzyme specificity was set to LysC/Trypsin with an additional allowance of cleavage N-terminal to proline, or unspecific search for elastase digestion.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as a fixed modification. For phosphoproteomic analysis, phosphorylation of STY (Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine) was also set as a variable modification. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantify the measured peptides and the “match between runs” option was enabled to quantify peptides with a missing MS2 spectrum. A minimum ratio count of 2 was used for SILAC quantification.  Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (1.5.5.3-1.6.5.0) software. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were excluded, and values were log2 transformed for t-tests. Two-sided t-tests were used to identify differentially expressed proteins between groups defined by the genotype (WT or KO). Identified peptides were annotated with the following Gene Ontology terms: Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Compartment, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes terms. Finally, graphical visualization was achieved using Instant Clue software.

### Publication Abstract
Heart development relies on PTMs that control cardiomyocyte proliferation, differentiation and cardiac morphogenesis. We generated a map of phosphorylation sites during the early stages of cardiac postnatal development in mice; we quantified over 10,000 phosphorylation sites and 5000 proteins that were assigned to different pathways. Analysis of mitochondrial proteins led to the identification of PGC-1- and ERR-induced regulator in muscle 1 (PERM1), which is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle and heart tissue and associates with the outer mitochondrial membrane. We demonstrate PERM1 is subject to rapid changes mediated by the UPS through phosphorylation of its PEST motif by casein kinase 2. Ablation of Perm1 in mice results in reduced protein expression of lipin-1 accompanied by accumulation of specific phospholipid species. Isolation of Perm1-deficient mitochondria revealed significant downregulation of mitochondrial transport proteins for amino acids and carnitines, including SLC25A12/13/29/34 and CPT2. Consistently, we observed altered levels of various lipid species, amino acids, and acylcarnitines in Perm1<sup>-/-</sup> mitochondria. We conclude that the outer mitochondrial membrane protein PERM1 regulates homeostasis of lipid and amino acid metabolites in mitochondria.

### Keywords
Heart development; phosphoproteomics; silac; mitochondria; perm1; lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne
CECAD Research Center, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
CECAD Research Center, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


