### Accession
PXD011167

### Title
H89 Phosphoproteomics in PKA-Null Cells

### Description
Protein phosphorylation plays a crucial role in propagating cellular responses to both internal and external cues. One of the most important kinases responsible for protein phosphorylation is protein kinase A (PKA). N-[2-p-bromocinnamylamino-ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulphonamide (H89) is often used as a “PKA specific inhibitor” to study the involvement of PKA in signaling pathways. However, evidence from cell-free experiments suggested that H89 can also inhibit other kinases. In this experiment, previously-generated mouse collecting duct cell lines with and without PKA were treated with H89, followed by mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to globally assess changes in phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The study utilized immortalized mpkCCD cells5 in which Prkaca and Prkacb gene expression was previously deleted (“PKA-null” cells) by introducing mutations using CRISPR-Cas9. “PKA-intact” cell lines did not have deletion of either gene. We used three different PKA-null lines and three different PKA-intact lines in separate replicates. Cells were initially maintained in complete medium, DMEM/F-12 containing 2% serum and other supplements (5 μg/mL insulin, 50 nM dexamethasone, 1 nM triiodothyronine, 10 ng/mL epidermal growth factor, 60 nM sodium selenite, 5 μg/mL transferrin; all from Sigma). Cells were treated with 0.1, 1 or 10 µM H89 in DMSO (DMSO final concentration, 0.1%) for 30 min added to both apical and basal media. Controls were in 0.1% DMSO for 30 min. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and then lysed with 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl, 1× Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitors) followed by sonication to solubilize proteins. Protein lysates were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 25°C, and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 25°C in the dark. The samples were diluted eight-fold with 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8.5) to reduce the urea concentration prior to digestion with Trypsin/LysC (Promega) (1:20 wt/wt.) overnight at 37°C. The peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) extraction cartridges (Oasis) and quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. For each replicate, equal amounts of each sample (160-400 μg of peptide) were labeled using TMT10Plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were combined and, after taking an aliquot for total proteomics, phosphopeptides were sequentially enriched following Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography protocol (SMOAC, Thermo Scientific). We then fractionated the samples (12 fractions) using high pH reverse phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC System). Samples were then vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C until analysis.  The dried peptides were re-suspended with 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis. Total and phosphopeptides were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano LC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos ETD mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were introduced into a peptide nanotrap at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were fractionated with a reversed-phase EASY-Spray PepMap column (C18, 75 μm × 50 cm) using a linear gradient of 4 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (120 min at 0.3 μL/min).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus UniProtKB reference proteome (Proteome ID: UP000000589, downloaded 17 April 2018, plus contaminant database)using MaxQuant 1.6.2.3. Data analyses were performed using Perseus, R, and Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation, mediated by protein kinases, plays a crucial role in cellular regulation. One of the most important protein kinases is protein kinase A (PKA). N-[2-p-bromocinnamylamino-ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulphonamide (H89) is often used as a "PKA specific inhibitor" to study the involvement of PKA in signaling pathways. However, evidence from cell-free experiments has suggested that H89 can also inhibit other protein kinases. In this study, previously generated PKA-null and PKA-intact mouse cell lines derived from mpkCCD cells were treated with H89 over a range of concentrations commonly used in the literature, followed by mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to globally assess changes in phosphorylation. From a total of 14,139 phosphorylation sites quantified, we found that 571 and 263 phosphorylation sites with significant changes in abundance in PKA-intact and PKA-null cells, respectively. Analyses of sequence logos generated from significantly decreased phosphorylation sites in PKA-intact and PKA-null cells both revealed a preference for basic amino acids at position -3 and -2. Thus, H89 appears to inhibit basophilic kinases even in the absence of PKA. Likely H89 targets include basophilic protein kinases such as AKT, RSK, AMPK and ROCK. We conclude that, in intact cells, H89 can affect activities of protein kinases other than PKA, and therefore responses to H89 should not be regarded as sufficient evidence for PKA involvement in a signaling process.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Pka, H89, Kinase inhibitor

### Affiliations
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, NIH

### Submitter
Kavee Limbutara

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, NIH


