### Accession
PXD031873

### Title
Linker histone H1-mediates transgenerational genome instability upon paternal DNA damage

### Description
Parental exposure to environmental stress can result in an increased diseases risk in the offspring. Although literature on maternal contribution to hereditary diseases are growing, the paternal contribution is frequently underrecognized. Since human studies reported that 80% of transmitted mutations arise in the paternal germline, it is crucial to understand the mechanism underlying the paternally inherited genome instability. Ionizing radiation (IR) is a major source of mutagenesis through inducing DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Here, we used sex-separated C. elegans mutants to investigate the paternal contribution to IR-induced transgenerational effects. Specifically, we found that paternal exposure to IR leads to a transgenerational embryonic lethality, and this effect is only observed when the radiation exposure occurred close to the time of fertilization. In the offspring of the irradiated males (F1 generation), we detected various genome instability phenotypes, including DNA fragmentation, chromosomal rearrangement, and aneuploidy. These phenotypes are attributed to the usage of two error-prone repair machinery, the polymerase-theta mediated end joining (TMEJ) and the non-homologous End Joining (NHEJ). Surprisingly, depletion of a human histone H1.0 ortholog, HIS-24, can significantly rescue this transgenerational embryonic lethality. Moreover, this rescue effect is associated with the downregulation of heterochromatin marker histone 3 lysine 9 di-methylation (H3K9me2), and the knocking-down of heterochromatin protein, HPL-1, could mimic the rescue effect of HIS-24 depletion. We also noticed that removal of the histone H1 and heterochromatin marker could activate the error-free repair machinery, Homologous Recombination repair (HR), thus improving the viability of the offspring carrying paternally inherited DNA damage. Altogether, our work sheds light on the importance of paternal radiation exposure on the health of offspring. In addition, our work establishes a previously unknown mechanism underlying the transgenerational genome instability and provides a potential therapeutic target for preventing the hereditary diseases caused by paternal radiation exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Worms were washed off from plates, and lysis buffer was added to the worm pellet (6 M Guanidinium chloride (GuCl), 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris-HCl). Heat the sample at 95 °C for 10 min and sonicate the sample with Bioruptor (30 s sonication, 30 s break, 10 cycles, high performance). Repeat the heating and sonication one more time. Then samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min, and the supernatant was collected. Take 5 µl of protein solution and dilute with 20 mM Tris to reduce the concentration of GuCl to lower than 0.6 M. Add 50 mM TEAB to dilute the samples to 100 µl and then add 1 µg Lys-C to incubate at 37 °C for 4 h. Samples were further diluted with 180 µl TEAB and treated with 2 µg Lys-C at 37°C over-night. Enzyme digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 1 %, and the sample purification by StageTip was carried out according to CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Core facility’s standard protocol.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.5.3) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical Uniprot CAEEL.fasta (2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. SILAC/dimethyl labeling quantification was used, and the re-quantify option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epigenetics, Dna damage, Paternal inheritance.

### Affiliations
Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, Medical Faculty, University Hospital and University of Cologne, Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Björn Schumacher
Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, Medical Faculty, University Hospital and University of Cologne, Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


