### Accession
PXD001432

### Title
Tcell surface analysis -  A combined omics approach to generate the surface atlas of human naive CD4+ T cells during early TCR activation

### Description
Naive CD4+ T cells are the common precursors of multiple effector and memory T cell subsets and possess a high plasticity in terms of differentiation potential. This stem-cell like character is important for cell therapies aiming at regeneration of specific immunity. Cell surface proteins are crucial for recognition and response to signals mediated by other cells or environmental changes. Knowledge of cell surface proteins of human naive CD4+ T cells and their changes during the early phase of T cell activation is urgently needed for a guided differentiation of naive T cells and may support the selection of  pluripotent cells for cell therapy.<br>Periodate oxidation and aniline-catalyzed oxime ligation (PAL) technology was applied with subsequent quantitative LC-MS/MS (PAL-qLC-MS/MS) to generate a dataset describing the surface proteome of human naive CD4+ T cells and to monitor dynamic changes during the early phase of activation. This led to the identification of 173 N-glycosylated surface proteins, of which 24 were previously not known to be expressed on human naive CD4+ T cells or have no defined role within T cell activation. To independently confirm the proteomic dataset and to analyse the cell surface by an alternative technique a systematic phenotypic expression analysis of surface antigens via flow cytometry was performed. This screening expanded the previous dataset, resulting in 229 surface proteins which are expressed on naive unstimulated and activated CD4+ T cells. Furthermore, we generated a surface expression atlas based on transcriptome data, experimental annotation and predicted subcellular localization, and correlated the proteomics result with this transcriptional dataset.<br>This extensive surface atlas provides an overall naive CD4+ T cell surface resource and will enable future studies aiming at a deeper understanding of mechanisms of T cell biology allowing the identification of novel immune targets usable for the development of therapeutic treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from the heparinized blood of healthy, non-atopic blood donors (n=19) by standard lymphoprep density gradient centrifugation. To generate and validate the surface atlas of human naïve CD4+ T cells on a proteomic level, 15 different biological replicates were used. For the generation of the transcriptome dataset by RNA microarray, again additionally 4 different donors were included. The study was approved by the local ethics committee of the Technical University Munich, ethic board no 2877/10. Informed written consent was obtained from all study subjects. Naive CD4+ T cells were separated by negative isolation, followed by the depletion of CD45RO+ cells according to the manufacturer’s protocol reaching a purity of at least 98% as monitored by flow cytometry. Cells were activated with plate-bound αCD3 (0.75 µg/24-well culture plate well; BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) and soluble αCD28 (0.75 µg/ml; BD Biosciences) or the T cell activation/expansion kit with a bead-to-cell ratio of 1 : 2 (Miltenyi Biotec) in a density of 1x106 cells/ml of AIMV Medium and cultured at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere.<br>Periodate oxidation and aniline-catalyzed oxime ligation (PAL)-based cell surface labeling procedure was performed and adapted for primary human naive CD4+ T cells. All following steps were performed on ice. The cell pellet of 8 x 106 naive CD4+ T cells per donor (n=4, donor 1-4) and time-point was washed twice in ice-cold labeling buffer (PBS with CaCl2/MgCl2 pH 6.7) and then added to 1 ml oxidation/biotinylation mix in an one-pot reaction, consisting of 1 mM NaIO4, 100 µM aminooxy-biotin (Biotium Inc. Hayward, CA) and 10 mM aniline (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) in labeling buffer and incubated for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark, rotating. The biotinylation reaction was quenched by adding glycerol to a final concentration of 1 mM for additional 5 min on the rotator at 4 °C. Cells were washed with 1 ml cold washing buffer (PBS with CaCl2/MgCl2 pH 7.4) and an aliquot of cells was collected to check biotinylation labeling efficiency. After centrifugation (4000 rpm, 4 °C, 10 min) each cell pellet was resuspended in 250 µl lysis buffer (1% NP40, 10 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.6, 2 x EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in ddH2O) and frozen at -20 °C. To prepare cell membrane fractions, the lysed cells were thawed on ice and constantly vortexed. Raw lysates were cleared by centrifugation (6000 g, 4 °C, 10 min). The pellet was discarded while the supernatant was diluted 1:5 with washing buffer. The diluted samples were incubated with 60 µl of prewashed Strep-Tactin Superflow 50% suspension (IBA GmbH, Göttingen, Germany) in LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 4 °C for 2 h on a rotator to bind biotinylated cell surface proteins to high-affinity streptavidin beads. Samples were centrifuged at 1000 g for 1 min to pellet the bead-protein complexes. The following washing and incubation steps (Weekes, M. P., et al., J Biomol Tech 2010, 21, 108-115) were all carried out in a volume of 200 µl and the centrifugation steps during the washing procedure were carried out at 2000 g for 2 min. First, beads were washed with the washing buffer, supplemented with 0.2% NP40 and followed by a washing step with 0.5% SDS (Gibco by lifetechnologies) in washing buffer. After centrifugation the beads of each sample were incubated with 0.5% SDS and 100 mM DTT in washing buffer at room temperature for 30 min. Beads were then washed with UC buffer (6 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5). For alkylation the beads were incubated in UC buffer containing 50 mM iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 min, followed by washing steps with UC buffer, 5 M NaCl, 100 mM Na2CO3 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) pH 11.5 and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Bead-protein complexes were then first digested in 40 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 containing 1 µg sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 37 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged as before and the supernatant, containing the tryptic peptides, was transferred into a new LoBind tube (Eppendorf). Beads were resuspended in 40 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and centrifuged, the resulting supernatant was pooled with the first tryptic fraction. The beads were washed with 40 µl 1 x G7 buffer (NEB, Frankfurt a.M., Germany) and then incubated with 20 µl 1x G7 buffer containing 500 U glyerol-free PNGase F (NEB) at 37 °C in a thermomixer for 6 h to release the glycopeptides from the beads. After the second digest, beads were centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred into a new LoBind tube. The beads were again resuspended with 20 µl 1 x G7 buffer and centrifuged to pool the resulting supernatant with the first PNGase F fraction. Tryptic and PNGase F peptide fractions were stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometric analysis and seperately measured.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed as described previously (Merl, J. et al, Proteomics 2012, 12, 1902-1911; von Toerne, C. et al, Mol Cell Proteomics 2014, 13, 2371-2381) on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the following adjustments: A nano trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18. 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (PepMap, 25 cm, 75 µm ID, 2µm/100 Å pore size, LC Packings) operated on a RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) using a nonlinear 170 min LC gradient from 5 to 31% of buffer B (98% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nl/min flow rate followed by a short gradient from 31 to 95% buffer B in 5 min and an equilibration for 15 min to starting conditions. From the MS prescan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap if they exceeded an intensity of at least 200 counts and were at least doubly charged. During fragment analyses, high-resolution (60,000 full-width half maximum) MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass range from 300 to 1500 Da. One microscan was recorded with fill times in the FT (MS) set to 0.5 s and in the Ion Trap (MSn) to 0.1 s. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) targets were set to 1e+6 (MS) and 1e+4MSn, respectively.<br>The RAW files (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were further analyzed using the Progenesis LC-MS software (version 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK), as described previously (Hauck, S. M., Mol Cell Proteomics 2010, 9, 2292-2305) with the following changes: For peptide identification, using the search engine Mascot (Matrix Science, Release number 2.4), assuming tryptic digestion, one missed cleavage was allowed, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. Spectra were searched against the Ensembl human database (Release 69; 100607 sequences) (Flicek, P. et al., Nucleic Acids Res 2014, 42, D749-755) excluding the common contaminants keratin and albumin. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search using the Percolator algorithm calculated an average peptide false discovery rate of < 1% when searches were performed with a Percolator score cut-off of 13 and a significance threshold of p < 0.05. Peptide assignments were re-imported into Progenesis LC-MS. Normalized abundances of all unique peptides were summed up and allocated to the respective protein.

### Publication Abstract
Naive CD4(+) T cells are the common precursors of multiple effector and memory T-cell subsets and possess a high plasticity in terms of differentiation potential. This stem-cell-like character is important for cell therapies aiming at regeneration of specific immunity. Cell surface proteins are crucial for recognition and response to signals mediated by other cells or environmental changes. Knowledge of cell surface proteins of human naive CD4(+) T cells and their changes during the early phase of T-cell activation is urgently needed for a guided differentiation of naive T cells and may support the selection of pluripotent cells for cell therapy. Periodate oxidation and aniline-catalyzed oxime ligation technology was applied with subsequent quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem MS to generate a data set describing the surface proteome of primary human naive CD4(+) T cells and to monitor dynamic changes during the early phase of activation. This led to the identification of 173 N-glycosylated surface proteins. To independently confirm the proteomic data set and to analyze the cell surface by an alternative technique a systematic phenotypic expression analysis of surface antigens via flow cytometry was performed. This screening expanded the previous data set, resulting in 229 surface proteins, which were expressed on naive unstimulated and activated CD4(+) T cells. Furthermore, we generated a surface expression atlas based on transcriptome data, experimental annotation, and predicted subcellular localization, and correlated the proteomics result with this transcriptional data set. This extensive surface atlas provides an overall naive CD4(+) T cell surface resource and will enable future studies aiming at a deeper understanding of mechanisms of T-cell biology allowing the identification of novel immune targets usable for the development of therapeutic treatments.

### Keywords
T-cells

### Affiliations
ZAUM - Center of Allergy and Environment
as before

### Submitter
Kathrin Suttner

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Suttner
as before


