### Accession
PXD021021

### Title
Altered turnover of the CNS myelin protein Opalin in a mouse model of hereditary spastic paraplegia 35

### Description
Fatty acid 2-hydroxylase (FA2H) is responsible for the synthesis of 2-hydroxylated fatty acids, which are a building block of sphingolipids. This 2-hydroxylated sphingolipids can be found in various tissues such as brain, spinal cord, skin, testis, ovary, kidney, stomach, or intestine with a notably high occurrence in the insulating myelin sheath of neurons.  Mutations in the FA2H gene can cause the neurodegenerative disease spastic paraplegia 35 (SPG35), which is also known as fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration. Moreover, FA2H knock-out mice largely resemble the SPG35 human disease phenotype. To further elucidate the connection between FA2H and SPG35, we performed a comparative quantitative proteome analysis of central nervous system myelin of wildtype and FA2H-KO mice at different ages (6, 13, and 17 months) using isobaric labeling with tandem mass tags (TMT).

### Sample Protocol
Myelin was purified from brains of 6, 13, and 17 months old WT and FA2H-KO mice (3 biological replicates for each condition) by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. For each sample, 40 µg of myelin protein were precipitated using acetone, resuspended in 0.1 % RapiGest in 0.1 M TEAB, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 45 min, and alkylated for 20 min with 50 mM acrylamide at RT. Trypsin was added at an 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio (w/w) and samples incubated at 37 °C overnight. The resulting digests were directly labelled using the TMTsixplex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The individual labels (0.8 mg per label) were dissolved in 123 µl anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and 40 µl used for each labelling reaction. Samples of the same genotype (WT/KO) and time point (6M, 13M, 17M) received the same label: WT6M = 126, WT13M = 127, WT17M = 128, KO6M = 129, KO13M = 130, and KO17M = 131. After 90 min at RT, labelling was stopped by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine 0.1 M TEAB and incubation for 15 min at RT. Subsequently, samples were combined and RapiGest was removed by acidic cleavage and precipitation. Then the ACN content was reduced by vacuum centrifugation and samples desalted using Oasis HLB 1cc (10 mg) solid-phase extraction columns. Columns were first activated 3x with 1 mL 70% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by equilibration with 4x 1 ml 0.1% FA. Then the sample was diluted in 0.1% FA, loaded onto the column, washed 10x with 1 ml 0.1% FA and eluted 2x with 300 µl 70% ACN. The eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and subsequently fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent G3100 OFFGEL device and pH 3-10 IPG strips according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the omission of glycerol from the rehydration buffer. The individual fractions were desalted using self-assembled StageTips containing two layers of Empore C18 material. Tips were activated with 20 µl methanol followed by 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid and equilibrated with 0.5% acetic acid. Acidified samples were loaded onto the tips, washed once with 100 µl 0.5 % acetic acid and eluted with 2x 10 µl 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid. Peptide eluates were dried via a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C. For LC-MS/MS measurements, samples were dissolved in 5% FA/5% ACN and analyzed with an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA/5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/94.9% water and phase B of 0.1% FA/5% DMSO/94.9% ACN. Peptide separation was achieved using self-pulled 30 cm spray tip columns filled with Magic C18 5 µm stationary phase material (Bruker-Michrom, Germany) by a linear 60 min gradient of mobile phase B (1 to 35%) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS1 spectra were measured in the Orbitrap from 400 – 1200 m/z at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC threshold of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. HCD-fragment spectra of the ten most intense precursors were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 with a fixed low mass of 100 m/z, an AGC threshold of 5E4 and a maximum inject time to 250 ms. The intensity threshold for precursor selection was set to 5E3, the normalized collision energy to 42, the isolation width to 2 m/z, and the minimal charge state to 2. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the following parameters: repeat duration = 30 s, exclusion duration = 30 s, exclusion window = +/- 10 ppm, expiration S/N threshold = 3.0.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 (www.maxquant.org) was used to identify and quantify peptides from raw data using UniProt Mus musculus (51,544 entries, downloaded 11/2013) and the software’s internal database for common contaminants. Trypsin was selected as protease with up to 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (Prot N-term) were selected as variable, and Propionamid (C) as fixed modifications. The MS tolerances were as follows: MS1 (first/main) = 20/6 ppm, MS2 = 20 ppm. Identifications were filtered on peptide and protein group levels with 1% FDR. TMT6plex was selected as quantification method with the precursor intensity fraction (PIF) filter set to 0.75. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Perseus 1.4.1.3 (https://maxquant.net/perseus/) was used for statistical analysis of the proteinGroups.txt output file. After upload into Perseus, reverse hits, contaminants and identified by site hits were removed. TMT signal abundances of each channel were normalized by the mean channel abundance. Normalized abundances were used to calculate FA2H-KO/WT-ratios for each time point within each replicate. Ratios were log2-transformed and the whole dataset filtered for proteins with at least two valid values at any of the three time points. Finally, a one-sample t-test was used to determine significantly regulated proteins at each time point (log2 fold change ≥ 0.585 or ≤ -0.585, p-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Spastic paraplegia 35 (SPG35) (OMIM: 612319) or fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration (FAHN) is caused by deficiency of fatty acid 2-hydroxylase (FA2H). This enzyme synthesizes sphingolipids containing 2-hydroxylated fatty acids, which are particularly abundant in myelin. Fa2h-deficient (Fa2h-/-) mice develop symptoms reminiscent of the human disease and therefore serve as animal model of SPG35. In order to understand further the pathogenesis of SPG35, we compared the proteome of purified CNS myelin isolated from wild type and Fa2h-/- mice at different time points of disease progression using tandem mass tag labeling. Data analysis with a focus on myelin membrane proteins revealed a significant increase of the oligodendrocytic myelin paranodal and inner loop protein (Opalin) in Fa2h-/- mice, whereas the concentration of other major myelin proteins was not significantly changed. Western blot analysis revealed an almost 6-fold increase of Opalin in myelin of Fa2h-/- mice aged 21-23&#xa0;months. A concurrent unaltered Opalin gene expression suggested a decreased turnover of the Opalin protein in Fa2h-/- mice. Supporting this hypothesis, Opalin protein half-life was reduced significantly when expressed in CHO cells synthesizing 2-hydroxylated sulfatide, compared to cells synthesizing only non-hydroxylated sulfatide. Degradation of Opalin was inhibited by inhibitors of lysosomal degradation but unaffected by proteasome inhibitors. Taken together, these results reveal a new function of 2-hydroxylated sphingolipids namely affecting the turnover of a myelin membrane protein. This may play a role in the pathogenesis of SPG35.

### Keywords
Time course, Myelin, Cns, Sphingolipids, Fa2h, Hereditary spastic paraplegia 35, Neurodegeneration, Fatty acid 2-hydroxylase, Opalin, Mice, Tmt, Isobaric labeling, Fatty acid hydroxylation, Disease model

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany
AK Gieselmann Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IBMB) Med. Fak. Universtität Bonn Nussallee 11 53115 Bonn Germany

### Submitter
Robert Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Eckhardt
AK Gieselmann Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IBMB) Med. Fak. Universtität Bonn Nussallee 11 53115 Bonn Germany


