### Accession
PXD008461

### Title
Proteomic Analysis and Validation of the RGS14 Signaling Interactome in the Mouse Brain

### Description
Regulator of G Protein Signaling 14 (RGS14) is a complex scaffolding protein with an unusual domain structure that allows it to integrate G protein and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. RGS14 mRNA and protein are enriched in brain tissue of rodents and primates. In the adult mouse brain, RGS14 is predominantly expressed in postsynaptic dendrites and spines of hippocampal CA2 pyramidal neurons where it naturally inhibits synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. However, the signaling proteins that RGS14 natively interacts with in neurons to regulate plasticity are unknown. Here, we show that RGS14 exists as a component of a high molecular weight protein complex in brain. To identify RGS14 neuronal interacting partners, endogenous RGS14 isolated from mouse brain was subjected to mass spectrometry and proteomic analysis.  We find that RGS14 interacts with key postsynaptic proteins that regulate neuronal plasticity. Gene ontology analysis reveals that the most enriched RGS14 interacting proteins have functional roles in actin-binding, calmodulin(CaM)-binding, and CaM-dependent protein kinase (CaMK) activity. We validate these proteomics findings using biochemical assays that identify interactions between RGS14 and two previously unknown binding partners: CaM and CaMKII. We report that RGS14 directly interacts with CaM in a calcium-dependent manner and is phosphorylated by CaMKII in vitro. Lastly, we detect that RGS14 associates with CaMKII and with CaM in hippocampal CA2 neurons by proximity ligation assays in mouse brain sections. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that RGS14 is a novel CaM effector and CaMKII phosphorylation substrate thereby providing new insight into cellular mechanisms by which RGS14 controls plasticity in CA2 neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Adult wild-type C57BL/6J mice were deeply anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation and euthanized by decapitation. Brains were rapidly removed from the skull and homogenized on ice using a glass dounce homogenizer with 10 strokes in an ice-cold buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, Halt phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1:100, Thermo Fisher), and one mini protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science), pH 7.4. Membranes were solubilized by the addition of 1% NP-40 for 1h at 4°C and subsequently centrifuged to pellet debris. Cleared brain homogenates were incubated with an anti-RGS14 mouse monoclonal antibody (5 µg, NeuroMab) for 2 h at 4°C. Next, 75 µl of Protein G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher) were added to homogenates for 2 h to precipitate antibody-bound protein complexes. Protein G Dynabeads were washed thoroughly with ice-cold TBS and immediately digested for MS. IPs were simultaneously performed with generic mouse IgG (Millipore) as a control for comparative MS analysis. Three independent biological replicates were performed for each condition. Following four washes with ice cold TBS, the control beads or RGS14 immunoprecipitated samples were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer and protein reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein was then digested overnight with 12.5ng/µL trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a stage tip and dried under vacuum. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 10 µL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) essentially as previously described with slight modification. Peptide mixtures (2 µL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 µm Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 µM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific , San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 120 minute gradient at a rate of 250 nL/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (300-1500 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (1.5 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability. The search engine Andromeda was used to build and search a Uniprot mouse reference (downloaded on Aug 14, 2015). Protein Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 miscleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of 7 residues, 0.5 Da Tolerance for ion trap HCD MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches and proteins were set to 1%. The label free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used for protein quantitation. LFQ intensity of each protein for each mouse was averaged from three bead control IP samples and three RGS14 IP samples. No more than two missing values were considered in the RGS14 IP samples, which were imputed as previously described (25). Differentially expressed proteins were found by calculating Student’s t-test p values and fold difference |log2(RGS14/non-specific IgG)| ≥ 0.58 (≥ ±1.50 fold change). Volcano plots were plotted with ggplot2 package in R.

### Publication Abstract
Regulator of G Protein Signaling 14 (RGS14) is a complex scaffolding protein that integrates G protein and MAPK signaling pathways. In the adult mouse brain, RGS14 is predominantly expressed in hippocampal CA2 neurons where it naturally inhibits synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. However, the signaling proteins that RGS14 natively engages to regulate plasticity are unknown. Here, we show that RGS14 exists in a high-molecular-weight protein complex in brain. To identify RGS14 neuronal interacting partners, endogenous RGS14 immunoprecipitated from mouse brain was subjected to mass spectrometry and proteomic analysis. We find that RGS14 interacts with key postsynaptic proteins that regulate plasticity. Gene ontology analysis reveals the most enriched RGS14 interactors have functional roles in actin-binding, calmodulin(CaM)-binding, and CaM-dependent protein kinase (CaMK) activity. We validate these findings using biochemical assays that identify interactions with two previously unknown binding partners. We report that RGS14 directly interacts with Ca<sup>2+</sup>/CaM and is phosphorylated by CaMKII in vitro. Lastly, we detect that RGS14 associates with CaMKII and CaM in hippocampal CA2 neurons. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that RGS14 is a novel CaM effector and CaMKII phosphorylation substrate thereby providing new insight into mechanisms by which RGS14 controls plasticity in CA2 neurons.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Neuroproteomics, Rgs14, Interactome

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Department of Pharmacology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Hepler
Emory University School of Medicine Department of Pharmacology


