### Accession
PXD021251

### Title
SILAC-Based Quantitative Proteomics Identifies Multifactorial Mechanism of Oxaliplatin Resistance in Pancreatic Cancer Cells

### Description
Oxaliplatin is a commonly used chemotherapeutic drug for the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Understanding the cellular mechanisms of oxaliplatin resistance is important for developing new strategies to overcome drug resistance in pancreatic cancer. In this study, we performed a stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics analysis of oxaliplatin-resistant and sensitive pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells. We identified 107 proteins whose expression levels changed between oxaliplatin-resistant and sensitive cells, which were involved in multiple biological processes, including DNA repair, drug response, apoptotic signalling, and the type 1 interferon signalling pathway. Notably, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS) and wntless homolog protein (WLS) were upregulated in oxaliplatin-resistant cells compared to sensitive cells, as confirmed by qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis. We further demonstrated the activation of AKT and β-catenin signalling (downstream targets of MARCKS and WLS, respectively) in oxaliplatin-resistant PANC-1 cells. Additionally, we show that the siRNA-mediated suppression of both MARCKS and WLS enhanced oxaliplatin sensitivity in oxaliplatin-resistant PANC-1 cells. Taken together, our results provide insights into multiple mechanisms of oxaliplatin resistance in pancreatic cancer cells and reveal that MARCKS and WLS might be involved in the chemotherapeutic resistance in pancreatic cancer.

### Sample Protocol
PANC-1 and PANC-1R cells were suspended with cell lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 75 mM NaCl, and a cocktail of protease inhibitors) and sonicated with ten 3-s pulses (2-s pause between pulses). The lysate was centrifuged for 15 min at 12000 rpm, and the supernatant was collected for proteomic sample preparation. Protein concentrations were measured using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. An equal amount of proteins from PANC-1 and PANC-1R cells were mixed and followed by being reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 2 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The remaining IAA was quenched by the addition of excess L-cysteine. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final concentration of 1 M urea and then digested with trypsin (1:50, w/w) for 18 h at 37°C. To stop the digestion, 1% formic acid (FA) was added, and the resulting peptide mixtures were desalted with a 10 mg OASIS HLB cartridge (Waters, MA, USA). The eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were searched against the UniProt human database (Jan 3, 2018 release) using MaxQuant search engine 1.6.1.0 for protein identification and SILAC quantification. The search criteria were set as follows: two mis-cleavages were allowed; the mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation of N-terminal residue was set as variable modifications; the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins; SILAC heavy label was set to Arg6 and Lys8. Only proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides per protein. All contaminants and reverse database hits were excluded from the protein list. Subsequent data processing and statistical analysis were performed using the Perseus software 1.5.8.5. The SILAC light/heavy ratios were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median. To identify a significant difference between PANC-1 and PANC-1R cells, the Student’s t-test was applied. A functional Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID. The enrichment analysis of the reactome pathway was performed using the R/Bioconductor package ReactomePA (version 1.30.0) (17). A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed (high confidence score, > 0.7) with the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) 11.0 and then visualized using Cytoscape software 3.7.1. Network module analysis was performed using the Molecular Complex Deletion (MCODE) plugin for Cytoscape. The parameters were set as degree cut-off = 2, node score cutoff = 0.2, k-core = 2, and maximum depth = 100.

### Publication Abstract
Oxaliplatin is a commonly used chemotherapeutic drug for the treatment of pancreatic cancer. Understanding the cellular mechanisms of oxaliplatin resistance is important for developing new strategies to overcome drug resistance in pancreatic cancer. In this study, we performed a stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics analysis of oxaliplatin-resistant and sensitive pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells. We identified 107 proteins whose expression levels changed (thresholds of 2-fold changes and <i>p</i>-value &#x2264; 0.05) between oxaliplatin-resistant and sensitive cells, which were involved in multiple biological processes, including DNA repair, cell cycle process, and type I interferon signaling pathway. Notably, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS) and Wntless homolog protein (WLS) were upregulated in oxaliplatin-resistant cells compared to sensitive cells, as confirmed by qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis. We further demonstrated the activation of AKT and &#x3b2;-catenin signaling (downstream targets of MARCKS and WLS, respectively) in oxaliplatin-resistant PANC-1 cells. Additionally, we show that the siRNA-mediated suppression of both MARCKS and WLS enhanced oxaliplatin sensitivity in oxaliplatin-resistant PANC-1 cells. Taken together, our results provide insights into multiple mechanisms of oxaliplatin resistance in pancreatic cancer cells and reveal that MARCKS and WLS might be involved in the oxaliplatin resistance.

### Keywords
Oxaliplatin, Quantitative proteomics, Pancreatic cancer, Silac, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
267, Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Center for Bioanalysis, Division of Chemical and Medical Metrology, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Youn Eun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Dukjin Kang
Center for Bioanalysis, Division of Chemical and Medical Metrology, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea


