### Accession
PXD025763

### Title
Arginine Methylation Regulates SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Protein Function and Viral Replication

### Description
Viral proteins are known to be methylated by host protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) playing critical roles during viral infections. Herein, we show that PRMT1 methylates SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein at residues R95 and R177 within RGG/RG sequences. Arginine methylation of N protein was confirmed by immunoblotting viral proteins extracted from SARS-CoV-2 virions isolated by cell culture. We demonstrate that arginine methylation of N protein is required for its RNA binding capacity, since treatment with a type I PRMT inhibitor (MS023) or substitution of R95K or R177K inhibited interaction with the 5’-UTR of the SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA. We defined the N interactome in HEK293 cells with or without MS023 treatment and identified PRMT1 and many of its RGG/RG substrates including the known interactor, G3BP1, and other components of stress granules (SG). Methylation of N protein at R95 regulates another function namely its property to suppress the formation of SGs. MS023 treatment or R95K substitution blocked N-mediated suppression of SGs. Also, the co-expression of methylarginine reader TDRD3 quenched N-mediated suppression of SGs in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, pre-treatment of VeroE6 cells with MS023 significantly reduced SARS-CoV-2 replication. With type I PRMT inhibitors being in clinical trials for cancer treatment, inhibiting arginine methylation to target the later stages of the viral life cycle such as viral genome packaging and assembly of virions may be an additional therapeutic application of these drugs.

### Sample Protocol
For FLAG-N proteomic analysis, peptides were reconstituted in water containing 0.2% formic acid and analyzed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000. Samples were injected on a 150 μm,~ 20 cm nano-LC column (Jupiter C18, 3 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex). The separation was performed with a linear gradient from 5 to 30% ACN and 0.2% formic acid over 56 min at 600nL/min. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350 to m/z 1200 at resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with a target automatic gain control (AGC) of 5E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in CID mode with a normalized collision energy of 30% at the rapid scan rate using a Top 3s method, with a target AGC of 2E4 and a maximum injection time of 35ms.

### Data Protocol
Dynamic exclusion was set at 60s. Database searches were performed with PEAKS X against the Uniprot human database (20350 entries) with the virus sequence. Precursor and fragment tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as fixed modification. Phosphorylation (STY), deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Viral proteins are known to be methylated by host protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) necessary for the viral life cycle, but it remains unknown whether severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) proteins are methylated. Herein, we show that PRMT1 methylates SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein at residues R95 and R177 within RGG/RG motifs, preferred PRMT target sequences. We confirmed arginine methylation of N protein by immunoblotting viral proteins extracted from SARS-CoV-2 virions isolated from cell culture. Type I PRMT inhibitor (MS023) or substitution of R95 or R177 with lysine inhibited interaction of N protein with the 5'-UTR of SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA, a property required for viral packaging. We also defined the N protein interactome in HEK293 cells, which identified PRMT1 and many of its RGG/RG substrates, including the known interacting protein G3BP1 as well as other components of stress granules (SGs), which are part of the host antiviral response. Methylation of R95 regulated the ability of N protein to suppress the formation of SGs, as R95K substitution or MS023 treatment blocked N-mediated suppression of SGs. Also, the coexpression of methylarginine reader Tudor domain-containing protein 3 quenched N protein-mediated suppression of SGs in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, pretreatment of VeroE6 cells with MS023 significantly reduced SARS-CoV-2 replication. Because type I PRMT inhibitors are already undergoing clinical trials for cancer treatment, inhibiting arginine methylation to target the later stages of the viral life cycle such as viral genome packaging and assembly of virions may represent an additional therapeutic application of these drugs.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Nucleocapsid (n) protein, Prmt1, Type i prmt inhibitor, Condensate, Rna binding, Stress granules, Arginine methylation, Rgg/rg motif

### Affiliations
McGill University

### Submitter
Stephane Richard

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Richard
McGill University


