### Accession
PXD045456

### Title
SIRT2 interactomics in HeLa cells

### Description
We aim to discovery new interactors of the deacetylase, SIRT2 from HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
We constructed SIRT2-Flag Stably expressing HeLa cells, and enriched SIRT2-interacting proteins via immunoprecipitating by Flag agarose beads. The elusion was projected into the MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The results of SIRT2-overexpressing cells were compared with Empty vector-expressing cells to find out SIRT2 specific interactors.

### Publication Abstract
SIRT2, a cytoplasmic member of the Sirtuin family, has important roles in immunity and inflammation. However, its function in regulating the response to DNA virus infection remains elusive. Here, we find that SIRT2 is a unique regulator among the Sirtuin family that negatively modulates the cGAS-STING-signaling pathway. SIRT2 is down-regulated after Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) infection, and SIRT2 deficiency markedly elevates the expression levels of type I interferon (IFN). SIRT2 inhibits the DNA binding ability and droplet formation of cGAS by interacting with and deacetylating G3BP1 at K257, K276, and K376, leading to the disassembly of the cGAS-G3BP1 complex, which is critical for cGAS activation. Administration of AGK2, a selective SIRT2 inhibitor, protects mice from HSV-1 infection and increases the expression of IFN and IFN-stimulated genes. Our study shows that SIRT2 negatively regulates cGAS activation through G3BP1 deacetylation, suggesting a potential antiviral strategy by modulating SIRT2 activity.

### Keywords
Sirt2

### Affiliations
Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Yutong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jianyuan Luo
Peking University Health Science Center


