### Accession
PXD007712

### Title
Tick host range adaptation: changes in protein profiles in Ixodes scapularis and Amblyomma americanum saliva during stimulation to feed on different hosts

### Description
Understanding the molecular basis of how the tick adapts to feed on different animal hosts is central to understanding tick and tick-borne disease (TBD) epidemiology. Tick adaptation to feed on vertebrate hosts is regulated by tick secretion of multiple tick saliva proteins (TSPs) and other molecules that regulate tick feeding. This study was initiated to determine if ticks such as Ixodes scapularis and Amblyomma americanum that are adapted to feed on multiple hosts utilized the same sets of proteins to accomplish feeding on all hosts. Our data suggest that ticks of the same species differentially express proteins when feeding on diffent hosts. SDS-PAGE and silver staining analysis revealed unique protein eletrophoretic profile in saliva of Ixodes scapularis and Amblyomma americanum that were stimulated to start feeding on different hosts: rabbits, humans, and dogs. LC-MS/MS sequencing and pairwise analysis of proteins in saliva of I. scapularis and A. americanum ticks that were non-stimulated and those that were stimulated to feed on rabbits, dogs, or humans identified TSPs that were unique to each treatment and those that were common. Overal, we identified a total of 276 and 340 non-redundant I. scapularis and A. americanum TSPs, which we have classified into 28 functional classes that include secreted conserved proteins (unknown functions), proteinase inhibitors, lipocalins, extracellular matrix/cell adhesion, heme/iron metabolism, signal transduction and immunity-related proteins being the most predominant in saliva of unfed ticks. With exception of Rhipicephalus microplus, anti-tick vaccine research relies on feeding lab animals. Data here suggest that lab animal data could result in prioritizing irrelevant targets as some tick genes are unique to ticks fed on lab animals. This study provides the platform that could be utilized to identify relevant target anti-tick vaccine antigens, and will facilitate early stage tick feeding research.

### Sample Protocol
Total tick saliva proteins (2 g, in triplicate) of I. scapularis or A. americanum ticks that were non-stimulated and those that were exposed to human, dog, and rabbit were diluted in 8 M urea/0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, EUA) with a final ratio of 1:20 (enzyme: substrate). Digestion reactions, in a final concentration of 0.2 µg/mL, were quenched with formic acid (5 % final concentration) and centrifuged for debris removal. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using an Easy NanoLC II and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Solutions A and B consisted of 5 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Saliva samples (2 µg per injection) were separated in 155-min chromatographic runs, as follows: 1-10 % gradient of solution B in 10 minutes, 10-40 % B in 100 minutes, 40-50 % B in 10 minutes and 50-90 % B in 10 minutes. Column was held at 90 %  B for 10 minutes, reduced to 1 % B and re-equilibrated prior to next injection.  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 400 to 1,200 m/z at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1 x 106. The 10 most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS at 17,500 resolution and AGC target of 2 x 105 and an underfill ratio of 0.1 %. Maximum fill times were 20 and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Normalized collision energy was set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2 (McDonald et al., 2004) and searched with ProLuCID (Xu et al., 2015) against a non-redundant tick databases. I. scapularis peptides were searched against the database containing an Ixodidae sequences from NCBI (62,246 sequences and reverse sequences). For A. americanum, we searched peptides against an in house database of translated whole tick and dissected organ transcriptome (BioProject accession number PRJNA226980). Searches were done using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline – IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc.). The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was used as static modification. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 20 ppm fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by ProLuCID was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform (Carvalho et al., 2012a). Identifications were grouped by charge state and tryptic status, resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each group, ProLuCID XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaMass, ZScore, number of peaks matched and secondary rank values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminating function. A cut-off score was established to accept a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in a false-positive rate that was independent of tryptic status or charge state. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required. Results were post processed to only accept PSMs with <10ppm precursor mass error.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular basis of how ticks adapt to feed on different animal hosts is central to understanding tick and tick-borne disease (TBD) epidemiology. There is evidence that ticks differentially express specific sets of genes when stimulated to start feeding. This study was initiated to investigate if ticks such as <i>Ixodes scapularis</i> and <i>Amblyomma americanum</i> that are adapted to feed on multiple hosts utilized the same sets of proteins to prepare for feeding. We exposed <i>I. scapularis</i> and <i>A. americanum</i> to feeding stimuli of different hosts (rabbit, human, and dog) by keeping unfed adult ticks enclosed in a perforated microfuge in close contact with host skin, but not allowing ticks to attach on host. Our data suggest that ticks of the same species differentially express tick saliva proteins (TSPs) when stimulated to start feeding on different hosts. SDS-PAGE and silver staining analysis revealed unique electrophoretic profiles in saliva of <i>I. scapularis</i> and <i>A. americanum</i> that were stimulated to feed on different hosts: rabbit, human, and dog. LC-MS/MS sequencing and pairwise analysis demonstrated that <i>I. scapularis</i> and <i>A. americanum</i> ticks expressed unique protein profiles in their saliva when stimulated to start feeding on different hosts: rabbit, dog, or human. Specifically, our data revealed TSPs that were unique to each treatment and those that were shared between treatments. Overall, we identified a total of 276 and 340 non-redundant <i>I. scapularis</i> and <i>A. americanum</i> TSPs, which we have classified into 28 functional classes including: secreted conserved proteins (unknown functions), proteinase inhibitors, lipocalins, extracellular matrix/cell adhesion, heme/iron metabolism, signal transduction and immunity-related proteins being the most predominant in saliva of unfed ticks. With exception of research on vaccines against <i>Rhipicephalus microplus</i>, which its natural host, cattle, research on vaccine against other ticks relies feeding ticks on laboratory animals. Data here suggest that relying on lab animal tick feeding data to select target antigens could result in prioritizing irrelevant anti-tick vaccine targets that are expressed when ticks feed on laboratory animals. This study provides the platform that could be utilized to identify relevant target anti-tick vaccine antigens, and will facilitate early stage tick feeding research.

### Keywords
Tick-host relationship, Proteomic, Host adaptation, Tick, Saliva

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA

### Submitter
Albert Mulenga

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Mulenga
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA


