### Accession
PXD003313

### Title
Identify Novel Iron–Transporting Proteins in Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Description
Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae) is a major human pathogen causing morbidity and mortality worldwide. Efficiently acquiring iron from the environment is critical for S. pneumoniae to sustain growth and cause infection. There are only three known iron-uptake systems in Streptococcal species responsible for iron acquisition from the host, including ABC transporters PiaABC, PiuABC and PitABC. Besides, no other iron-transporting system has been suggested. In this work, we employed our newly established translating mRNA analysis integrated with proteomics to evaluate the possible existence of novel iron transporters in the bacterium. We simultaneously deleted the iron-binding protein genes of the three iron-uptake systems to construct a piaA/piuA/pitA triple mutant (Tri-Mut) of S. pneumoniae D39, in which genes and proteins related to iron transport should be regulated in response to the deletion. With ribosome associated mRNA sequencing-based translatomics focusing on translating mRNA and iTRAQ quantitative proteomics based on the covalent labeling of peptides with tags of varying mass, we indeed observed a large number of genes and proteins representing various coordinated biological pathways with significantly altered expression levels in the Tri-Mut mutant. Highlighted in this observation is the identification of several new potential iron-uptake ABC transporters for Streptococcal iron metabolism. In particular, putative protein SPD_1609 in operon 804 was verified to be a novel iron-binding protein with similar function to PitA in S. pneumoniae. These data derived from the integrative translatomics and proteomics analyses provided rich information and insightful clues for further investigations on iron-transporting mechanism in bacteria and the interplay between Streptococcal iron availability and the biological metabolic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The iTRAQ labeling of the peptide samples were performed using an iTRAQ Reagent 4-plex kit (AB SCIEX, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Two biological replicates for WT were labeled with 114-, 115- and two biological replicates for Tri-Mut were labeled with 116-, 117-. After incubation for 2 h, the labeled peptides with respective isobaric tags were dried to approximately 20 μL with a vacuum centrifuge. The labeled WT and Tri-Mut replicate samples were 1:1 pooled (114 vs 116, 115 vs 117), and cleaned up using Strata-X 33u polymeric reversed phase column (10 mg/mL, Phenomenex, USA). Desalted peptides were resuspended with buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and detected using an ABSCIEX Triple-TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA) coupled with a Nanospray III source and a pulled quartz tip.

### Data Protocol
The data (.mgf) were acquired from raw data (.wiff) by AB SCIEX MS Data Converter V1.1 software, then identified and quantified via ProteinPilot™ Software 4.5. The quantitative analysis parameters were set as follow: Sample Type, iTRAQ 4 plex (Peptide Labeled); Cys. Alkylation, Iodoacetic acid; Digestion, Trypsin; Instrument, Triple-TOF 5600; ID Focus, Biological modifications; Database, S. pneumoniae D39_.fasta.fasta; Search Effort, Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold [Unused ProtScore (Conf)] >1.30 (95.0%).

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae (S.pneumoniae) is a major human pathogen causing morbidity and mortality worldwide. Efficiently acquiring iron from the environment is critical for S. pneumoniae to sustain growth and cause infection. There are only three known iron-uptake systems in Streptococcal species responsible for iron acquisition from the host, including ABC transporters PiaABC, PiuABC, and PitABC. Besides, no other iron-transporting system has been suggested. In this work, we employed our newly established translating mRNA analysis integrated with proteomics to evaluate the possible existence of novel iron transporters in the bacterium. We simultaneously deleted the iron-binding protein genes of the three iron-uptake systems to construct a piaA/piuA/pitA triple mutant (Tri-Mut) of S. pneumoniae D39, in which genes and proteins related to iron transport should be regulated in response to the deletion. With ribosome associated mRNA sequencing-based translatomics focusing on translating mRNA and iTRAQ quantitative proteomics based on the covalent labeling of peptides with tags of varying mass, we indeed observed a large number of genes and proteins representing various coordinated biological pathways with significantly altered expression levels in the Tri-Mut mutant. Highlighted in this observation is the identification of several new potential iron-uptake ABC transporters participating in iron metabolism of Streptococcus. In particular, putative protein SPD_1609 in operon 804 was verified to be a novel iron-binding protein with similar function to PitA in S. pneumoniae. These data derived from the integrative translatomics and proteomics analyses provided rich information and insightful clues for further investigations on iron-transporting mechanism in bacteria and the interplay between Streptococcal iron availability and the biological metabolic pathways.

### Keywords
Iron–transporting proteins, Proteomics, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China

### Submitter
Yang Xiao-Yan

### Lab Head
Dr He Qing-Yu
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


