### Accession
PXD003359

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of soybean sprouts that treated with deionized water or with 6 mM Ca2+

### Description
Soybean sprout, a kind of year-round vegetable in Asia, is perceived as a part of a healthy diet. We found that supplemental Ca2+ could increase soybean sprout yield and improve its nutrition qualities. Ca2+-treated sprouts had higher yield than water-treated ones. Metabolism of selected anti-nutritional factors and bioactive substances in soybean sprouts was strengthened by Ca2+. To investigate the role of Ca2+ in soybean during germination, proteomic changes were analyzed. Total protein from soybean sprouts that treated with deionized water or with 6 mM Ca2+ were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Adult female mites were dissected in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mMTris-HCl, pH 8.5), and 1 mM PMSF (phenyl methane sulfonyl fluoride) and 2 mM EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid) were added after dissection. After 5 min, 10 mM DTT was added to the lysis solution. Then sonication in ice for 5 min and centrifugation at 4 °C, 30,000g for 15 min, and the supernatant was collected. To reduce disulfide bonds, 10 mM DTT was added and incubated at 56°C for 1 h. Subsequently, 55 mM IAM was added to block the cysteines, incubated for 45min in the darkroom. The treated proteins were precipitated in 80% acetone at -20 °C overnight and the precipitants were re-suspended in 500 μL 0.5 M TEAB, and sonicated for 5 min. Finally, samples were centrifuged at 4 °C, 30 000g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and quantified, using Bradford assay with BSA as standard. Total protein (100μg) was taken out of each sample solution and then the protein was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with the ratio of protein: trypsin =30: 1 at 37°C for 16 hours. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB and processed according to the manufacture's protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems, Inc). 6 sample (two replicates for R3, D3 and D13, respectively) were labeled with iTRAQ reagent 113 (R3-1), 114 (R3-2), 115 (D3-1), 116 (D3-2), 117 (D13-1), 118 (D13-2). In additional, we labeled the two same samples (both of which were the mixture of equal amounts of peptides prepared from all six samples) with different tags (119 and 121). The eight labeled samples were then pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator. The obtained peptide mixture was reconstituted and fractionated by SCX chromatography (Phenomenex, CA, USA) using a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system. The collected 20 fractions were then desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex, CA, USA), dried and resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and centrifugedat 20000g for 10 min. The LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis of each  of  these  fractions was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled on-line to a LC-20AD nano HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were converted into MGF format by Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). And the exported MGF files were searched by Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with the target-decoy database searching strategy against the protein database with all 17909 predicted proteins in T. urticae (mRNA_tetur__pep_20150218) originating from the T. urticae genome sequencing project (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/bogas/). For protein identification, several parameters were set in Mascot, including iTRAQ 8-plex for quantification, tolerance of one missed cleavage of trypsin, carbamidomethylation for cysteine as fixed modification, and Gln- >pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.05 Da. Only peptides with a score above the probability-based Mascot Identity Threshold at the 95% confidence interval were counted as identified. The global false discovery rate was less than 1%. And at least one unique peptide was required to identify a protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Soybean sprout, Deionized water, Ca2+, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xinkun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr xinkun-wang  
Nanjing Agricultural University


