### Accession
PXD046384

### Title
SMARCAL1 is a dual regulator of innate immune signaling and PD-L1 expression that promotes tumor immune evasion

### Description
Although genomic instability can trigger cancer-intrinsic innate immune responses that promote tumor rejection, cancer cells often evade these responses by overexpressing immune checkpoint regulators, such as PD-L1. Here, we identify the SNF2-family DNA translocase SMARCAL1 as a factor that favors tumor immune evasion by a dual mechanism involving both the suppression of innate immune signaling and the induction of PD-L1-mediated immune checkpoint responses. Mechanistically, SMARCAL1 relieves endogenous DNA damage and suppresses cGAS-STING-dependent immune signaling during cancer cell growth. Simultaneously, it cooperates with the AP-1 family member JUN to maintain chromatin accessibility at a transcriptional regulatory element in the PD-L1 gene, thereby promoting PD-L1 expression in cancer cells. Loss of SMARCAL1 enhances anti-tumor immune responses and sensitizes tumors to immune checkpoint blockade in a mouse melanoma model. Collectively, these studies uncover SMARCAL1 as a valuable target for cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
To identify SMARCAL1 interactors by mass spectrometry, 10 x 106 MDA-MB-436 cells were transfected with pHAGE-BioID control, pHAGE-BioID-SMARCAL1-WT, pHAGE-BioID-SMARCAL1-ΔN115 or pHAGE-BioID-SMARCAL1-ΔHARP plasmids. Two days after DNA transfection, cells were treated with 50 µM biotin for 24 hr, washed 3 times and then harvested in PBS. Pulldown of biotinylated proteins was performed as previously described (PMID: 32528060). Proteins bound to streptavidin were washed five times with 200 μl of 100 mM Tris-pH 8.0. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), which was quenched with 5 mM DTT. Protein digestion was performed by adding 1 μg of trypsin/LysC mix overnight at 37°C and 1400 rpm. The next day, digested peptides were collected in a new microfuge tube, and digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA (final v/v), followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at room temperature. Cleared digested peptides were desalted on an SDB-RPS Stage-Tip128 and then dried in a speed-vac. Peptides were then dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated within 80 min at a flow rate of 400 nl/min on a reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (25 cm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks). Mobile phases A and B were with 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The fraction of B was linearly increased from 2 to 23% within 70 min, followed by an increase to 35% within 10 min and a further increase to 80% before re-equilibration. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode129 with the following settings: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 Vs/cm-2, End 1.6 Vs/cm-2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 200°C, PASEF settings: 10 MSMS Frames (1.16 seconds duty cycle), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Target intensity 20000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 59eV.  A polygon filter was applied to the m/z and ion mobility plane to select features most likely representing peptide precursors rather than singly charged background ions.

### Data Protocol
Acquired PASEF raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant environment v.2.3.1.0 and Andromeda for database searches at default settings with a few modifications130. The default is used for first search tolerance and main search tolerance (20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively). MaxQuant was set up to search with the reference human proteome database downloaded from UniProt. MaxQuant performed the search trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide, site, and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were all set to 1% with a minimum of 2 peptides needed for identification. The following modifications were used for protein identification and quantification: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as static modifications, while the oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), and deamidation (+0.984) on asparagine were set as a variable modification.  Protein groups table obtained from MaxQuant was further used for data analysis. In particular, naturally biotinylated carboxylases were specifically excluded from the analysis of BioID experiments78. Moreover, proteins with less than two unique peptides were filtered out. Identified proteins were considered putative SMARCAL1 interactors if the peptide intensity was at least 2-fold enriched in BirA*–SMARCAL1 relative to BirA* alone.

### Publication Abstract
Genomic instability can trigger cancer-intrinsic innate immune responses that promote tumor rejection. However, cancer cells often evade these responses by overexpressing immune checkpoint regulators, such as PD-L1. Here, we identify the SNF2-family DNA translocase SMARCAL1 as a factor that favors tumor immune evasion by a dual mechanism involving both the suppression of innate immune signaling and the induction of PD-L1-mediated immune checkpoint responses. Mechanistically, SMARCAL1 limits endogenous DNA damage, thereby suppressing cGAS-STING-dependent signaling during cancer cell growth. Simultaneously, it cooperates with the AP-1 family member JUN to maintain chromatin accessibility at a PD-L1 transcriptional regulatory element, thereby promoting PD-L1 expression in cancer cells. SMARCAL1 loss hinders the ability of tumor cells to induce PD-L1 in response to genomic instability, enhances anti-tumor immune responses and sensitizes tumors to immune checkpoint blockade in a mouse melanoma model. Collectively, these studies uncover SMARCAL1 as a promising target for cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Bioid, Mda-mb-436 cells, Smarcal1

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA
Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Alberto Ciccia

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Ciccia
Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA


