### Accession
PXD026310

### Title
Thiol reactive tandem mass tags for quantitative top-down proteomics

### Description
Here, we describe the development of a labeling strategy for TDP targeting thiol groups of cysteine residues with iodoTMTsixplex. While this method inherently excludes the quantification of cysteine-free proteoforms, it provides the opportunity of sixplexing and the implementation of multidimensional separation schemes. The approach was tested using both a high/low-pH RP-LC and a gel-eluted liquid fraction entrapment electrophoresis (GelFrEE) x RP-LC separation. Over- and underlabeling rates were determined and MS/MS parameters were optimized to enable parallel protein identifications and quantification. Finally, a complex two proteome interference model was applied to demonstrate the high accuracy of the developed quantification method.

### Sample Protocol
Single 0-30 kDa GELFrEE fraction: E. coli lysate was separated into one GELFrEE fraction using an 8% Tris-Acetate GELFrEE cartridge, subsequently reduced and labeled with iodoTMTsixplex and mixed to 1:5:9:9:5:1 (126:127:128:129:130:131). E. coli only: E. coli lysate was reduced and labeled with iodoTMTsixplex and combined to 8:4:1:1:4:8 (126:127:128:129:130:131). Interference model: E. coli and Yeast lysate was reduced and labeled with iodoTMTsixplex and subsequently combined to 8(4):4(4):1(4):1(4):4(4):8(4) (129:126:127:131:130). High-pH fractionation: Separation into 13 fractions using a XBridge protein BEH C4 column (300 Å, 3.5 μm, 2.1 x 250 mm, Waters) with pH 10 eluents. Multiple GELFrEE fractions: Separation into 12 fractions using 12% Tris-Acetate GELFrEE cartridge. Low-pH LC-MS/MS: Analyzed using Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid with μ-precolumn (C4 PepMap300, 5 μm, 300 Å) and an Accucore C-4 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2.6 μm,  50 Å). Six different maximum injection times varying from 22 to 118 ms were tested in duplicate yielding 12 raw files. High-pH fractions F04 to F13 of the E. coli iodoTMTsixplex sample were measured with EThcD and CID resulting in 20 raw-files. High-pH fraction F02 to F12 of the interference model were measured with both fragmentation methods as well (22 raw files). Eight GELFrEE fractions (F04-F11) of the Interference Model and twelve GELFrEE fractions (F01-F012) of the “E. coli only” sample were measured with CID and EThcD as well (16 and 24 raw files).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the complex samples were conducted using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.5.0.400) and ProSightPD nodes (Version 4.0) software package. Data were processed using the ProSightPD high/high cRAWler node utilizing the Xtract algorithm. Merging of MS2 scans was not allowed to ensure the individual processing of each fragmentation scan, which simplified the manual matching of quantification scan  (quant scan) and PrSM. Searches were performed combining the ProSightPD Annotated Proteoform Search, and the ProSightPD Subsequence Search. For both searches the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm. For the Annotated Proteoform Search a minimum of three, for the Subsequence Search a minimum of six fragments were required. Two ProSight Databases (*.PSDB) were created with the Database Manager from XML files downloaded via UniProt (E. coli only DB: StrainK12 MG 1665, reviewed, 4081 entries, downloaded 8-25-2020; E. coli and yeast DB: Unique proteome identifier up000000625 and up000002311, reviewed, 8648 entries, downloaded 2-15-2021, www.uniprot.org). IodoTMTsixplex (+329.227 Da) was set as fixed modification. PrSMs and proteoforms were filtered with a 1% FDR cutoff (Decoy Rep: 1). The quantification values were extracted in a separate Proteome Discoverer workflow. As identification and quantification were conducted in separate fragment scans, the corresponding data were merged manually in Excel. Quant scans were matched to the PrSM by iteratively changing the quant scan number (identification scan number + 1/2/3/4/5) and controlling the assignment by comparing the respective m/z values. Scan numbers and m/z values were extracted using scanheadsman software (https://bitbucket.org/caetera/scanheadsman, published under MIT license). For the connection of the proteoform results from Proteome Discoverer with the corresponding PrSMs and quant data, proteoforms were matched with their corresponding PrSMs using the sequence and theoretical mass as identifiers. The results do not account for modifications at proteoform level, thus isomers with modifications at different positions are indistinguishable. Nevertheless, this issue was negligible as it only applied to one protein group. PrSMs and proteoforms with half cystines were removed. As ProSightPD can report more than one PrSMs from the same fragment scan (e.g. if proteoform is identified by Annotated Proteoform and Subsequence Search), we ensured to not count the same quant scan twice. The reporter ion abundances of all quant scans of a proteoform were summed before calculating the ratios. This resembles the ‘Summed Abundance’ approach of the protein ratio calculation in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 User Guide.

### Publication Abstract
While identification-centric (qualitative) top-down proteomics (TDP) has seen rapid progress in the recent past, the quantification of intact proteoforms within complex proteomes is still challenging. The by far mostly applied approach is label-free quantification, which, however, provides limited multiplexing capacity, and its use in combination with multidimensional separation is encountered with a number of problems. Isobaric labeling, which is a standard quantification approach in bottom-up proteomics, circumvents these limitations. Here, we introduce the application of thiol-directed isobaric labeling for quantitative TDP. For this purpose, we analyzed the labeling efficiency and optimized tandem mass spectrometry parameters for optimal backbone fragmentation for identification and reporter ion formation for quantification. Two different separation schemes, gel-eluted liquid fraction entrapment electrophoresis &#xd7; liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and high/low-pH LC-MS, were employed for the analyses of either <i>Escherichia coli</i> (<i>E. coli</i>) proteomes or combined <i>E. coli</i>/yeast samples (two-proteome interference model) to study potential ratio compression. While the thiol-directed labeling introduces a bias in the quantifiable proteoforms, being restricted to Cys-containing proteoforms, our approach showed excellent accuracy in quantification, which is similar to that achievable in bottom-up proteomics. For example, 876 proteoforms could be quantified with high accuracy in an <i>E. coli</i> lysate. The LC-MS data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD026310.

### Keywords
Yeast, Escherichia coli, Quantitative top-down proteomics, Isobaric labeling, Saccharomyces cerevisae, High ph fractionation, Gelfree, Iodotmtsixplex

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel


