### Accession
PXD019866

### Title
: Proteomic analysis of two weight classes of mule duck “foie gras” at the end of force-feeding period

### Description
The weight liver is one of the important selection criteria in the quality of foie gras. This factor is highly variable despite the fact that individuals are reared, force-fed and slaughtered in the same way. In this study, an analysis of the proteome profile of two weight classes of light (between 550 g and 599 g) and heavy (more than 700 g) livers. For the analysis of the proteic extracts, a liquid chromatographic analysis coupled with mass spectrometry was carried out. In livers with low weight, aerobic energy metabolism, protein anabolism and lipid metabolism oriented towards export and beta-oxidation was overexpressed. However, high weight livers was characterized by anaerobic energy metabolism, more active protein catabolism associated with cell death by apoptosis and reorganisation of the cell structure.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from samples according to a modified protocol of Sayd et al. (2006). Samples extraction was performed with a buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propane sulfate (CHAPS) and 1% Dithiothreitol (DTT). Then, proteins concentration was measured, according to Bradford’s method (1976).Proteome samples were reduced and alkylated using equilibration buffers containing dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide and loaded onto a precast 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la Coquette, France). As decribed by Laemmli (1970), SDS-PAGE gel migration was performed for each sample and stopped immediately after the entrance of proteins in the separation gel. This step concentrates the proteins. After the blue staining (InstantBlue, Expedeon, UK) of the gels, bands were excised and digested by the addition of 60 µL of a solution of modified trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (20 ng/µL, sequence grade, Promega, Charbonnières, France). The mixture was incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides mixtures were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C18 pre-column (5 mm × 300 µm; Dionex) at 20 µL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (15 cm × 75 µm; in-house packed) equilibrated in 95% of mixture A (5% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid in water) and 5% of mixture B (80% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid in water). Peptides were eluted using a 5-50% gradient of B during 105 min at a 300 nL/min flow rate. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. Survey scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300–2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 60 000. The twenty most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analysed in the linear trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was used within 60s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS and MS/MS data as Raw MS files were converted to the mzdb format and were processed with the mzdb-access library (https://github.com/mzdb) to generate peaklists. Data were searched with Mascot (version 2.6.1, http://matrixscience.com) against a custom-made database containing Anas platyrhynchos & Cairina moschata entries from the UniProtKB database (Swiss-Prot/TrEmbl release 20190524, 35 568 entries). The search included methionine oxidation as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Specificity of digestion was set for cleavage after lysine or arginine for trypsin-digested samples, and one missed cleavage was allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for the precursor ion. It was set to 0.8 Da for fragment ions in CID mode (detection in the ion trap). Validation of identifications was performed through a false-discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the in-house-developed software Proline software version 1.6 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Raw MS signal extraction of identified peptides was performed with Proline across different samples. For all comparison, statistical analysis was applied to the abundance values. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 and a ratio of average normalized area < 0.67 and > 1.5 were considered significant. Volcano plots were drawn to visualize significant protein abundance variations between the two studied groups. They represent log10 (p-value) according to the log2 ratio. Finally, a Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) between the two studied groups was applied to identify the discriminating proteins. A protein was considered as a discriminating one only if its Variable Importance in Projection (VIP) value was higher than 0.8. Statistical analyses were performed with the R software (version 3.6.3).

### Publication Abstract
The weight of the liver is one of the important selection criteria in the quality of "foie gras". This factor is highly variable despite the fact that individuals are reared, overfed and slaughtered in the same way. In this study, we performed an analysis of the proteome profile of two weight classes of light (between 550 and 599 g) and heavy (more than 700 g) livers. For the analysis of the proteic extracts, a liquid chromatographic analysis coupled with mass spectrometry was carried out. In low-weight livers, aerobic energy metabolism, protein metabolism and lipid metabolism oriented toward export and beta-oxidation were overexpressed. On the contrary, high weight livers were characterized by anaerobic energy metabolism and a more active protein catabolism associated with cell apoptosis and reorganization of the cell structure.

### Keywords
Cell structure, Oxidative stress, Mule duck, Cell death, Proteomic, Foie gras

### Affiliations
CNRS
GenPhySE, Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT,  Toulouse INP,  31326 Castanet Tolosan,  France

### Submitter
Carole Pichereaux

### Lab Head
Dr Hervé Rémignon
GenPhySE, Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT,  Toulouse INP,  31326 Castanet Tolosan,  France


