### Accession
PXD041917

### Title
Proteomics analysis of preterm lung tissue with mass spectrometry to understand the impact of tidal volume strategy at birth

### Description
This study aimed to use a lamb model of preterm birth to investigate the impact of different tidal volume strategies, applied during positive pressure ventilation, on lung injury development. Preterm lambs were ventilated for a total of 15 minutes, followed by a 30 minute ‘rest’ period where lambs were supported via the intact placenta. A group of lambs was also euthanised at birth to act as an unventilated control group. At post-mortem lung tissue was sampled for proteomic analysis. Lung tissue samples were analysed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics using a TMT-11plex labelling approach, followed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to an Q Exactive HF-X benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissue was homogenised in 500 µL lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES, 1x Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitor, pH 8). Protein extracts were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C and supernatants transferred to low protein-binding tubes. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce MicroBCA protein assay and protein lysates (20 µg/50 µL) then  reduced with 10 mM dithiothritol (DTT) at 450 rpm for 1 h at room temperature (RT, 25 °C) followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetic acid (IAA) at 450 rpm for 30 min at RT (light protected). Samples were immediately quenched with 10 mM DTT before being subjected to singlepot, solid-phase-enhanced sample separation (SP3). Samples were mixed at 1000 rpm for 10 min at RT and the supernatant removed, followed by three rounds of washing with 80% (v/v) ethanol. Samples were reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB pH 8 and digested with MS grade trypsin (enzyme: substrate 1:50) and Lysyl Endopeptidase (enzyme:substrate 1:100) for 18 h, 1000 rpm at 37 ℃. Peptide digests were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 1 min, supernatants transferred to fresh low-protein binding tubes, snap frozen and lyophilised via vacuum centrifugation. Prior to TMT-labelling peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5, quantified using Fluorometric Peptide Assay, adjusted to 0.1 µg/µL and TMT-labelled according to manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. A pooled internal reference channel was prepared across all sample groups. Samples were labelled using tandem mass tag (TMT) TMT11-plex. TMT tags were prepared in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and transferred to 5 µg of peptide digests in a 1:4 peptide:TMT ratio. Samples were incubated at RT for 2 h at 450 rpm, quenched with 1 µL of 5% hydroxylamine at RT for 15 min at 450 rpm, and combined in equal ratio. Combined, labelled peptides were acidified to 3% formic acid (FA), desalted using solid phase extraction manifold, eluted in 50% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were reconstituted in 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in MS-grade water, quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Peptide Assay and normalized to 0.5 µg/µL.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was analysed using MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0, Uniprot Ovis aries (sheep) database; UP000002356, 23111 entries, Feb 2022) using the built-in search engine Andromeda with a contaminants database employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Data was processed using trypsin/P and LysC as the proteolytic enzymes with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. For TMT-based analyses, reporter ion MS2 (11plex TMT) settings were employed, with trypsin/P and LysC as the proteolytic enzymes set as digestion enzymes allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. False discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein spectrum match was set at 0.01. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Tidal ventilation is essential in supporting the transition to air-breathing at birth, but excessive tidal volume (V<sub>T</sub>) is an important factor in preterm lung injury. Few studies have assessed the impact of specific V<sub>T</sub> levels on injury development. Here, we used a lamb model of preterm birth to investigate the role of different levels of V<sub>T</sub> during positive pressure ventilation (PPV) in promoting aeration and initiating early lung injury pathways. V<sub>T</sub> was delivered as <i>1</i>) 7 mL/kg throughout (V<sub>Tstatic</sub>), <i>2</i>) begun at 3 mL/kg and increased to a final V<sub>T</sub> of 7 mL/kg over 3 min (V<sub>Tinc</sub>), or <i>3</i>) commenced at 7 mL/kg, decreased to 3 mL/kg, and then returned to 7 mL/kg (V<sub>Talt</sub>). V<sub>T</sub>, inflating pressure, lung compliance, and aeration were similar in all groups from 4 min, as was postmortem histology and lung lavage protein concentration. However, transient decrease in V<sub>T</sub> in the V<sub>Talt</sub> group caused increased ventilation heterogeneity. Following TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics, 1,610 proteins were identified in the lung. Threefold more proteins were significantly altered with V<sub>Talt</sub> compared with V<sub>Tstatic</sub> or V<sub>Tinc</sub> strategies. Gene set enrichment analysis identified V<sub>Talt</sub> specific enrichment of immune and angiogenesis pathways and V<sub>Tstatic</sub> enrichment of metabolic processes. Our finding of comparable lung physiology and volutrauma across V<sub>T</sub> groups challenges the paradigm that there is a need to rapidly aerate the preterm lung at birth. Increased lung injury and ventilation heterogeneity were identified when initial V<sub>T</sub> was suddenly decreased during respiratory support at birth, further supporting the benefit of a gentle V<sub>T</sub> approach.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> There is little evidence to guide the best tidal volume (V<sub>T</sub>) strategy at birth. In this study, comparable aeration, lung mechanics, and lung morphology were observed using static, incremental, and alternating V<sub>T</sub> strategies. However, transient reduction in V<sub>T</sub> was associated with ventilation heterogeneity and inflammation. Our results suggest that rapidly aerating the preterm lung may not be as clinically critical as previously thought, providing clinicians with reassurance that gently supporting the preterm lung maybe permissible at birth.

### Keywords
Tissue damage, Lung, Proteomics, Ventilation, Sheep, Tmt

### Affiliations
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute (pmpf@unimelb.edu.au)
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening & Prudence Pereira-Fantini
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute (pmpf@unimelb.edu.au)


