### Accession
PXD032225

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of Medium-Sized Extracellular Vesicle-Enriched Plasma of Lacunar Infarction for the Discovery of Prognostic Biomarkers

### Description
Lacunar infarction (LACI), a difficult to diagnose, subtype of acute ischemic stroke affects around 25% of all ischemic stroke cases. Despite having an excellent recovery during acute phase, certain LACI patients have poor mid- to long-term prognosis due to the recurrence of vascular events or dementia. The existing clinical protocols are unable to predict the prognosis of LACI patients. Blood-based biomarkers maybe useful as complementary prognostic and research tools.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was collected from forty-five patients during the convalescent phase following a non-disabling LACI along with seventeen matched control subjects.  The patients were followed up prospectively for up to five years to record an occurrence of adverse outcome and grouped accordingly (i.e., LACI-no adverse outcome, LACI-recurrent vascular event, and LACI-cognitive decline without any recurrence of vascular events). Medium-sized extracellular vesicles, isolated from the pooled plasma of four groups, were analyzed by stable isotope labeling (4-plex iTRAQ) and two-dimensional mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Out of 573 (FDR <1%) quantified proteins, 146 were classified as showing significant changes in at least one LACI group when compared to matched healthy control. A systems analysis revealed that 1) adverse outcome in LACI patients is associated with an increase in the total number of altered proteins. 2) Majority of the altered proteins in LACI patients are reduced in abundance. 3) Vesicle-, hypoxia-, and vasculature-associated proteins were preferentially enriched in the deregulated proteome. 4)  Protein abundance changes of the two LACI groups with adverse outcome were strongly correlated indicating an underlying similarity between the pathology of these two groups.

### Publication Abstract
Lacunar infarction (LACI), a subtype of acute ischemic stroke, has poor mid- to long-term prognosis due to recurrent vascular events or incident dementia which is difficult to predict using existing clinical data. Herein, we aim to discover blood-based biomarkers for LACI as a complementary prognostic tool. Convalescent plasma was collected from forty-five patients following a non-disabling LACI along with seventeen matched control subjects. The patients were followed up prospectively for up to five years to record an occurrence of adverse outcome and grouped accordingly (i.e., LACI-no adverse outcome, LACI-recurrent vascular event, and LACI-cognitive decline without any recurrence of vascular events). Medium-sized extracellular vesicles (MEVs), isolated from the pooled plasma of four groups, were analyzed by stable isotope labeling and 2D-LC-MS/MS. Out of 573 (FDR &lt; 1%) quantified proteins, 146 showed significant changes in at least one LACI group when compared to matched healthy control. A systems analysis revealed that major elements (~85%) of the MEV proteome are different from the proteome of small-sized extracellular vesicles obtained from the same pooled plasma. The altered MEV proteins in LACI patients are mostly reduced in abundance. The majority of the shortlisted MEV proteins are not linked to commonly studied biological processes such as coagulation, fibrinolysis, or inflammation. Instead, they are linked to oxygen-glucose deprivation, endo-lysosomal trafficking, glucose transport, and iron homeostasis. The dataset is provided as a web-based data resource to facilitate meta-analysis, data integration, and targeted large-scale validation.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Brock University
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
SoFong Cam Ngan

### Lab Head
Dr Newman Sze
Brock University


