### Accession
PXD015099

### Title
The developmental phosphoproteome of Haemonchus contortus

### Description
Protein phosphorylation plays essential roles in the biology of cellular processes. Despite recent progress in the genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics of a range of socioeconomically important parasitic nematodes, there is scant phosphoproteomic data to underpin fundamental molecular biological discovery. Here, using the phosphopeptide enrichment-based LC-MS/MS and DIA quantitation, we characterised the first developmental phosphoproteome of the parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus, one of the most pathogenic parasites of livestock animals. In total, 1804 phosphorylated proteins with 4406 phosphorylation sites from different developmental stages/sexes (i.e. egg, L3 and L4, female (Af) and male (Am) adults) were identified with confidence (false discovery rate: < 0.01; localisation probability: ≥ 75%). Bioinformatic analyses of quantified phosphopeptides (with a single phosphorylation site) exhibited distinctive stage and sex-specific pattern during H. contortus development. A subset of phosphoproteins is proposed to play crucial roles in fundamental biological processes, such as spindle positioning (e.g. LIN-5 and LFI proteins), signal transduction (e.g. IGF-1 signalling related proteins) and kinase activity (e.g., auto-phosphorylated kinases). In addition, a sequence-based comparison of the phosphoproteome of H. contortus with those of free-living nematodes (i.e. Caenorhabditis elegans and Pristionchus pacificus) revealed that protein phosphorylation is likely regulated in a species-specific manner. Our findings infer active roles for protein phosphorylation in the adaptation of a parasitic nematode to a constantly changing external environment. The phosphoproteome data set for H. contortus provides a foundation for a better understanding of phosphorylation and associated biological processes (e.g. regulation of signal transduction), and might enable the discovery of novel anthelmintic targets.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Parasite procurement and stages Helminth-free Merino sheep were inoculated intra-ruminally (via oral intubation) with ~ 7,000 third-stage larvae (L3s) of H. contortus (Haecon-5 strain), in accordance with the institutional animal ethics guidelines (permit no. 1714374; The University of Melbourne). 2.2. Protein extraction and phosphopeptide enrichment  In brief, each sample was suspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5), and ultrasonicated (20 kHz) on ice at 30 sec bursts for 10 min. Each sample was supplemented with protease inhibitors (Cocktail set I, Merck, Denmark) and incubated at 23 °C for 30 min. Then, samples were centrifuged at 12000 ×g for 30 min, and individual supernatants collected. Protein concentrations were measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Each protein sample (100 g) was reduced, alkylated and digested (Lys-C/trypsin Mix; Promega, USA), and the peptides were acidified and purified using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, USA). Phosphorylated peptides were selected and enriched using a titanium dioxide (TiO2) enrichment method. 2.3. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS and protein identification For data-dependent acquisition (DDA) profiling, the LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% v/v CH3CN in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The gradient was at 300 nl/min from (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B; (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B; (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B; (v) 110-115 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 115-117 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode, 70,000 resolution, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50 ms. Fifteen of the most intense peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 1.7e4 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors fragmented using a normalised collision energy of 30, a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in a positive-ionisation mode, with the spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and the source temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (cycle time: 3 s) on the most intense precursor was used, whereby peptide ions with charge states of 2 to 5 were isolated using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, and fragmented with a high energy collision (HCD) mode employing a stepped collision energy of 30 ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s.  2.4. Data-independent LC-MS/MS To quantify the phosphopeptides in each developmental stage/sex of H. contortus, data-independent acquisition (DIA) of enriched phosphoproteins from individual stages and sexes of H. contortus were analysed via the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using the HRM-DIA methodology. Here, a survey scan from 400-1000m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and an AGC target of 3e6 at 50 ms was followed by 30, 21 m/z DIA windows at a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 1e6, with the IT time set on “auto”. Stepped normalised collision energies were set at 28, 30 and 32. All spectra were acquired in the profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analyses of data sets  Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of the phosphorylated proteins were performed in the program InterProScan v5.15.54 [46]. The profiles of identified phosphorylated proteins were compared with those of recently-published data sets for the somatic and excretory/secretory proteomes of H. contortus [35, 47]. The profiles of quantified phosphorylated proteins were compared among the egg, L3, L4 and adult stages of H. contortus. Principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) and multi-scatter plots were conducted using Perseus software (v.1.6.1.1) [48, 49]. The statistical significance of correlation analyses was set at p < 0.05. An UpSet plot was drawn via a web-based platform (https://cppanalytics.latrobe.edu.au/proteomics/sets/). The functions of the phosphorylated proteins were annotated using Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases [50] by BLASTP (e-value: < 10-5). KEGG Orthology (KO) terms and pathways were assigned to proteins and displayed in a FuncTree [51].

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation plays essential roles in many cellular processes. Despite recent progress in the genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics of socioeconomically important parasitic nematodes, there is scant phosphoproteomic data to underpin molecular biological discovery. Here, using the phosphopeptide enrichment-based LC-MS/MS and data-independent acquisition (DIA) quantitation, we characterised the first developmental phosphoproteome of the parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus - one of the most pathogenic parasites of ruminant livestock. Totally, 1804 phosphorylated proteins with 4406 phosphorylation sites ('phosphosites') from different developmental stages/sexes were identified. Bioinformatic analyses of quantified 'phosphosites' exhibited distinctive stage- and sex-specific patterns during development, and identified a subset of phosphoproteins proposed to play crucial roles in processes such as spindle positioning, signal transduction and kinase activity. A sequence-based comparison of the phosphoproteome of H. contortus with those of two free-living nematode species (Caenorhabditis elegans and Pristionchus pacificus) suggested a limited number of common protein phosphorylation events among these species. Our findings infer active roles for protein phosphorylation in the adaptation of a parasitic nematode to a constantly changing external environment. The phosphoproteomic data set for H. contortus provides a basis to better understand phosphorylation and associated biological processes (e.g., regulation of signal transduction), and might enable the discovery of novel anthelmintic targets. SIGNIFICANCE: Here, we report the first phosphoproteome for a socioeconomically parasitic nematode (Haemonchus contortus). This phosphoproteome exhibits distinctive patterns during development, suggesting active roles of post-translational modification in the parasite's adaptation to changing environments within and outside of the host animal. This work sheds a light on the developmental phosphorylation in a parasitic nematode, and could enable the discovery of novel interventions against major pathogens.

### Keywords
Haemonchus contortus, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome, Dia, Parasitic nematode

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


