### Accession
PXD020326

### Title
Quantification of histone H3 and H4 modifications by mass spectrometry in wildtype and MCM2-2A mutants of mice ESCs

### Description
During DNA replication modified parental histones H3-H4 are segregated almost symmetrically to the two daughter DNA strands enabling mitotic inheritance of histone PTMs. Whether heritable histone modifications confer epigenetic regulation by maintaining chromatin states and gene expression is unclear. Using MCM2 histone-binding mutant embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and mass spectrometry, we show that asymmetric segregation of parental histones to the leading strand causes imbalanced inheritance of histone H3K27 methylations to daughter cells.

### Sample Protocol
Acid extracted histones from either WT or MCM2 mutants were resuspended in Lämmli buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Protein bands in the molecular weight range of histones (15-23 kDa) were excised and gel slices were destained in 50% acetonitrile/50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysine residues were chemically modified by propionylation with propionic anhydride in ammonium bicarbonate. Subsequently, proteins were digested overnight with 200ng of trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight and peptides desalted using C18-Stagetips (reversed-phase resin) and carbon Top-Tips (Glygen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After desalting, the eluent was speed vacuumed until dryness and re-suspended in 17 μl of 0.1% TFA. A total of 5.0 μl were injected into a nano-HPLC device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient from 4% B to 90% B (solvent A 0.1% FA in water, solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a C18 UHPCL column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was acquired in PRM positive mode using a Q Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify and quantify specific N-terminal peptides of histone H3 and histone H4 proteins and their PTMs. One survey MS1 scan and 9 MS2 acquisitions precursor m/z value in the inclusion list was performed. MS1 spectra were acquired in the m/z range 250-1600 with resolution 30,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). PRM spectra were acquired with resolution 15,000 to a target value of 2x105, maximum IT 60ms, isolation 2 window 0.7 m/z and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with the Skyline software (MacLean et al., 2010) against histone H3 and H4 peptides and their respective PTMs with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm. The chromatogram boundaries of +2 and +3 charged peaks were validated and the Total Area MS1 under the first 4 isotopomers was extracted and used for relative quantification and comparison between experimental groups. The Total Area MS1 of co-eluting isobaric peptides (i.e., H3K36me3 and H3K27me2K36me1) was resolved using their unique MS2 fragment ions. The averaged ratio of analogous ions (i.e., y7 vs y7) were used to calculate the respective contribution of the precursors to the isobaric MS1 peak. Relative abundances (percentages) were calculated as in the following example for H3K18 acetylation: %H3K18ac = (H3K18ac_K23un + H3K18ac_K23ac) / (H3K18un_K23un + H3K18ac_K23unmod + H3K18un_K23ac + H3K18ac_K23ac) where "ac" indicates acetylation and "un" indicates unmodified.

### Publication Abstract
Modified parental histones are segregated symmetrically to daughter DNA strands during replication and can be inherited through mitosis. How this may sustain the epigenome and cell identity remains unknown. Here we show that transmission of histone-based information during DNA replication maintains epigenome fidelity and embryonic stem cell plasticity. Asymmetric segregation of parental histones H3-H4 in MCM2-2A mutants compromised mitotic inheritance of histone modifications and globally altered the epigenome. This included widespread spurious deposition of repressive modifications, suggesting elevated epigenetic noise. Moreover, H3K9me3 loss at repeats caused derepression and H3K27me3 redistribution across bivalent promoters correlated with misexpression of developmental genes. MCM2-2A mutation challenged dynamic transitions in cellular states across the cell cycle, enhancing na&#xef;ve pluripotency and reducing lineage priming in G1. Furthermore, developmental competence was diminished, correlating with impaired exit from pluripotency. Collectively, this argues that epigenetic inheritance of histone modifications maintains a correctly balanced and dynamic chromatin landscape able to support mammalian cell differentiation.

### Keywords
H4 methylation, H3 methylation, Mcm2-2a, Histones, H3 acetylation, Escs, Mcm2

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (CPR), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
EpiQMAx GmbH

### Submitter
Victor Solis

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Groh
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (CPR), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


