### Accession
PXD033923

### Title
The Human Nse5 Orthologue SIMC1 Localizes SMC5/6 to Polyomavirus Replication Centers

### Description
The human SMC5-SMC6 complex (SMC5/6) is a conserved guardian of genome stability and an emerging component of the antiviral response in animals and plants. In yeast, Smc5/6 is recruited to and loaded on chromatin by the poorly conserved Nse5-Nse6 heterodimer (Nse5/6), which remains largely undefined in humans. Here we report that SIMC1 is an Nse5 orthologue and novel subunit of the human SMC5/6 complex. SIMC1 binds to SLF2, the proposed Nse6 orthologue, forming a stable complex structurally similar to yeast Nse5/6. SIMC1 localizes SMC5/6 to polyomavirus replication centers in a SUMO interaction-dependent manner. Further structure prediction analyses indicate that SLF1, a putative Nse5 counterpart that recruits SMC5/6 to DNA lesions, interacts with SLF2 in a very similar manner as SIMC1. Consistently, SIMC1 and SLF1 form mutually exclusive complexes with SLF2. Thus, both SIMC1 and SLF1 act as orthologues of yeast Nse5 to independently direct the functions of SMC5/6.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 20 minutes at room temperature and 10 mM iodoacetamide reagent in the dark at room temperature for 20 additional minutes. Proteins were digested sequentially at 37 °C with lys-C for 4 h followed by trypsin for 12 hours. After quenching the digest by the addition of formic acid to 5% (v/v), peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5% formic acid. Peptides were fractionated online using reversed phase chromatography on in-house packed C18 columns. The 140 minute gradient of increasing acetonitrile was delivered using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Human reference proteome (UP000005640 9606). Peptides identifications were filtered using a 1% FDR as estimated using a decoy database. Proteins were considered present in a sample if they had 2 or more unique peptides mapping to them. Relative comparisons between samples to identify candidate FAM111A interacting proteins was done using raw peptide spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nse5, Lcms, Simc1 localizes smc5/6

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Nicholas Boddy
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.


