### Accession
PXD023830

### Title
Changes in Caenorhabditis elegans proteome after dnj-21 knockdown

### Description
Dysfunction of the motor subunit of the TIM23 translocase, the PAM complex located on the matrix side of the mitochondrial inner membrane in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, was shown to cause a decrease in mitochondrial protein import and precursor accumulation in the cytosol. We used an analogous model to study the non-mitochondrial response to defective mitochondrial import machinery in Caenorhabditis elegans in which we depleted DNJ-21 as the functional homolog of yeast Pam18. To gain a broader insight in potential changes in Caenorhabditis elegans proteome upon DNJ-21 depletion we performed a quantitative, label-free proteomics analysis. We compared protein levels upon knockdown of dnj-21 (dnj-21 RNAi) with control conditions (Empty vector RNAi). Synchronized N2 wild type worms were grown on NGM plates seeded with E. coli HT115(DE3) transformed with a construct targeting dnj-21 gene or with empty vector L4440 as a control.

### Sample Protocol
When worms reached young adult stage they were lysed in 8 M Urea buffer using probe-sonicator. The lysate was centrifuged at 2800×g for 5 min. The pellet containing debris was discarded and the supernatant from the total worm extract was diluted (8x) and incubated overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in the presence of 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM chloroacetamide. The samples were acidified with 1% TFA, loaded on three AttractSPE Discs Bio C18 (Affinisep) and desalted via standard stage-tip protocol.  Peptides were eluted from the SPE discs in 60% acetonitrile in water and the solvent removed using a SpeedVac Concentrator.  Prior to LC-MS measurements, the peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45 °C by applying a 150 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Each sample was measured in duplicate. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 22 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 4.4e2, and the intensity threshold for MS/MS was set to 2.0e4.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.10.43 and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the Uniprot C.elegans Reference Proteome (UP000001940) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping (razor peptides are the peptides uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). LFQ values for protein groups were loaded into Perseus v. 1.6.6.0. Standard filtering steps were applied to clean up the dataset: reverse (matched to decoy database), only identified by site, and potential contaminant (from a list of commonly occurring contaminants included in MaxQuant) protein groups were removed. Protein groups identified by less than 2 razor + unique peptides were removed.  LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, protein groups with LFQ values in less than 3 out of 6 samples were removed, and all remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8 × standard deviation). Gaussian distribution of log2 transformed LFQ intensities were confirmed by histogram analysis preventing the unbiased introduction of small values. Student T-testing (permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations = 0.01, S0 = 0.1) was performed on the dataset to return proteins which levels were statistically significantly changed in response to DNJ21 knockdown.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial stress, Caenorhabditis elegans, Mitochondria, Dnj-21 knockdown

### Affiliations
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, University of Warsaw, Warsaw 02-097, Poland; Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Chacinska
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, University of Warsaw, Warsaw 02-097, Poland; Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland


