### Accession
PXD023078

### Title
A chromatin basis for protein-RNA correlation in human cancer

### Description
This work describes a previously unreported link between the chromatin states and protein abundance in cancer. We curated and studied a novel cohort of human thyroid tumors that allowed us to identify chromatin features that directly regulate protein expression. We believe this is the first study to establish chromatin states that reflect protein abundances in human cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh-frozen samples were collected at Stanford University. Detailed information about donor enrollment, tissue collection, are reported in the manuscript. There are in total 65 samples collected 33 different individuals. The sample preparation method was as described before with modification (3). About 20mg tissue samples were cut into small pieces on ice and further disrupted using beat beating and sonication in lysis buffer (6 M guanidine, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8.5). The supernatant was collected and heated at 95℃ for 5min. After protein reduction and alkylated, protein concentration was measured using the BCA kit (ThermoFisher). Since Paxgene fixed samples have a high amount of PEG contamination, protein extract was cleaned up by acetone precipitation at -20⁰C overnight. The protein pellet was washed with acetone 3 times and air-dried. The pellet was resuspended in 6 M guanidine and 100mg was used for digested using LysC (1:100 protease to protein ratio) for 2 hours followed by trypsin (1:50) digestion overnight at 37⁰C. Peptides were cleaned up using Waters HLB column and subsequently labeled using TMT11 Plex (ThermoFisher) in 100mM TEAB buffer. An equal amount of proteins from each tissue were pooled together as a reference sample. Tissue samples were randomized and equal amount of them and one common reference sample was multiplexed into one sample. To ensure equal mix, we mixed a small amount of each sample first and adjusted the amount of each sample for the final run based on the mass spectrometry results of the small mix. About 15ug of multiplexed sample was loaded to Waters 2D LC system for online fractionation. Peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography at high pH in the first dimension, followed by an orthogonal separation at low pH in the second dimension. In the first dimension, the mobile phases were buffer A: 20mM ammonium formate at pH10 and buffer B: Acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on an Xbridge 300µm x 5 cm C18 5.0µm column (Waters) using 12 discontinuous step gradient at 2 µl/min. In the second dimension, peptides were loaded to an in-house packed 75µm ID/15µm tip ID x 25cm Sepax GP-C18 1.8µm resin column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min in 180 min. The LC system was directly coupled in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a data-dependent mode for both MS2 and MS3. MS1 scan was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 120,000 at m/z 400. Top speed instrument method was used for MS2 and MS3. For MS2, the isolation width was set at 0.7 Da and isolated precursors were fragmented by CID at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and analyzed in the ion trap using “turbo” scan. Following the acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scan was collected on the top 5 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum. SPS-MS3 precursors were fragmented by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at an NCE of 65% and analyzed using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. We used SEQUEST in ProteomeDiscoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific) for protein identification. Raw files from 12 fractions of each sample were combined together for a single search against GENCODE V28 human proteome database (4). Mass tolerance of 10ppm was used for precursor ion and 0.6 Dalton for fragment ions. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Peptide N-terminal and lysine TMT 10plex modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set as <1% using Percolator. For protein identification, at least one unique peptide with a minimum 6 amino acid length was required. For protein quantitation, only unique peptides with reporter ion mass tolerance of less than 10ppm were used. Peptide precursor ion isolation purity should be >50%, signal-to-noise (S/N) > 15 and the summed S/N of all channels > 200. Peptides passing these criteria were summed, thereby giving more weight to the most-intense peptides. We also pooled together all the spectra in this study for a single search at protein FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Although alterations in chromatin structure are known to exist in tumors, how these alterations relate to molecular phenotypes in cancer remains to be demonstrated. Multi-omics profiling of human tumors can provide insight into how alterations in chromatin structure are propagated through the pathway of gene expression to result in malignant protein expression. We applied multi-omics profiling of chromatin accessibility, RNA abundance, and protein abundance to 36 human thyroid cancer primary tumors, metastases, and patient-match normal tissue. Through quantification of chromatin accessibility associated with active transcription units and global protein expression, we identify a local chromatin structure that is highly correlated with coordinated RNA and protein expression. In particular, we identify enhancers located within gene-bodies as predictive of correlated RNA and protein expression, that is independent of overall transcriptional activity. To demonstrate the generalizability of these findings we also identify similar results in an independent cohort of human breast cancers. Taken together, these analyses suggest that local enhancers, rather than distal enhancers, are likely most predictive of cancer gene expression phenotypes. This allows for identification of potential targets for cancer therapeutic approaches and reinforces the utility of multi-omics profiling as a methodology to understand human disease.

### Keywords
Human cancer, Systems biology, Proteomics ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Stanford University
Stanford University 

### Submitter
Akshay Sanghi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Snyder
Department of Genetics, Stanford University


