### Accession
PXD024989

### Title
Proteomic characterization of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from ankylosing spondylitis patients

### Description
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is an inflammatory arthritis of the axial skeleton that predominantly affects young men. HLA-B27 has remained the major genetic risk factor in AS. Recently, more non-MHC genes has been discoverd to be involved in AS pathogenesis, especially IL-23 signalling pathway related genes. We performed a proteomic study of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells from AS patients and healthy donors.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs were isolated from the peripheral blood of AS patients and healthy donors. Then the cells were disrupted with 8M UREA lysis buffer and cellular proteins were quantified using BCA assay. The proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated by 40 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark, then the 8M urea were removed by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) with 10 Kd filter. The proteins were digested by incubating with trypsin at a protease: protein ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were furtherquantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. For proteomics analysis, the peptides were dried with Savant SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) before mass spectrometric analyses.Peptides from each sample were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nLC 1,200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an QE plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched against the refseq database using MaxQuant. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavages sites were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The oxidation of M and acetylation of the protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Peptides with the minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Match Between Run was applied with default parameters. The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the Label Free Quantification algorithm.Proteins with at least two identifications were used for subsequent quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Pbmc, Ankylosing spondylitis

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China
Tianjin medical university

### Submitter
Hao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China


