### Accession
PXD017611

### Title
Mechanistic basis for selective Mediator-dependence of cell type-specifying transcription

### Description
The Mediator complex routes signals from DNA-binding transcription factors to RNA polymerase (Pol) II. Despite its pivotal position, mechanistic understanding of Mediator in human cells remains incomplete. Here, we quantified Mediator-controlled Pol II kinetics by coupling rapid subunit degradation with orthogonal experimental readouts. Consistent with a model of condensate-driven transcription initiation, large clusters of hypo-phosphorylated Pol II rapidly disassembled upon Mediator degradation. This was accompanied by a selective and pronounced disruption of cell type-specifying transcriptional circuits, whose constituent genes featured exceptionally high rates of Pol II turnover. Remarkably, transcriptional output of most other genes was largely unaffected by acute Mediator ablation. Maintenance of transcriptional activity at these genes was linked to an unexpected, CDK9-dependent compensatory feedback loop that elevated Pol II pause release rates genome-wide. Collectively, our work positions human Mediator as a globally acting coactivator that selectively safeguards the functionality of cell type-specifying transcriptional networks.

### Sample Protocol
40mio washed and snap-frozen MED14-dTAG KBM7 cells were thawed on ice and incubated with 350µL hypotonic buffer SB (10mM HEPES pH7.5, 10mM KCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 340mM sucrose, 0.1% Triton-X-100, 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail) for 30 min at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Nuclei were harvested by 3 min centrifugation at 4°C and 2000g, keeping the supernatant as cytoplasmic fraction. Pellets were taken up in 500µL buffer SB, layered onto 2.5mL sucrose buffer SC (10mM HEPES pH7.5, 10mM KCl, 1.5mL MgCl2, 2.1M sucrose, 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail) and ultracentrifuged for 3h at 4°C and 150,000g. Supernatant was kept as the nuclear fraction and pellets taken up in 500µL buffer SB. Pellets were collected by 45 min centrifugation at 4°C and 20,000g and washed twice with 500µL wash buffer (10mM HEPES pH7.5, 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail). The chromatin pellets were transferred to 1mL Covaris AFA Fiber milliTUBEs with 200µL Benzonase digest buffer (15mM HEPES pH7.5, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 0.1% NP-40, 1x protease inhibitor) and sonicated for 120s at 4°C in a Covaris S220 focused ultrasonicator with following settings: peak power 140, duty factor 10, cycles/burst 200. Samples were transferred to fresh 1.5mL microcentrifuge tubes and chromatin was digested by addition of 2.5U Benzonase and 20µg RNase A and 30 min incubation on a rotating wheel at 4°C. Samples were incubated for 10 min at room temperature after addition of equal volume 2x SDS lysis buffer (100mM HEPES pH7.5, 4% SDS, 2mM PMSF, 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail) and then heated to 99°C for 5 min. Lysates were cleared by 10 min centrifugation at 16,000g and 20°C and transferred to fresh microcentrifuge tubes. Protein concentration was determined by BCA. Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) of 200µg total protein was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (VIVACON 500), essentially following described procedures 53. 50µL sample were directly mixed in the filter unit with 200 μL of freshly prepared 8M urea in 100mM Tris-HCl pH8.5 buffer (UA buffer) and centrifuged at 14,000g for 15min at 20°C to remove SDS. Residual SDS was washed out by two washing steps with 200μL UA buffer. Proteins were alkylated by incubation with 100μL of 50mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30min at RT. After washing 3x with 100μL UA buffer and 3x with 100µL of 50mM TEAB buffer pH 8, proteins were digested with 4µg trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered from the filter by centrifugation, applying 40μL of 50mM TEAB buffer followed by 50μL of 0.5M NaCl. Eluted peptides were acidified with TFA, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns, organic solvent removed in a vacuum concentrator at 45°C and reconstituted in 5% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano system via nanoflex source interface. Approximately 2µg tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3μm, 5 × 0.3 mm) at a flow rate of 10μL/min using 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 40cm, 75µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230nL/min and a ~206min gradient used (4 to 24% solvent B within 191min, 24 to 36% solvent B within 10min and, 36 to 100% solvent B within 5min, 100% solvent B for 10min before re-equilibrating at 4% solvent B for 18min). Analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using the integrated universal method. MS1 spectra were acquired with a mass range of 375-1650m/z in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200Th). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 2×10^5 and a maximum injection time of 50msec. MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap (IT) at rapid scan rates using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and a normalized collision energy of 35%. Peptide monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled and an intensity threshold for precursor selection set to 1×10^4 applying a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da and a maximum injection time of 250msec. Inject ions for all available parallelizable time was enabled. Charge states of 2-6 were included for MS2 selection. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was set to 90sec. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed 54. XCalibur version 4.0.0 and Tune 2.1.1565.24 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3) using default settings unless noted otherwise 55. Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (release 2018_07 containing 20386 sequences) concatenated with MaxQuant’s contaminant database. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. In silico cleavage was performed with trypsin/P, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Match between runs was additionally enabled. Peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered at 1 % FDR and label free quantification (LFQ) calculations were performed. For further processing, both peptide- and protein-based quantification methods were used and combined. Protein summaries reported in MaxQuant's proteinGroups.txt file were processed using Perseus, where firstly reverse hits and those only identified by a single site were excluded from further analysis. LFQ and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were log2-transformed and only proteins with reported intensities in all biological replicates of at least one treatment group were kept for statistical analysis. Missing values were replaced by random numbers drawn form a normal distribution of 1.8 standard deviation down shift and a width of 0.3 of each sample. Significance of differential enrichment was calculated by comparing LFQ and iBAQ protein intensities of untreated and dTAG-treated samples in a two-sided t-test at 5 % FDR corrected via the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure. As a peptide-based quantification method, we used the MSqRob software with standard settings (version 0.7.5), where the 36,424 peptides reported in MaxQuant's peptide.txt file were used as input. Intensities were log2 transformed and quantile normalized. Contaminants and reverse identifications were removed as well as protein groups that contained one or more proteins present also in a smaller protein group. Protein quantification was performed on 18760 remaining proteins, where dTAG treatment was specified as a fixed effect and biological replicates as well as peptide sequences were set as random sample effects.

### Publication Abstract
The Mediator complex directs signals from DNA-binding transcription factors to RNA polymerase II (Pol II). Despite this pivotal position, mechanistic understanding of Mediator in human cells remains incomplete. Here we quantified Mediator-controlled Pol II kinetics by coupling rapid subunit degradation with orthogonal experimental readouts. In agreement with a model of condensate-driven transcription initiation, large clusters of hypophosphorylated Pol II rapidly disassembled upon Mediator degradation. This was accompanied by a selective and pronounced disruption of cell-type-specifying transcriptional circuits, whose constituent genes featured exceptionally high rates of Pol II turnover. Notably, the transcriptional output of most other genes was largely unaffected by acute Mediator ablation. Maintenance of transcriptional activity at these genes was linked to an unexpected CDK9-dependent compensatory feedback loop that elevated Pol II pause release rates across the genome. Collectively, our work positions human Mediator as a globally acting coactivator that selectively safeguards the functionality of cell-type-specifying transcriptional networks.

### Keywords
Human, Chromatome, Chromatin proteomics, Lumos

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
Winter Lab, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Martin Jaeger

### Lab Head
Dr Georg E. Winter
Winter Lab, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria


