### Accession
PXD023109

### Title
Protein-based vaccine protect against Piscirickettsia salmonis in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)

### Description
An effective and economical vaccine against the Piscirickettsia salmonis pathogen is needed for sustainable salmon farming and to reduce disease-related economic losses. Consequently, the aquaculture industry urgently needs to investigate efficient prophylactic measures. Three protein-based vaccine prototypes against Piscirickettsia salmonis were prepared from a highly pathogenic Chilean isolate. Only one vaccine effectively protected Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), in correlation with the induction of Piscirickettsia-specific IgM antibodies and a high induction of transcripts encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e. Il-1β and TNF-α). In addition, we studied the proteome fraction protein of P. salmonis strain Austral-005 using multidimensional protein identification technology. The analyzes identified 87 proteins of different subcellular origins, such as the cytoplasmic and membrane compartment, where many of them have virulence functions. The other two prototypes activated only the innate immune responses, but did not protect Salmo salar against Piscirickettsia salmonis. These results suggest that the knowledge of the formulation of vaccines based on P. salmonis proteins is useful as an effective therapy, this demonstrates the importance of the different research tools to improve the study of the different immune responses, resistance to diseases in the Atlantic salmon. We suggest that this vaccine can help prevent widespread infection by P. salmonis, in addition to being able to be used as a booster after a primary vaccine to maintain high levels of circulating protective antibodies, greatly helping to reduce the economic losses caused by the pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Production of Piscirickettsia salmonis protein  Bacterial suspensions of AUSTRAL-005 strain were prepared in sterile Austral-broth (10), and 15 mL aliquots were adjusted to 1.0 absorbance at 600 nm, as measured in a spectrophotometer. The aliquots were washed with 1 × phosphate buffered saline [(PBS), pH buffer] by centrifugation at 6000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, according to the protocol of Oliver et al 2016 and Yañez et al 2013. The samples was further centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C to obtain the supernatant for an SDS-PAGE electrophoretic mobility assay (Figure 2). Proteomic analysis and identification The samples corresponding to prototype 1 (P1), which generated greater protection against the pathogen P. salmonis, were loaded on to 400 μm ID fused silica 2D high-performance liquid chromatography triphasic peptide trap column packed in house with 3 cm of a reverse-phase desalting C18 (100 Å, 5 μm Magic C18 particles; Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA, USA), 3 cm of a strong cation exchange column (300 Å, 5 μm, PolySULFOETHYL A, PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD, USA), and, finally, 3 cm of reversed phase resolving C18. Following a wash with 0.1% formic acid for 30 min at 0.5 μL/min, the efflux of the peptide trap column was directed to 10 cm resolution reversed-phase column (100 Å, 5 μm Magic C18 particles, Michrom Bioresources), which was mounted on the electrospray stage of a FT ICR mass spectrometer (LTQ FT, Thermo Finnigan LLC). The peptides were separated gradient for 120 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. An electrospray voltage of 1.9 kV was used, with the ion transfer temperature set at 250 °C. The mass spectrometer was controlled by the Xcalibur software, which subsequently performed mass analysis of the FT and, subsequently, of the six most intense ions during MS / MS scans of the ion traps. The criteria for protein identification was followed according to Oliver et al., (2017).

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra MS/MS samples were analyzed using SEQUEST (v1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) and X! Tandem (vCYCLONE 2010.12.01.1; The GPM, thegpm.org). SEQUEST searched the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Piscirickettsia salmonis 12-21-2015.fasta database (10,012 entrie) assuming digestion of the enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem searched a subset of the Piscirickettsia salmonis NCBI 11-03-2016 database, also assuming trypsin digestion. SEQUEST and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 50 PPM. Carbamidomethyl-cysteine was a fixed modification. Criteria for Protein Identification Scaffold (v.4.5.0; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if the Peptide Prophet algorithm, with Scaffold delta-mass correction, established a >95.0% probability (Keller et al., 2002). Protein identifications were accepted if presenting a >99.9% probability, as assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm, and containing at least two identified peptides (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins containing similar peptides that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins were annotated with NCBI Gene Ontology terms (downloaded 17-03-2016) (Ashburner et al., 2000).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adaptive, Piscirickettsia salmonis, Proteome, Atlantic salmon, Vaccine, Innate, Il-1β, Igm.

### Affiliations
proteogenomics laboratory
Proteogenomics laboratory, MELISA Institute

### Submitter
Mauricio Hernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Mauricio Hernandez
proteogenomics laboratory


