### Accession
PXD025493

### Title
FCGBP, the IgGFc-binding protein, is secreted with all GDPH sequences cleaved, but maintained by inter-fragment disulfide bonds

### Description
Mucus has an important protective function and forms a barrier that minimizes the bacterial contact with the colonic epithelium. It is organized as a complex network with several specific proteins of which most are still poorly understood. Abundant proteins in intestinal mucus, in addition to the mucin MUC2, are CLCA1 and FCGBP. FCGBP is expressed in all intestinal goblet cells and secreted into the mucus. It is comprised of repeated von Willebrand Factor D (vWD) domain assemblies, of which most have a GDPH amino acid sequence. This sequence can be autocatalytically cleaved, as previously found in MUC2 and MUC5AC. We show that all vWD with a GDPH sequence are cleaved, and that these cleavages occur early during biosynthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum. All cleaved fragments remained connected by a disulfide bond within each vWD domain. The cleavage can generate a C-terminal reactive Asp-anhydride that could react with other molecules, such as MUC2, but this was not observed. Quantitative analyses by mass spectrometry showed that, in chaotropic solutions, FCGBP was mainly soluble whereas MUC2 was insoluble, and most of the secreted FCGBP was not covalently bound to MUC2. As its name indicates, FCGBP has been suggested to bind IgG, something that was not possible to reproduce in vitro using purified proteins. The function of FCGBP is still unknown, but our results suggest that the Asp-anhydrides do not contribute to covalent crosslinking in the mucin framework nor does FCGBP incorporate IgG in mucus.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested in-solution using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, reduced with 10 mM DTT under gentle shaking for 2 h at 37˚C, transferred to 10-kDa cut-off filter units and centrifuged at 10,000 x g. The samples were alkylated with 50 mM IAA in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5) on the filter. After washing with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, trypsin (cleaving at Lys and Arg) was used for overnight digestion at 37°C. Peptides were eluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate or 500 mM NaCl, acidified and purified through C18 Stage Tips. The peptides were vacuum dried and resolved in 0.1-0.2 % formic acid and analyzed in a Q-Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Results files were processed using maxquant in order to do relative quantification of Fcgbp and Muc2 content in guanidinium insoluble and soluble fraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fcgbp, Gdph, Igg, Mucus

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Department of medical biochemistry and cell biology at Institution of Biomedicine, Gothenburg University

### Submitter
Erik Ehrencrona

### Lab Head
Dr Malin E.V. Johansson
Department of medical biochemistry and cell biology at Institution of Biomedicine, Gothenburg University


