### Accession
PXD033733

### Title
Mapping of the autophagosomal degradome identifies IL-7Rα as key 1 cargo in proliferating CD4+ T-cells

### Description
CD4+ T cells orchestrate both humoral and cytotoxic immune responses. While it is known that CD4+ T cell proliferation relies on autophagy, direct identification of the autophagosomal cargo involved is still missing. Here, we created a transgenic mouse model, which, for the first time, enables us to directly map the proteinaceous content of autophagosomes in any primary cell by LC3 proximity labelling. IL-7Rα, a cytokine receptor mostly found in naïve and memory T cells, was reproducibly detected in autophagosomes of activated CD4+ T cells. Consistently, CD4+ T cells lacking autophagy showed increased IL-7Rα surface expression, while no defect in internalisation was observed. Mechanistically, excessive surface IL-7Rα sequestrates the common gamma chain, impairing the IL-2R assembly and downstream signalling crucial for T cell proliferation. This study provides proof-of-principle that key autophagy substrates can be reliably identified with this model to help mechanistically unravel autophagy’s contribution to healthy physiology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of membrane-protected material were lysed with RIPA buffer containing quenchers (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1x PhosSTOP 956 (Roche), 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM Trolox and 1 mM sodium azide), sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000x g for 10 min. The supernatant was incubated with Streptavidin-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight, which was balanced with RIPA buffer containing quenchers. After 3x wash with RIPA buffer and 3x wash with 3 M Urea dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3, beads were incubated TCEP (5 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) at 55 °C for 30 min and shaken at 1000x rpm. Samples were alkylated with IAA (10 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 20 min and shaken at 1000x rpm, further quenched by DTT (20 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) and washed 2x with 2 M Urea dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3. After overnight incubation with trypsin (1 μg/20 μl beads, Promega), supernatants were collected, plus 2x washes with 2 M Urea buffer. The samples were 966 acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (1%) and underwent vacuum centrifugation to decrease the volume. After being desalted on C18 stage tips (Thermo Scientific), peptides were reconstituted with 0.5% acetic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) were used for peak detection and quantification of proteins based on RAW data. MS spectra were searched referred to the manually-annotated UniProt Mus musculus proteome (retrieved 30/03/2020), using the Andromeda search engine with the parameters as follow: full tryptic specificity, allowing two missed cleavage sites, modifications included carbamidomethyl (C) and the variable modification to acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M), and filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Analysis of label-free quantification intensities of proteins were log2-transformed with Python programming (Version 3.7.6). Missing values were replaced by random values from a distribution a quarter of the width, and -1.8 units of the original sample distributions. Proteins without greater-than-background values in both replicates for at least one condition were removed. Volcano plots were generated using GraphPad Prism software (Version 8.2.1). The log2(BafA1:DMSO) fold change of each protein is plotted on x versus the log10(p-value) of each protein plotted on y. Gene ontology analysis was performed with g:Profiler

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Il-7ra autophagosome degradome

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford


