### Accession
PXD010741

### Title
MHC I-restricted immunopeptidomics analysis of human monocyte-derived macrophages exposed to biological nanoparticles bearing influenza hemagglutinin

### Description
In this study, primary human monocyte-derived macrophages were exposed to plant-derived virus-like particles (VLPs) bearing influenza A hemagglutinin (HA) or soluble influenza HA, as control. Immunopurified MHC class I-associated peptides were analysed by nano-flow high pressure liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution dopant-assisted electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry. A total of 109 host-derived MHC I peptides were identified in the VLP-treated samples, two of which were also detected in controls. The peptides unique to VLP treatment were, on average, ~13 amino acid residues long, more basic and hydrophilic, and were mainly processed via proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinases and cathepsins. The proteins associated with these peptides were primarily involved in cellular, metabolic and regulatory processes and activated several pathways including inflammation stimulation and attenuation, response to stimuli, innate and adaptive immunity, clathrin-mediated endocytosis, protein synthesis and endo-lysosomal degradation. This study is the first report to describe the response of a primary human antigen-presenting cell to nanoparticulate vs. soluble antigen exposure from an immunopeptidomics point of view.

### Sample Protocol
MDMs were differentiated from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from healthy donors between the ages of 23-47. PBMCs were separated from whole blood by centrifugation. Monocytes were isolated by negative selection using magnetic microbeads and cultured in RPMI-1640/ penicillin/streptomycin/HEPES supplemented with fetal bovine serum and recombinant human macrophage colony-stimulating factor for 7 days. MDMs were exposed to either H1-VLPs or soluble H1 and lysed with Tris-HCl/NaCl/ NP-40 in presence of protease inhibitors. MHC I–peptide complexes were immunoprecipitated with anti-human MHC I antibody and peptides were eluted with 10% acetic acid. The eluate was cleaned by C18 solid-phase extraction and evaporated under vacuum. Reconstituted samples were analyzed by a Bruker Maxis II high-resolution QTOF mass spectrometer equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system in nano-ESI mode. HPLC solutions were water (A) and acetonitrile (B) both containing 0.1% formic acid. MS spectra were acquired at m/z 400–2200 and MS/MS spectra were recorded at m/z 150–2200 using collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation. Ions with z = 2–5 were preferred whereas singly charged ions were excluded. Redundant ions were also excluded for 2 min. Acquisition time was 0.5 s for MS and 0.06–0.25 s for each MS/MS scan depending on precursor ion signal intensity, with a total cycle time of 3.0 s. CaptiveSpray (Bruker) nano-spray ionisation source operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 1.8 kV. A continuous flow of nitrogen and vaporized acetonitrile (as dopant) was injected into the ion source during the analysis using a nanoBooster (Bruker) module. nanoBooster pressure was set to 0.3 bar. Nitrogen (99.5% pure) was used as dry gas (150°C) at a flow rate of 3.0 L/min. Samples were analysed in duplicate except sample 0 which was used for method development.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were imported into the MaxQuant software and searched against the human subset of the UniProt-SwissProt protein database (downloaded on 9/11/2017). An unspecific search was conducted for peptides 5–20 residues long at 0.01 false-discovery rate. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. A posterior error probability (PEP) threshold of 0.01 was set for all MaxQuant searches. To account for LC retention shifts, the “match between runs” option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
An outbreak of a new variant of the coronavirus infection, known as COVID-19, occurred at the end of 2019 in China, in the city of Wuhan. It was caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. This variant of the virus is characterized by a high degree of variability and, as the current situation with its spread across different regions of the globe shows, it can lead to a progressive spread of infection among the human population and become the cause of a pandemic. The world scientific community is making tremendous efforts to develop means of protection,prevention and treatment of this disease based on modern advances in molecular biology, immunology and vaccinology. This review provides information on the current state of research in the field of vaccine development against COVID-19 with an emphasis on the role of plants in solving this complex problem. Although plants have long been used by mankind as sources of various medicinal substances, in a pandemic, plant expression systems become attractive as biofactories or bioreactors for the production of artificially created protein molecules that include protective antigens against viral infection. The design and creation of such artificial molecules underlies the development of recombinant subunit vaccines aimed at a rapid response against the spread of infections with a high degree of variability. The review presents the state of research covering a period of just over two years, i. e. since the emergence of the new outbreak of coronavirus infection. The authors tried to emphasize the importance of rapid response of research groups from various scientific fields towards the use of existing developments to create means of protection against various pathogens. With two plant expression systems - stable and transient - as examples, the development of work on the creation of recombinant subunit vaccines against COVID-19 in various laboratories and commercial companies is shown. The authors emphasize that plant expression systems have promise for the development of not only protective means under conditions of rapid response (subunit vaccines), but also therapeutic agents in the form of monoclonal antibodies against COVID-19 synthesized in plant cells.

### Keywords
Virus-like particle (vlp), Dopant-assisted electrospray ionisation (da-esi), Immunopeptidomics, Proteomics, Class i major histocompatibility complex (mhc), High-resolution mass spectrometry, Monocyte-derived macrophage (mdm), Human antigenic peptides

### Affiliations
McGill University
Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Momar Ndao

### Lab Head
Dr Momar Ndao
Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


