### Accession
PXD043520

### Title
Physiological implications of dietary inclusion of the algae Laminaria digitata on the weaned piglet: a combined proteomics and metabolomics approach

### Description
The brown seaweed Laminaria digitata is a novel feedstuff for weaned piglets. It can help prevent dysbiosis in addition to improve overall health and performance. However, it has a recalcitrant cell wall that is not easily digested by the piglet digestive system. Alginate lyase has promising effects for the supplementation of in vivo diets in order to address this issue. The objective of this study is to evaluate the effect of 10% dietary Laminaria digitata inclusion and alginate lyase supplementation on the hepatic proteome and metabolome of weaned piglets in a physiological study. The diets caused incipient differences on the metabolome of piglets, with the proteome having the most significant changes. Feeding seaweed provided a source of n-3 PUFA that accumulated in the liver, signalling for increased fatty acid oxidation (FABP, ACADSB, ALDH1B1). This contributed at least in part to reduce oxidative stability of the tissue, demanding the higher abundance of GST to maintain it. Reactive oxygen species possibly damaged proteins, which caused hepatocytes to increase proteasome activity (LAPTM4B, PSMD4), recycling their amino acids. Providing alginate lyase to the diet increased the number of differentially abundant proteins, including GBE1 and LDHC that contributed to the maintenance of circulating glucose through mobilization of glycogen stores and branched chain amino acids. Enzymatic supplementation enhanced the baseline effects of feeding seaweed alone.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was realised with 50 mg of freeze-dried tissue. Then, 20 µg of protein were run on a short migration using precast 1Dgel 12% Bis-Tris (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Samples were divided in two groups of bands (low and high molecular weight). Proteins were reduced, alkylated and unstained further trypsin digestion incubated overnight at 37°C. Extracted peptides were analysed by NanoLC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were imported into Progenesis QI software for Proteomics (version 4.2, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters). The protein and peptide identification searching Sus scrofa database on UniprotKB (189,471 sequences; released 7th of September 2021) via Mascot Daemon (version 2.8.0. Matrix Science) were imported to Progenesis QIP and matched to peptide spectra. The following Mascot research parameters were used: peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot calculated confidence of 95% were accepted. Proteins were considered reliably identified when at least 2 peptides and at least 1 unique peptide per protein.  Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were considered when ANOVA p-value<0.05 and fold change (X vs Y) was higher than 1.5 (higher in X) and lower than 0.67 (higher in Y). Principal components analysis (PCA) was carried out for the identified proteins using the fviz_pca_ind function of the FactoMineR package. A Venn diagram was obtained using an available online tool to depict common DAPS between comparisons (https://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/, accessed 16/03/2023). Functional analysis was carried out using the ClueGO [17] plugin (v. 2.5.9.)  of the Cytoscape (v. 3.8.2.) software [18] for each comparison. The parameters used were: right-sided hypergeometric enrichment and a Bonferroni p-value correction.

### Publication Abstract
The brown seaweed Laminaria digitata, a novel feedstuff for weaned piglets, has potentially beneficial prebiotic properties. However, its recalcitrant cell wall challenges digestion in monogastrics. Alginate lyase is a promising supplement to mitigate this issue. This study's aim was to investigate the impact of incorporating 10% dietary Laminaria digitata, supplemented with alginate lyase, on the hepatic proteome and metabolome of weaned piglets. These diets introduced minor variations to the metabolome and caused significant shifts in the proteome. Dietary seaweed provided a rich source of n-3 PUFAs that could signal hepatic fatty acid oxidation (FABP, ACADSB and ALDH1B1). This may have affected the oxidative stability of the tissue, requiring an elevated abundance of GST for regulation. The presence of reactive oxygen species likely inflicted protein damage, triggering increased proteolytic activity (LAPTM4B and PSMD4). Alginate lyase supplementation augmented the number of differentially abundant proteins, which included GBE1 and LDHC, contributing to maintain circulating glucose levels by mobilizing glycogen stores and branched-chain amino acids. The enzymatic supplementation with alginate lyase amplified the effects of the seaweed-only diet. An additional filter was employed to test the effect of missing values on the proteomics analysis, which is discussed from a technical perspective. SIGNIFICANCE: Brown seaweeds such as Laminaria digitata have prebiotic and immune-modulatory components, such as laminarin, that can improve weaned piglet health. However, they have recalcitrant cell wall polysaccharides, such as alginate, that can elicit antinutritional effects on the monogastric digestive system. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of a high level of dietary L. digitata and alginate lyase supplementation on the hepatic metabolism of weaned piglets, using high throughput Omics approaches.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Piglet, Proteomics, Laminaria digitata

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-BEAP Bascharage1 Luxembourg
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celine LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP Bascharage1 Luxembourg


