### Accession
PXD013952

### Title
Bidirectional Control of Coronary Vascular Resistance by Eicosanoids via a Novel GPCR

### Description
Arachidonic acid metabolites epoxyeicosatrienoates (EETs) and hydroxyeicosatetraenoates (HETEs) are important regulators of myocardial blood flow and coronary vascular resistance (CVR), but their mechanisms of action are not fully understood. We identified G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) as a microvascular smooth muscle cell (mVSMC) receptor antagonistically regulated by two endogenous eicosanoids: 15-HETE, which stimulates GPR39 to increase mVSMC intracellular calcium and augment microvascular CVR, and 14,15-EET, which inhibits these actions. Furthermore, zinc ion acts as an allosteric modulator of GPR39 to potentiate the efficacy of the two ligands. The study elucidates the roles of eicosanoids in cardiovascular physiology and disease and provide an opportunity for the development of novel GPR39-targeting therapies for cardiovascular disease.

### Sample Protocol
Microvascular Smooth Muscle Cell (mVSMC) Culture:  After removing the atrium, aorta and large vessels from the heart surface of adult mice (20-25 g), the left ventricle was sliced with mouse heart slicer matrix (Zivic Instruments, Pittsburgh, PA).  To avoid epicardial coronary arteries, only 4 apical slices (1 mm thick) from the left ventricle were collected and placed on the surface of a collagen-coated 24-well tissue culture plate (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) containing 100 microliters FBS/well.  The slices were incubated at 37 C with 5% CO2 for 4 h before DMEM (supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 microgram/mL streptomycin and 10% FBS) was added to the wells.  The sections were removed after mVSMCs migrated from tissue to the surface of the well.  mVSMCs were trypsinized (0.05%) and re-plated for subsequent experiments.  Photocrosslinking, Click Chemistry, and Streptavidin Pulldown:  Adult mouse heart mVSMC cells at 70-80% confluency were washed once with HBSS (Invitrogen), then cells were treated with (“E” in sample name) or without (“P” in sample name) 14,15-EET for 10 min followed by treatment with photoactive cross-linker EET-P for 30 min at 37 C. At the end of incubation, the cells were cooled to 4 C and UV-irradiated at 365 nm for 5 min. The cells were then collected by scraping and pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The cell pellets were washed once with ice-cold PBS and then lysed in 1% SDS/PBS with brief sonication followed by centrifugation at room temperature at 14000 rpm for 10 min. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). The crude lysates were adjusted with PBS to give a final concentration of 1.0 mg/mL for click reaction with biotin-azide using the following condition: azide (50 micromolar), TCEP (1 mM), TBTA (100 micromolar), CuSO4 (1 mM). The mixture was incubated with shaking at room temperature for 1.5 h in the dark. For streptavidin pulldown and protein identification, the reaction mixture was further processed as follows: An equal volume of MeOH and 0.25 volume of CHCl were added to the mixture. The reaction mixture was again vigorously vortexed for 30 s and centrifuged at 8000x g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and the protein solid was washed three times with MeOH: CHCl3 (1:1). Then MeOH was added to the washed solid and briefly sonicated to resuspend the solid. CHCl3 was added to a final of MeOH:CHCl3 (4:1). The mixture was vigorously vortexed for 30 s and centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min to pellet the solid. The resulting protein solid was redissolved in PBS with 8 M urea and 2% SDS with brief sonication. The solution was centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min to remove any insoluble pellet. The proteins in the supernatant were reduced with DTT (10 mM) at 55 C for 30 min followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (25 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The solution was diluted 10x with PBS and mixed with PBS-washed streptavidin-agarose beads. The mixture was tumbled at room temperature for 2 h. Then the beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 700x g for 2 min. The beads were extensively washed by 3x 1% SDS/PBS followed by 6x PBS. The beads were incubated with 100 mM NH4HCO3 with 2 M urea supplemented with 1 mM CaCl2 and 2 microgram sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma) at 37 C overnight. The tryptic peptide mixture was collected with a Spin-X centrifuge tube filter. They were further washed with 2 x 200 microliter 100 mM NH4HCO3 with 2 M urea. The tryptic peptide mixture and washes were combined, 0.3 ml of 1% TFA added, and final volumes adjusted to 2 ml with water.  Digests were then desalted, and urea removed by solid phase extraction using Oasis HLB 1 cc cartridges (Waters, Product Number WAT094225) and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were dissolved in 42 microliter of 5% formic acid, and 40 microliter of the solution was analyzed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry using a NanoAcquity Ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters) and LTQ Velos dual-pressure linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Electrospray ionization was performed with a Captive Spray source (Microm Biosciences) fitted with a 20-micron inner-diameter tapered spray tip and a 1.0-kV source voltage. Xcalibur version 2.1 was used to control the system. Samples were applied at 15 microliters/min to a Symmetry C18 trap cartridge (Waters) for 10 min and then switched to a 75-micron x 250 mm BEH130 C18 column with 1.7 micron diameter particles (Waters) using mobile phases of water (phase A) and acetonitrile (phase B) containing 0.1% formic acid, a 7.5% to 30% acetonitrile gradient over 60 min, and a 300 nL/min flow rate. A normalized collision energy level of 30 was used. Data-dependent collection of MS/MS spectra used the dynamic exclusion feature of the instrument’s control software (repeat count 1, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 24 s, and exclusion mass width -1 to +1.5 Da) to obtain MS/MS spectra of the 10 most abundant parent ions (minimum signal of 5000) following each survey scan from m/z 400 to 1,400. The tune file was configured with no averaging of microscans, a maximum injection time of 200 ms for survey scans (100 ms for MS2 scans), and automatic gain control targets of 30000 in MS1 mode and 10000 in MS2 mode. Comet (version 2016, release 03) was used to search MS2 spectra against a UniProt canonical reference mouse proteome FASTA protein database (release 2019.04 with 22287 sequences), with concatenated sequence-reversed entries to estimate peptide and protein false discovery rates, and 179 common contaminant sequences and their reversed forms. The search results processing was performed with Python scripts (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git). Searches for all samples were performed with trypsin enzyme specificity. The average parent ion mass tolerance was 2.5 Da. The monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.0005 Da. A static modification of +57.02 Da was added to all cysteine residues. A variable modification of +16 Da on methionine residues was also allowed, with a maximum of 3 modifications per peptide. Comet scores were combined into linear discriminant function scores to improve the identification sensitivity, and discriminant score histograms were created separately for each peptide charge state (1+, 2+, and 3+). Separate histograms were created for matches to forward sequences and for matches to reversed sequences for all peptides of 7 amino acids or longer. Scores of histograms for reversed matches were used to control peptide-spectrum match (PSM) false-discovery rates (FDR) to 3% and that achieved an estimated protein FDR of 0.5% when requiring a minimum of two distinct peptide matches per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Arachidonic acid metabolites epoxyeicosatrienoates (EETs) and hydroxyeicosatetraenoates (HETEs) are important regulators of myocardial blood flow and coronary vascular resistance (CVR), but their mechanisms of action are not fully understood. We applied a chemoproteomics strategy using a clickable photoaffinity probe to identify G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) as a microvascular smooth muscle cell (mVSMC) receptor selective for two endogenous eicosanoids, 15-HETE and 14,15-EET, which act on the receptor to oppose each other's activity. The former increases mVSMC intracellular calcium via GPR39 and augments coronary microvascular resistance, and the latter inhibits these actions. Furthermore, we find that the efficacy of both ligands is potentiated by zinc acting as an allosteric modulator. Measurements of coronary perfusion pressure (CPP) in GPR39-null hearts using the Langendorff preparation indicate the receptor senses these eicosanoids to regulate microvascular tone. These results implicate GPR39 as an eicosanoid receptor and key regulator of myocardial tissue perfusion. Our findings will have a major impact on understanding the roles of eicosanoids in cardiovascular physiology and disease and provide an opportunity for the development of novel GPR39-targeting therapies for cardiovascular disease.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Eicosanoids, Microvascular smooth muscle cell, Cardiovascular disease, Photoactive cross-linking, G-coupled receptor 39

### Affiliations
The Knight Cardiovascular Institute  Oregon Health & Science University  3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, OR 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Nabil J. Alkayed
The Knight Cardiovascular Institute  Oregon Health & Science University  3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, OR 97239, USA


