### Accession
PXD024059

### Title
The plant thimet oligopeptidases TOP1 and TOP2 have divergent redox sensitivities and substrate cleavage specificity

### Description
Physiological and pathogen-induced oscillations in the plant cells' redox environment trigger response mechanisms that involve redox-sensitive cysteines and consequent changes in proteins' biochemical and functional characteristics. Arabidopsis thimet oligopeptidases (TOPs) TOP1 and TOP2 are components of the immune signaling and oxidative stress response. Here, TOP1 and TOP2 were evaluated comparatively to understand their role as redox sensors. We show that TOPs catalytic activity is augmented in plants undergoing an immune response and in mutant lines with altered expression of the chloroplastic NTRC impaired in the chloroplast thiol-disulfide regulatory system; ntrc was unable to mount a systemic immune response. Oxidation promoted TOP1 self-interaction to dimers and oligomers; Cys-to-Ala mutagenesis of multiple Cys residues inhibited TOP1 oxidative self-interaction. In contrast, TOP1 lacking the signal peptide (ΔSPTOP1) and TOP2 were detected solely as monomers. Treatment with oxidized glutathione increased the catalytic activities of TOPs; Ala substitution of the unique Cys405 of TOP2 abolished its oxidative activation. The immune regulator ROC1 was identified as a candidate TOPs substrate. TOPs cleaved a ROC1 peptide (ROC1p) at similar and unique cleavage sites; ROC1p concentration helped determine TOPs cleavage specificity. We propose that TOP1 and TOP2 form a proteolysis couple with divergent redox-sensing mechanisms and specificity.

### Sample Protocol
The native PAGE gel was excised manually around the masses for the TOP1 monomer and dimer for downstream processing. Gel slices were destained three times with 300 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% ACN solution before an in-gel trypsin digestion (5 μL of 0.5 μg/μL trypsin in 50 mM acetic acid) was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at RT. Following trypsin digestion, 10 mM calcium chloride was added and an in-gel chymotrypsin digestion (5 μL of 0.5 μg/μL chymotrypsin in 1 mM hydrochloric acid) was performed in the same solution for 4 h at RT. Following both digestions, peptides were extracted first with 30 μL of 1% formic acid/2% ACN, and then with 30 μL of 60% ACN. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 1 mL of 0.1% TFA, and desalted by reversed-phase solid-phase extraction as described above prior to LC-MS/MS.  Samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and analyzed using an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  Injections were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5μm, 180μm x 20 mm; Waters) with a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8μm, 75μm x 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B was held at 5% for 1 min, then increased from 5% to 50% in 30 min before ramping to 85% in 2 min, where it was held for 3 min before returning to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibrating for 23 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity and the Nanospray Flex source had spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, capillary temperature at 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition was used where HCD fragmentation of precursor ions having +2 to +7 charge state was performed using a normalized collision energy setting of 28. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for precursor m/z was set to a 10 s window.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectral files (*.raw) were converted into combined peak lists (*.mgf) using MSConvertGUI (version 3.0.18130-e9d0c75b5) (89) for peptide sequence determination by Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1; Boston, MA). Database searching was performed against the Arabidopsis thaliana UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548, 39,359 canonical entries, accessed 4/24/2020) and Escherichia coli UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002032, 4,156 canonical entries, accessed 12/4/2020) with sequences for common laboratory contaminants (https://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/, 116 entries, accessed 4/24/2020) appended. Target-decoy searches of MS/MS data used a trypsin (specificity: K/R that are not before P)/chymotrypsin (specificity: F/Y/W/L that are not before P) protease specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, and variable modifications of N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to less than 1% peptide FDR using the embedded Percolator algorithm (90). The threshold for a peptide-spectrum match was Percolator-adjusted Mascot Peptide Score > 13.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Redox regulation, Thimet oligopeptidase

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Associate Professor, Chemistry Department, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Hicks
Associate Professor, Chemistry Department, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


