### Accession
PXD027674

### Title
Protein Targets of Acetaminophen Covalent Binding in Rat and Mouse Liver Studied by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Acetaminophen (N-acetyl-p-aminophenol; APAP) is a mild analgesic and antipyretic used commonly worldwide. Although APAP is considered a safe and effective over-the-counter medication, it is also the leading cause of drug-induced acute liver failure. Its hepatotoxicity has been linked to the covalent binding of its reactive metabolite, N-acetyl p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), to proteins. The aim of this in vivo study was to identify APAP-protein targets in both rat and mouse liver, and to compare the results from both species, using bottom-up proteomics and targeted multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) experiments. Livers from rats and mice, treated with APAP, were homogenized and digested by trypsin.  Digests were then fractionated by mixed-mode solid-phase extraction prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using scheduled multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) acquisition. The targeted assays were optimized based on high-resolution MS/MS data from information-dependent acquisition (IDA) using control liver homogenates treated with a custom alkylating reagent forming a positional isomer of the APAP modification on all cysteine residues, in order to build an in-house modified peptide database for targeted analysis. A list of putative in vivo targets of APAP were screened from previous in vitro studies, data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS analyses of liver digests, as well as selected proteins from the target protein database (TPDB), an online resource which references previous reports of proteins found to be modified by acetaminophen. Multiple protein targets of APAP in each species were found, while confirming modification sites.

### Sample Protocol
Sprague-Dawley male rats were dosed with 600 mg/kg APAP or vehicle for controls, and livers were collected after 24 h. Male C57BL/6 mice were treated with 150 and 300 mg/kg (livers collected after 2 or 6 h), as well as with vehicle for control samples. Frozen liver samples were homogenized in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC biffer, pH 8-8.5) at 5 mL/g tissue weight using a hand-held homogenizer, and 100 μL aliquots were solubilized by adding 25 μL of 0.1% SDS (heated for 5 min at 95°C). After cooling samples, 50 μL of 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea solution was added, followed by using a probe sonicator, following by 15 min in an ultrasonic bath. The resulting protein extract was then diluted with 500 μL of 100 mM ABC buffer. Reductive alkylation was performed by adding DTT (30 μL, 100 mM; 37°C for 20 min), followed by IAM (45 μL, 100 mM; 37°C for 30 min in the dark). Similarly, control samples were alkylated using HP-IAM (hydroxyphenyl-iodoacetamide). Samples were digested by trypsin (30 μg; 37°C for 18 h), followed by the addition of 300 μL 2% formic acid for fractionation by SPE on OASIS MCX cartridges (1 cc, 30 mg; Waters). Following sample loading, cartridges were washed in three steps with 2% formic acid in water, 100% MeOH and 50% MeOH (1 mL each). Eight fractions were collected using subsequent elution steps with 15 mM, 20 mM, 25 mM, 35 mM, 50 mM, and 200 mM ammonium acetate in 50% MeOH, then 0.1% and 3% ammonium hydroxide in 50% MeOH (1 mL each). Fractions were then dried and reconstituted in 100 μl 10% ACN, 0.2% FA. 20 μl were injected for analysis on LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated on an Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 column (100 × 2.1 mm, 1.7 μm) (Phenomenex) using a Nexera UHPLC system (Shimadzu) with water (A) and ACN (B), both containing 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 μL/min (at 40°C). The elution gradient started at 5% B for 2.5 min, and was linearly increased to 30% B in 47.5 min, to 50% B in 5 min, then to 90% B in 1 min, held for another 4 min at 90% B. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected on a high-resolution quadrupole-time-of-flight TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) equipped with a DuoSpray ion source in positive electrospray mode set at 5 kV source voltage, 500°C source temperature and 50 psi GS1/GS2 gas flows, with a declustering potential of 80 V. The instrument performed a survey TOF-MS acquisition from m/z 140–1250 (250 ms accumulation time), followed by MS/MS on the 15 most intense precursor ions with a minimum intensity of 250 cps from m/z 300–1250 (excluded for 20 s after two occurrences) using information-dependent acquisition (IDA; also known as data-dependent acquisition, DDA) with dynamic background subtraction. Each MS/MS acquisition (m/z 80–1500, high sensitivity mode) had an accumulation time of 50 ms and collision energy of 30 ± 10 V, with a total cycle time was 1.05 s. The MS instrument was calibrated at every 4 injections using an in-house calibration mix. Analyst TF software (1.7.1, Sciex) was used for data acquisition and raw data was visualized with PeakView 2.2 with Masterview 1.1 (Sciex).  Raw data files (eight fractions of each sample combined) were searched against the rat or mouse UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (release date: 07/18/2018, including common protein contaminants) using Sciex ProteinPilot 5.0. To detect APAP covalent adducts, a custom modification was added to the Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) with a probability of 50% for APAP modification on cysteine residues (C8H8NO2 replacing H, Δm = +149.04766 u). The search was performed for +2 to +4 charge states at a MS tolerance of 0.05 u on precursor ions and 0.1 u on fragments. For protein identifications, a target-decoy approach was applied at a 1% false discovery rate. From the list of identified APAP-modified peptides, those with spectral confidence above 95%. Peptides with modifications other than APAP and cysteine carbamidomethylation (CAM) were also removed.

### Publication Abstract
Acetaminophen (APAP) is a mild analgesic and antipyretic used commonly worldwide. Although considered a safe and effective over-the-counter medication, it is also the leading cause of drug-induced acute liver failure. Its hepatotoxicity has been linked to the covalent binding of its reactive metabolite, <i>N</i>-acetyl <i>p</i>-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), to proteins. The aim of this study was to identify APAP-protein targets in both rat and mouse liver, and to compare the results from both species, using bottom-up proteomics with data-dependent high resolution mass spectrometry and targeted multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) experiments. Livers from rats and mice, treated with APAP, were homogenized and digested by trypsin. Digests were then fractionated by mixed-mode solid-phase extraction prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Targeted LC-MRM assays were optimized based on high-resolution MS/MS data from information-dependent acquisition (IDA) using control liver homogenates treated with a custom alkylating reagent yielding an isomeric modification to APAP on cysteine residues, to build a modified peptide database. A list of putative <i>in vivo</i> targets of APAP were screened from data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS analyses of liver digests, previous <i>in vitro</i> studies, as well as selected proteins from the target protein database (TPDB), an online resource compiling previous reports of APAP targets. Multiple protein targets in each species were found, while confirming modification sites. Several proteins were modified in both species, including ATP-citrate synthase, betaine-homocysteine <i>S</i>-methyltransferase 1, cytochrome P450 2C6/29, mitochondrial glutamine amidotransferase-like protein/ES1 protein homolog, glutamine synthetase, microsomal glutathione <i>S</i>-transferase 1, mitochondrial-processing peptidase, methanethiol oxidase, protein/nucleic acid deglycase DJ-1, triosephosphate isomerase and thioredoxin. The targeted method afforded better reproducibility for analysing these low-abundant modified peptides in highly complex samples compared to traditional data-dependent experiments.

### Keywords
Rat, Mouse, Acetaminophen, Liver, Reactive metabolite, Covalent binding, Napqi

### Affiliations
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM), Chemistry Department / Pharmaqam, Montréal, QC, Canada
Chemistry department, University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM)

### Submitter
Lekha Sleno

### Lab Head
Dr Lekha Sleno
Chemistry department, University of Quebec at Montreal (UQAM)


