### Accession
PXD026864

### Title
DOT1 Like Histone Lysine Methyltransferase (DOT1L) and  Menin 1 (MEN1) interaction proteomics in breast cancer cell nuclei

### Description
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor that mediates estrogen signaling in hormone-responsive breast cancer (BC) and is the primary target of specific anticancer therapies that although effective can generate resistance phenomena that represents a crucial problem in clinical management of patients affected by this disease. DOT1 Like Histone Lysine Methyltransferase (DOT1L) and  Menin 1 (MEN1) have been identified as functional component of the ERα mechanism of action. To investigate the involvement of DOT1L and MEN1 in mediating ERα actions in hormone-responsive and endocrine-resistant BC, interaction proteomics was applied to map the DOT1l and MEN1 nuclear interacting partners in MCF7 breast cancer cell nuclei in order to the identifiy new possible therapeutic targets for a more effective pharmacological treatment of endocrine therapy-resistant tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts obtained, from exponentially growing MCF7 cells, were subjected to DOT1L and MEN1 immunoprecipitations for interaction proteomics experiments. For mass spectrometry analyses, three biological replicates of each immunoprecipitate from samples (DOT1L and MEN1) and from controls (IgG) were analyzed. After immunoprecipition, dynabeads were washed and resuspended in 100 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein digestion was performed by on-beads digestion with trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA / 50% ACN, dried and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1% FA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo) using a 60 minute separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files of controls, DOT1L and MEN1 samples were submitted to the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) for protein identification and quantitation using the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant search was done against the UniProt Human database (September 2018). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. In order to obtain the list of DOT1L and MEN1 molecular partners, we compared each dataset to the control (IgG). We considered as DOT1L or MEN1 associated proteins those molecules identified only in samples (at least in 2 out of 3 biological replicates and absent in the controls) or those supported by statistical analysis performed as follow: a permutation (10000) based T-test applied to MaxQuant protein “Intensities” values (FDR ≤0.05) between samples (DOT1L and MEN1) and controls (IgG) and a fold-change cut off ≥ I quartile.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Dot1l, Endocrine therapy resistance, Breast cancer, Men1

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


