### Accession
PXD027751

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension: an exploratory SWATH proteomics analysis

### Description
The pathogenesis of idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is currently poorly understood. Speculations regarding the role of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein biomarkers in understanding the pathomechanism of IIH needs to be studied using the high-throughput omics approaches.In this study we have performed an untargeted SWATH-MS proteomics approach to identify CSF biomarkers in IIH cases compared to control subjects.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins from CSF samples collected in the cryo-vials were diluted with Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) and precipitated in pre-chilled acetone. The samples were then centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C and supernatants were discarded. The protein pellets were resuspended in 100mM Tris-HCl with 8M Urea (pH: 8.5). 20ug of protein from each sample and 300 µg protein pooled from all the cases and controls were reduced with 25 mM of Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 56C, followed by alkylation using 55 mM of Iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (in dark) for 20 minutes. These samples were then subjected to trypsin digestion in an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:10 (trypsin: protein) for 16 hours at 37C. The tryptic peptides were vacuum dried in vacuum concentrator. Optimized source parameters were used, curtain gas and nebulizer gas were maintained at 25 psi and 30 psi respectively, the ion spray voltage was set to 5.5 kV and temperature was set to 250°C. For DDA, a 1.8 sec instrument cycle was repeated in high sensitivity mode throughout the whole gradient, a full scan MS spectrum for 400–1250 m/z was performed with an accumulation time of 250 msec, followed by 30 MS/MS experiments with 50 msec accumulation time and 100–1500 m/z range each, on MS precursors with charge state 2 + to 5 + exceeding a 120-cps threshold. Rolling collision energy was used and former target ions were excluded for 15 sec.SWATH-MS analysis for the samples were performed on the same instrument setup, chromatographic conditions and source parameters as DDA. Four microgram of desalted peptides were analyzed from each sample in a SWATH method with 100 precursor isolation windows, defined based on precursor m/z frequencies in a DDA run using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator (SCIEX), with a minimum window of 5 m/z. Data was acquired using Analyst TF 1.7.1 Software (SCIEX). Accumulation time was set to 250 msec for the MS scan (400–1250 m/z) and 25 msec for the MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z). Rolling collision energies were applied for each window based on the m/z range of each SWATH and a charge 2+ ion, with a collision energy spread of 5. Total cycle time was 2.7 sec.

### Data Protocol
A combined database search was performed for .wiff format raw files generated in DDA mode against UniProtKB human FASTA database (Swissprot and TrEMBL; 152,774 entries) using ProteinpilotTM Software 5.0.1 (SCIEX). The .group output file from ProteinpilotTM served as spectral ion library for SWATH analysis. A 1% global False Discovery Rate (FDR) at protein level, excluding shared peptides was considered for import in SWATH 2.0 microapp of PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX). SWATH run files were added and retention time alignment was performed using peptides from abundant proteins. The processing settings for peak extraction were: maximum of 10 peptides per protein, 5 transitions per peptide, >95% peptide confidence threshold, 1% peptide FDR. XIC extraction window was set to 55 minutes with 75 ppm XIC Width. Protein area was exported in the form of MarkerView (.mrkw) file. In MarkerView 1.2.1 (SCIEX), data normalization was performed using total area sum normalization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cerebrospinal fluid (csf), Proteomics, Biomarkers, Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (iih)

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Neurosciences Centre, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, India
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology

### Submitter
Praveen Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Awadh Kishor Pandit
Department of Neurology, Neurosciences Centre, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, India


