### Accession
PXD008415

### Title
Global lip mod analysis -  Obesity-Induced Protein Carbonylation In Murine Adipose Tissue Regulates The DNA Binding Domain Of Nuclear Zinc-Finger Proteins

### Description
The project involves global proteomics analysis of HNE and HHE modified proteins in mammalian tissues and cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from tissues and cells were fractionated based on subcellular compartments. Proteins were immunoprecipated and then subject to SDS-PAGE fractionation and LCMS analysis. Alternatively, proteins were digested into peptides by trypsin and subject to immunoprecipitation and LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Raw data were searched against Uniprot mouse proteome and specifying different lipid modificationas as variable modifications using Maxquant and Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
In obesity-linked insulin resistance, oxidative stress in adipocytes leads to lipid peroxidation and subsequent carbonylation of proteins by diffusible lipid electrophiles. Reduction in oxidative stress attenuates protein carbonylation and insulin resistance, suggesting that lipid modification of proteins may play a role in metabolic disease, but the mechanisms remain incompletely understood. Herein, we show that <i>in vivo</i>, diet-induced obesity in mice surprisingly results in preferential carbonylation of nuclear proteins by 4-hydroxy-<i>trans</i>-2,3-nonenal (4-HNE) or 4-hydroxy-<i>trans</i>-2,3-hexenal (4-HHE). Proteomic and structural analyses revealed that residues in or around the sites of zinc coordination of zinc finger proteins, such as those containing the C2H2 or MATRIN, RING, C3H1, or N4-type DNA-binding domains, are particularly susceptible to carbonylation by lipid aldehydes. These observations strongly suggest that carbonylation functionally disrupts protein secondary structure supported by metal coordination. Analysis of one such target, the nuclear protein estrogen-related receptor &#x3b3; (ERR-&#x3b3;), showed that ERR-&#x3b3; is modified by 4-HHE in the obese state. <i>In vitro</i> carbonylation decreased the DNA-binding capacity of ERR-&#x3b3; and correlated with the obesity-linked down-regulation of many key genes promoting mitochondrial bioenergetics. Taken together, these findings reveal a novel mechanistic connection between oxidative stress and metabolic dysfunction arising from carbonylation of nuclear zinc finger proteins, such as the transcriptional regulator ERR-&#x3b3;.

### Keywords
Lipid ptm

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota


