### Accession
PXD005425

### Title
RNF4-knockdown and RNF4-TULIP identified proteins

### Description
In this project we aim to identify the spacific targets of the SUMO-Targeted Ubiquitin Ligase (STUBL) RNF4. For that, we combine the study of SUMOylation targets that are enriched after RNF4 knockdown with the use of Targeted Ubiquitin Ligases Identified by Proteomics (TULIP).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified using Ni-NTA beads in order to purify HIS tagged proteins. Samples were then concentrated and treated by reduction alkylation using Dithiothreitol and Chloroacetamide. Next volume was set to 250 ul using Ammonium Bicarbonate 50mM and trated with 250 ng of trypsin overnight. Next, samples were desalted using C-18 stagetips.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed usiing MaxQuant 1.5.5.1. Matching runs, N-term acetylation and oxidation as modifications. Allowing 4 missing cleavages of Trypsin and Max peptide mass of 5 kDa

### Publication Abstract
SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligases (STUbLs) mediate the ubiquitylation of SUMOylated proteins to modulate their functions. In search of direct targets for the STUbL RNF4, we have developed TULIP (targets for ubiquitin ligases identified by proteomics) to covalently trap targets for ubiquitin E3 ligases. TULIP methodology could be widely employed to delineate E3 substrate wiring. Here we report that the single SUMO E2 Ubc9 and the SUMO E3 ligases PIAS1, PIAS2, PIAS3, ZNF451, and NSMCE2 are direct RNF4 targets. We confirm PIAS1 as a key RNF4 substrate. Furthermore, we establish the ubiquitin E3 ligase BARD1, a tumor suppressor and partner of BRCA1, as an indirect RNF4 target, regulated by PIAS1. Interestingly, accumulation of BARD1 at local sites of DNA damage increases upon knockdown of RNF4. Combined, we provide an insight into the role of the STUbL RNF4 to balance the role of SUMO signaling by directly targeting Ubc9 and SUMO E3 ligases.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Sumo, Rnf4

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Associate Proffesor Department of Molecular Cell Biology Leiden University Medical Centre Leiden The Netherlands

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred CO Vertegaal
Associate Proffesor Department of Molecular Cell Biology Leiden University Medical Centre Leiden The Netherlands


