### Accession
PXD022316

### Title
Fast skeletal myosin binding protein-C regulates fast skeletal muscle contraction

### Description
Myosin-binding protein C (MyBP-C) is a thick filament regulatory protein found exclusively in the C-zone of the A band in the sarcomeres of vertebrate striated muscle. Cardiac, slow skeletal and fast skeletal MyBP-C (fMyBP-C) paralogs perform different functions. However, the functional role of fMyBP-C in fast skeletal muscle is completely unknown. Genetic mutations in human fMyBP-C lead to skeletal myopathies. All three isoforms share similar protein structures, but likely differ substantially in terms of expression and function, which may serve the distinct physiologies of fast and slow muscle fibers. In the present study, we developed a novel fMyBP-C global knockout (KO) mouse model (C2-/-) to investigate the structural, functional, molecular, cellular and physiological roles of fMyBP-C in skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 250 µg protein of each sample were reduced, alkylated and digested followed by labeled with TMT10 plex reagents. One part of labeled peptides were pooled and fractionated into 10 fractions by High pH reverse phase (hpRP) fractionation. Another part of peptides were done by TiO2 beads, Fe-NTA beads and Fe-NTA beads for phosphopeptides enrichment. Then injected into NanoLC-Orbitrap Eclipse for analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS spectra were processed and searched using the Sequest HT search engine within the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD2.4, Thermo). The Mus musculus database that has 63,028 entries was downloaded from NCBI and used for database searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Proteomics, Skeletal myosin binding protein-c, Muscle

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics facility, Cornell University
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Proteomics and Metabolomics facility, Cornell University


