### Accession
PXD001276

### Title
Modulation of cell metabolic pathways and oxidative stress signaling contribute to acquired melphalan resistance in multiple myeloma cells

### Description
Multiple myeloma RPMI8226 cells adapted to growth in melphalan display a shift towards Warburg metabolism and modulated oxidative stress signaling. Inhibitors targeting specific enzymes in these pathways are selectively toxic to the melphalan-resistant cells. To investigate large scale alterations in gene expression accompanying melphalan resistance, we used the multiple myeloma cell line RPMI8226 and its melphalan-resistant derivative LR5. The stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) approach.

### Sample Protocol
RPMI8226 and RPMI8226-LR5 cells were grown in light (12C6-lysine) and heavy (13C6-lysine) medium, respectively (Pierce SILAC protein Quantitation kit-RPMI1640). Sensitive and resistant cells were mixed 1:1 and cell extracts prepared as above. Proteins were separated on 4-12% denaturing NuPAGE (Invitrogen) and stained with Simply BlueTM (Invitrogen). Thirteen bands were excised, reduced and alkylated prior to trypsin in-gel digestion as described.18 Peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid and dried in speedvac for further MS analysis. LC-MS/MS was conducted on an EASY-nLC (Proxeon) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo). Reconstituted samples were separated on an in-house 15 cm fused silica column (100 µm i.d., 375 µm o.d.) using a 50 min gradient up to 32% ACN in 0.1% FA and 250 nl/min flow rate. MS scans (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 400) in the Orbitrap. During each duty cycle, up to five of the most intense peptides were selected for CID fragmentation in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant v.1.0.13.8, with Mascot searches utilizing a human IPI database containing extra entries for reverse protein sequences. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications, maximum of two missed cleavage sites and MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da. A minimum of two unique peptides was specified for protein identifications, with protein quantification requiring at least two ratio measurements.

### Publication Abstract
Alkylating agents are widely used chemotherapeutics in the treatment of many cancers, including leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma, sarcoma, lung, breast and ovarian cancer. Melphalan is the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agent against multiple myeloma. However, despite a 70-80% initial response rate, virtually all patients eventually relapse due to the emergence of drug-resistant tumour cells. By using global proteomic and transcriptomic profiling on melphalan sensitive and resistant RPMI8226 cell lines followed by functional assays, we discovered changes in cellular processes and pathways not previously associated with melphalan resistance in multiple myeloma cells, including a metabolic switch conforming to the Warburg effect (aerobic glycolysis), and an elevated oxidative stress response mediated by VEGF/IL8-signaling. In addition, up-regulated aldo-keto reductase levels of the AKR1C family involved in prostaglandin synthesis contribute to the resistant phenotype. Finally, selected metabolic and oxidative stress response enzymes were targeted by inhibitors, several of which displayed a selective cytotoxicity against the melphalan-resistant cells and should be further explored to elucidate their potential to overcome melphalan resistance.

### Keywords
Signaling, Rpmi8226, Multiple myeloma, Melphalan, Warburg, Silac, Oxidative, Metabolism, Stress

### Affiliations
Professor at Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine  Laboratory Centre, 5th floor. Erling Skjalgssons gt. 1  Norwegian University of Science and Technology NTNU 7006 Trondheim, Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Professor at Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine Faculty of Medicine  Laboratory Centre, 5th floor. Erling Skjalgssons gt. 1  Norwegian University of Science and Technology NTNU 7006 Trondheim, Norway


