### Accession
PXD015285

### Title
Ensured auxin sensing by degron flexibility

### Description
Using a structural proteomics approach via chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry (XL-MS), we have resolved SCFTIR auxin·AUX/IAA complex overall topology, and established the power of IDRs modulating auxin receptor assemblies.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking reactions Cross-linking reactions were carried out with either 4-5 µM of ASK1·TIR1 and 5 µM AUX/IAA (bm3 version) or 10 µM AUX/IAA alone. The crosslinking reagent used was Disuccinimidyl Dibutyric Urea (DSBU) at 1 mM final concentration either purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific or kindly provided by the group of Andrea Sinz. The proteins were pre-incubated 15 minutes in the presence or absence of 10 µM auxin (IAA) before addition of the crosslinker. Reaction were stopped after 1 hour by addition of 0.2 volumes 1.5 M TRIS pH 6.8. Cross-linking reactions were denatured under sonication with deoxycholate sodium salt, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Alkylation was quenched by DTT and the reactions were incubated with trypsin over night at 37°C. Digestion was stopped with 10% TFA and after centrifugation (5 min 14.000 xg), peptide mixtures were analyzed via mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry analyses of cross-linked peptides Proteolytic peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC/MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system coupled to an Q Exactive™ Hybrid-Quadrupol-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both equipped with Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on reversed phase C18 columns (precolumn: Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5μm, 100 Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific); separation column: packed Picofrit nanospray C18 column, 75 μM × 250 mm, 1.8 μm, 80 Å, tip ID 10 µm (New Objective)). After washing the precolumn for 15 minutes with water containing 0.1 % (v/v) TFA at 50°C, peptides were eluted and separated using a linear gradient from 3% to 42% B (with solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 85% (v/v) acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min over 90 min, 42% to 99% B (5 min) and 99% B (5 min). The separation column is kept at 45°C using an external column heater (Phoenix S&T).

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode with stepped higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and normalized collision energies of 27%, 30%, and 33%. Each high-resolution full scan (m/z 299 to 1799, R = 120,000 at m/z 200) in the orbitrap was followed by 10 high-resolution product ion scans (R = 30,000), starting with the most intense signal in the full-scan mass spectrum (isolation window 2 Th); the target value of the automated gain control was set to 3,000,000 (MS) and 250,000 (MS/MS) and maximum accumulation times were set to 50 ms (MS) and 200 ms (MS/MS). Precursor ions with charge states <3+ and >7+ or were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (duration 60 seconds, window 2 ppm).  For cross-linking analysis, mass spectrometric *.raw files were converted to mzML using Proteome Discoverer 2.0. MeroX analysis was performed with the following settings: Proteolytic cleavage: C-terminal at Lys and Arg with 3 missed cleavages, peptides’ length: 5 to 30, static modification: alkylation of Cys by IAA, variable modification: oxidation of M, cross-linker: DSBU with specificity towards Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr, and N-termini, analysis mode: RISE-UP mode, precursor mass accuracy: 5 ppm, product ion mass accuracy: 10 ppm (performing mass recalibration, average of deviations), signal-to-noise ratio: 1.5, precursor mass correction activated, prescore cut-off at 55% intensity, FDR cut-off: 5%, and minimum score cut-off: 70. All analysis included the cRAP database with more than 100 proteins. For further analysis only interprotein cross-links found in at least 2/3 (IAA7) or 3/4 (IAA12) experiments were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Cullin RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases SCF<sup>TIR1/AFB1-5</sup> and their AUX/IAA targets perceive the phytohormone auxin. The F-box protein TIR1 binds a surface-exposed degron in AUX/IAAs promoting their ubiquitylation and rapid auxin-regulated proteasomal degradation. Here, by adopting biochemical, structural proteomics and in vivo approaches we unveil how flexibility in AUX/IAAs and regions in TIR1 affect their conformational ensemble allowing surface accessibility of degrons. We resolve TIR1&#xb7;auxin&#xb7;IAA7 and TIR1&#xb7;auxin&#xb7;IAA12 complex topology, and show that flexible intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) in the degron's vicinity, cooperatively position AUX/IAAs on TIR1. We identify essential residues at the TIR1 N- and C-termini, which provide non-native interaction interfaces with IDRs and the folded PB1 domain of AUX/IAAs. We thereby establish a role for IDRs in modulating auxin receptor assemblies. By securing AUX/IAAs on two opposite surfaces of TIR1, IDR diversity supports locally tailored positioning for targeted ubiquitylation, and might provide conformational flexibility for a multiplicity of functional states.

### Keywords
Scf-type e3 ubiquitin ligase, Auxin, Auxin receptor, Tir1, Indole-3-acetic acid, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Aux/iaas, Iaa12, Iaa7, Idrs

### Affiliations
Luz Irina A. Calderón Villalobos, PhD. Head of Signal Integration Research Group Molecular Signal Processing Dept. Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry (IPB) Weinberg 3, D-06120 Halle (Saale) Germany
Department of Molecular Signal Processing, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry (IPB), Weinberg 3, D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany

### Submitter
Michael Niemeyer

### Lab Head
Dr Luz Irina Calderón Villalobos
Luz Irina A. Calderón Villalobos, PhD. Head of Signal Integration Research Group Molecular Signal Processing Dept. Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry (IPB) Weinberg 3, D-06120 Halle (Saale) Germany


