### Accession
PXD033637

### Title
PC4 is a post-transcriptional manipulator of D-type cyclins and centromere proteins

### Description
The cell cycle is an intensively control process, in which cell-cycle proteins display a cyclical expression pattern regulated by specific transcription, translation and degradation. Cell cycle progression is initiated by highly expressed D-type cyclins (D1/2/3) to facilitate DNA synthesis, subsequently driven by mitotic proteins formation (e.g., centromere proteins) that is responsible for mitosis onset. Whether there exist master regulators to keep the cycle rapidly “running” with D-type cyclins induction, as well as maintain the cycle in a stable process by centromere proteins modulation is of particular interest yet remains unclear at present. Here our study clarifies human positive cofactor 4 (PC4) as a previously unrecognized RNA binding protein (RBP), as a post-transcriptional master regulator to orchestrate CCND1 and CENPF expression. We reveal that lack of PC4 reduces CCND1 stability whereas enhances excessive CENPF translation, results in cell cycle arrest and mitotic defects. Furthermore, PC4 RNA binding activity is strictly controlled by S17 phosphorylation and K68 ubiquitination in a cell cycle-dependent way. Lastly, we use in vivo model to verify that PC4 deficiency amplifies response of cancer cells to CDK4/6 inhibitor, and PC4 induction accelerates liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy. These results highlight that cell-cycle gene expressions are dynamically and post-transcriptionally fine-tuned, and identify PC4 as an essential cell-cycle post-transcriptional manipulator that is profoundly applied within cancer and regeneration medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Cells or tissues were lysed in lysis buffer on ice for half an hour. After sonication and centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Extracted protein of each sample was mixed with TCA and centrifuged. Then supernatant was discarded and the precipitation was washed with chilled acetone. After drying,TEAB was incubatedwith the precipitation, followed by sonication. Next,the peptides were reduced with dithiothreitol. And the proteins were alkylated withiodoacetamide in the darkness. Subsequently, the precipitation was digested by incubation with trypsin. Then, the peptides were separated with a gradient of acetonitrile in ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 into 80 fractions by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC usingthe Agilent 300 Extend C18 column. Eventually, the peptides were combined into fractions. For phosphopeptide enrichment, franctionated peptide mixtures were resuspended in phosphopeptide binding buffer and carefully transferred to a new tube, incubated with an IMAC microsphere suspension by vibration. Then, the enrichment of phosphopeptides with IMAC microspheres were collected after centrifugation. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed 3 times. After that, elution buffer was added to elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Next, the phosphopeptides were desalted by C18 Ziptips and analyzed by the liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on Thermo ScientificTMEASY-nLCTM 1000. For ubiquitinated peptide enrichment, the peptides were dissolved in IP buffer) and incubated separately with pre-washed Ubiquitinated resin. After that, the resin was washed four times with IP buffer and with deionized water. The bound peptides were eluted with TFA, vacuum-dried, desalted with C18 ZipTips and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis on EASY-nLCTM1200(Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the Swiss-prot Homo sapiens protein sequence database. The existence of phosphopeptides were verified on the basis of the occurrence of consecutive y or b ions and the mass increment of 79.9663 Da on-serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. For analyzing ubiquitinated modification  peptides, di-glycine-lysine was defined as a ubiquitination modification.

### Publication Abstract
The cell cycle is a highly regulated process in which proteins involved in cell cycle progression exhibit periodic expression patterns, controlled by specific mechanisms such as transcription, translation, and degradation. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the oscillations of mRNA levels in cell cycle regulators are not fully understood. In this study, we observed that the stability of cyclin D1 (CCND1) mRNA fluctuates during the cell cycle, with increased stability during interphase and decreased stability during the M phase. Additionally, we identified a key RNA binding protein, positive coactivator 4 (PC4), which plays a crucial role in stabilizing CCND1 mRNA and regulating its periodic expression. Moreover, the binding affinity of PC4 to CCND1 mRNA is modulated by two cell cycle-specific posttranslational modifications: ubiquitination of K68 enhances binding and stabilizes the CCND1 transcript during interphase, while phosphorylation of S17 inhibits binding during the M phase, leading to degradation of CCND1 mRNA. Remarkably, PC4 promotes the transition from G1 to S phase in the cell cycle, and depletion of PC4 enhances the efficacy of CDK4/6 inhibitors in hepatocellular carcinoma, suggesting that PC4 could serve as a potential therapeutic target. These findings provide valuable insights into the intricate regulation of cell cycle dynamics.

### Keywords
Pc4, Rbp, Cell cycle, Ptm

### Affiliations
Army Medical University
Third Military Medical University(Army Medical University)

### Submitter
Qimei Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Chunmeng Shi
Third Military Medical University(Army Medical University)


