### Accession
PXD002344

### Title
Global and phosphoproteomic profiling of the DNA damage response in yeast by SILAC labeling and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Wild type yeast cells were metabolically labeled in SILAC medium. The heavy (H)-SILAC-labeled cells were then continuously exposed to 0.01% MMS to induce replication stress, and the light (L)-SILAC-labeled cells were mock-exposed. After 3 hours, heavy and light cells were harvested and lysed. To ensure reproducibility, the entire experiment was repeated, and the labels were swapped such that the (L)-SILAC-labeled wild type yeast cells were exposed to 0.01% MMS for 3 hours, and the (H)-SILAC-labeled wild type yeast cells were mock-exposed. Lysates from heavy and light cells were mixed 1:1 by protein mass, reduced and treated with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin. 5 mg of each protein lysate was fractionated by high-pH reverse phase (RP) liquid chromatography into 12 samples. For proteome analysis, 2% of each fraction was dried down and re-suspended for LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining 98% was processed to enrich for phosphopeptides using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), dried down, and re-suspended in 0.1% FA, 3% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis. Global and phosphopeptide-enriched samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Raw MS/MS spectra were searched against version 3.69 of the Yeast International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database using three independent search engines (MaxQuant/Andromeda, Spectrum Mill, and xTandem). All searches were performed with the tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. For MaxQuant, the peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. For X!Tandem, the peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±2.0 Da with post-search filtering of the precursor mass to 50 ppm and the fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.5 Da. For Spectrum Mill, peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.7 Da. The overall FDR was set at ≤3% based on a decoy database search. Phosphosite localization probabilities are reported in the MaxQuant results. Any site with a probability greater than 0.8 was considered to be localized. Quantification of the Heavy:Light ratios was performed using MaxQuant software, with a minimum ratio count of 2 and using unique + razor peptides for quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type yeast cells were metabolically labeled in SILAC medium. The heavy (H)-SILAC-labeled cells were then continuously exposed to 0.01% MMS to induce replication stress, and the light (L)-SILAC-labeled cells were mock-exposed. After 3 hours, heavy and light cells were harvested and lysed. To ensure reproducibility, the entire experiment was repeated, and the labels were swapped such that the (L)-SILAC-labeled wild type yeast cells were exposed to 0.01% MMS for 3 hours, and the (H)-SILAC-labeled wild type yeast cells were mock-exposed. Lysates from heavy and light cells were mixed 1:1 by protein mass, reduced and treated with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin. 5 mg of each protein lysate was fractionated by high-pH reverse phase (RP) liquid chromatography into 12 samples. For proteome analysis, 2% of each fraction was dried down and re-suspended for LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining 98% was processed to enrich for phosphopeptides using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), dried down, and re-suspended in 0.1% FA, 3% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis. Global and phosphopeptide-enriched samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were searched against version 3.69 of the Yeast International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database using three independent search engines (MaxQuant/Andromeda, Spectrum Mill, and xTandem). All searches were performed with the tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. For MaxQuant, the peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. For X!Tandem, the peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±2.0 Da with post-search filtering of the precursor mass to 50 ppm and the fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.5 Da. For Spectrum Mill, peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at ±0.7 Da. The overall FDR was set at ≤3% based on a decoy database search. Phosphosite localization probabilities are reported in the MaxQuant results. Any site with a probability greater than 0.8 was considered to be localized. Quantification of the Heavy:Light ratios was performed using MaxQuant software, with a minimum ratio count of 2 and using unique + razor peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
In response to replication stress, a phospho-signaling cascade is activated and required for coordination of DNA repair and replication of damaged templates (intra-S-phase checkpoint) . How phospho-signaling coordinates the DNA replication stress response is largely unknown. We employed state-of-the-art liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approaches to generate high-coverage and quantitative proteomic and phospho-proteomic profiles during replication stress in yeast, induced by continuous exposure to the DNA alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) . We identified 32,057 unique peptides representing the products of 4296 genes and 22,061 unique phosphopeptides representing the products of 3183 genes. A total of 542 phosphopeptides (mapping to 339 genes) demonstrated an abundance change of greater than or equal to twofold in response to MMS. The screen enabled detection of nearly all of the proteins known to be involved in the DNA damage response, as well as many novel MMS-induced phosphorylations. We assessed the functional importance of a subset of key phosphosites by engineering a panel of phosphosite mutants in which an amino acid substitution prevents phosphorylation. In total, we successfully mutated 15 MMS-responsive phosphorylation sites in seven representative genes including APN1 (base excision repair); CTF4 and TOF1 (checkpoint and sister-chromatid cohesion); MPH1 (resolution of homologous recombination intermediates); RAD50 and XRS2 (MRX complex); and RAD18 (PRR). All of these phosphorylation site mutants exhibited MMS sensitivity, indicating an important role in protecting cells from DNA damage. In particular, we identified MMS-induced phosphorylation sites on Xrs2 that are required for MMS resistance in the absence of the MRX activator, Sae2, and that affect telomere maintenance.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Genetic interaction, Homologous recombination, Dna damage checkpoint, Mass spectrometry, Telomere, Methylmethanesulfonate, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G Paulovich
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center


