### Accession
PXD042148

### Title
A viral pan-end RNA element and host complex define a SARS-CoV-2 regulon

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of COVID-19, generates multiple protein-coding, subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs) from a longer genomic RNA, all bearing identical termini with poorly understood roles in regulating viral gene expression. Insulin and interferon-gamma, two host-derived, stress-related agents, and virus spike protein, induce binding of glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase (EPRS1), within an unconventional, tetra-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex, to the sgRNA 3'end thereby enhancing sgRNA expression. We identify an EPRS1-binding sarbecoviral pan-end activating RNA (SPEAR) element in the 3'end of viral RNAs driving agonist-induction. Translation of another co-terminal 3'end feature, ORF10, is necessary for SPEAR-mediated induction, independent of Orf10 protein expression. The SPEAR element enhances viral programmed ribosomal frameshifting, thereby expanding its functionality. By co-opting noncanonical activities of a family of essential host proteins, the virus establishes a post-transcriptional regulon stimulating global viral RNA translation. A SPEAR-targeting strategy markedly reduces SARS-CoV-2 titer and kinetics, suggesting a pan-sarbecoviral therapeutic modality.

### Sample Protocol
Transfected cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and ~100-150 g extracts were resolved on 10-20% Tris-tricine gel with 2X tricine SDS sample buffer (Novex) and 10X NuPAGE sample reducing agent. A region of gel between 2-15 kDa, as aligned with Spectra Multicolor Low Range Protein Ladder run on same gel, was excised. For protein digestion, the bands were cut to minimize excess polyacrylamide and divided into small pieces. The gel pieces were washed with water and dehydrated in acetonitrile. The bands were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to in-gel digestion. All bands were digested by adding 5 L of 10 ng/μL trypsin or chymotrypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubating overnight at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides were extracted in two aliquots of 30 L 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac, and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to a final volume of ~30 L. The LC-MS system was a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry system equipped with a Dionex 25 cm x 75 m id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 m, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. 5 L of the extract was injected and peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 L/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source was operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data-dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans.

### Data Protocol
he data were analyzed using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search the human SwissProt database, specifically targeting the ORF10 sequence with the search program Proteome Discoverer 2.4.  Database  Human Swiss-Prot, downloaded 3-23-2022, 26576 entries, ORF10 Protease trypsin Trypsin, full Missed cleavages 2 Mass accuracy 10 ppm MS1, 0.6 Da MS2 Variable modifications  Oxidation of Met  N-terminal acetyl: protein  N-terminal Met-loss: protein  N-terminal Met-loss + acetyl: protein Static modifications  Carbamidomethylation at Cys Protein ID requirements 2 Peptides, 1 unique, Sequest ≥ 4.0 FDR rate: PSM  Percolator 1%   For targeted analysis by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), chromatograms were plotted for the precursor to fragement ion transition for each condition tested.  The spectra were manually interpreted for retention time and observed fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of COVID-19, generates multiple protein-coding, subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs) from a longer genomic RNA, all bearing identical termini with poorly understood roles in regulating viral gene expression. Insulin and interferon-gamma, two host-derived, stress-related agents, and virus spike protein, induce binding of glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase (EPRS1), within an unconventional, tetra-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex, to the sgRNA 3'-end thereby enhancing sgRNA expression. We identify an EPRS1-binding sarbecoviral pan-end activating RNA (SPEAR) element in the 3'-end of viral RNAs driving agonist-induction. Translation of another co-terminal 3'-end feature, ORF10, is necessary for SPEAR-mediated induction, independent of Orf10 protein expression. The SPEAR element enhances viral programmed ribosomal frameshifting, thereby expanding its functionality. By co-opting noncanonical activities of a family of essential host proteins, the virus establishes a post-transcriptional regulon stimulating global viral RNA translation. A SPEAR-targeting strategy markedly reduces SARS-CoV-2 titer, suggesting a pan-sarbecoviral therapeutic modality.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; covid-19; translational control; rna element; rna-binding protein; eprs1; aminoacyl-trna synthetase; multi-trna synthetase complex; post-transcriptional regulon; 3’ untranslated region; obesity; insulin; interferon-gamma; spike protein; subgenomic rna; programmed ribosomal frameshifting; spear element; orf10; 3’end; sars-cov-2 replicon; ppmo

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Paul L Fox
Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA


