### Accession
PXD040582

### Title
Proteome characterization of HCMV virus microenvironment with addition of cidofovir

### Description
The control of host processes which influence cell-cell communication is central to determining the outcome of a virus infection in tissue. Despite this, it remains unclear how cells either in close or distant proximity to an infected cell differentially respond to the primary infection. Here, we established a virus infection microenvironment to resolve molecular features and functional consequences of cell spatial address within this localized niche by mass spectrometry. To rule out the possibility that neighboring cells are infected by the viral progeny from the primary infection, cidofovir is added in the system to prevent viral genome replication in order to prevent the spread of infection.

### Sample Protocol
SP-TATκ-mCherry MRC5 human fibroblasts were infected with UL32-GFP HCMV, and co-cultured with WT MRC5s. Infected, neighboring, and distal cell populations were FACS sorted using FACSAria Fusion (BD Biosciences) at 48 hours post infection. In the meantime, mock MRC5s were sorted, serving as negative control samples. Cells were lysed by detergent lysis and proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion using suspension trapping columns (S-Trap, Protifi) for 1 hour. Peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry with a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. 1 µg of peptides were injected in 2 µL volume and separated with a linear gradient from 3% B to 35% B (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA in 97% ACN) over 150 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASYSpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm, 50 cm) heated to 50°C. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3e6, a maximum IT of 30 ms, a scan range of 350 to 1,800 m/z, and recorded in profile, while the data-dependent MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum IT of 42 ms, with a loop count of 20 (Top-20 method), an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, an NCE of 28, and recorded as centroided. The data-dependent settings used a minimum AGC target of 4.2e3, no apex trigger; excluded unassigned, 1, 7, 8, and >8 charge states; preferred peptide matches, excluded isotopes, and included a dynamic exclusion of 45.0 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra collected from DDA mode were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v2.4. MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a UniProt human database containing herpesvirus sequences and common contaminants. The Spectrum Files RC node was used to perform offline mass recalibration and the Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free MS1 quantitation. PSMs were assembled into peptide and protein identifications with a false discovery rate of less than 1% for both the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Communication between infected cells and cells in the surrounding tissue is a determinant of viral spread. However, it remains unclear how cells in close or distant proximity to an infected cell respond to primary or secondary infections. We establish a cell-based system to characterize a virus microenvironment, distinguishing infected, neighboring, and distal cells. Cell sorting, microscopy, proteomics, and cell cycle assays allow resolving cellular features and functional consequences of proximity to infection. We show that human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection primes neighboring cells for both subsequent HCMV infections and secondary infections with herpes simplex virus 1 and influenza A. Neighboring cells exhibit mitotic arrest, dampened innate immunity, and altered extracellular matrix. Conversely, distal cells are poised to slow viral spread due to enhanced antiviral responses. These findings demonstrate how infection reshapes the microenvironment through intercellular signaling to facilitate spread and how spatial proximity to an infection guides cell fate.

### Keywords
Hcmv, Cell cycle, Innate immunity, Cidofovir, Membrane contact sites, Mass spectrometry, Virus microenvironment

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Bokai Song

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


