### Accession
PXD045316

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation in mitochondrial protein in rat astrocytes

### Description
To further investigate this idea that O-GlcNAcylation in mitochondria can improve the efficacy and benefit of mitochondrial transfer, we asked what mitochondrial proteins were modified with O-GlcNAc. To identify O-GlcNAcylated proteins and the potential target sites of O-GlcNAcylation, rat astrocytes were stimulated with NAD to induce O-GlcNAcylation in mitochondria, then we isolated mitochondria and extracted O-GlcNAcylated proteins by immunoprecipitation using O-GlcNAc antibody followed by silver staining.

### Sample Protocol
Rat astrocytic CD38 signaling was stimulated by nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD, 5 mM) for 24 hours. Following immunoprecipitation with O-GlcNAc antibody, silver staining was performed. Gels with target bands (rectangles) were cut out for Mass Spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were then extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac, reconstituted in 5 - 10 μl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and loaded into a nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings,San Francisco CA). A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest(ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Spectral matches were manually examined and multiple identified peptides per protein were required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Astrocytes, O-glcnacylation

### Affiliations
Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Departments of Radiology and Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Radiology, neuroprotection research laboratory

### Submitter
Kazuhide Hayakawa

### Lab Head
Dr Kazuhide Hayakawa
Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Departments of Radiology and Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA


