### Accession
PXD005064

### Title
Quantitative Temporal in vivo Proteomics (QTiPs) deciphers the transition of inflammatory CD11b+,Ly6G-,Ly6Chigh myeloid cells into M2-like macrophages

### Description
Phenotypic transition of myeloid cells into distinct lineages in vivo is important in pathogen response. To monitor immune cell phenotype transitions in vivo, we developed a quantitative temporal in vivo proteomics (QTiPs) platform, performing multiplexed (10-plex) tandem-mass-tag (TMT)-based mass spectrometry on sorted cells collected from their in situ microenvironment during infection. We temporally characterized a poorly understood, virus-driven CD11b+,Ly6G-,Ly6Chigh-low myeloid cell population throughout an acute phase of infection in both the site of infection and bone marrow. QTiPs, in combination with phenotypic, functional and metabolic analyses, elucidated a pivotal role for inflammatory CD11b+,Ly6G-,Ly6Chigh-low cells in anti-viral immune response and viral clearance. Most importantly, the highly time-resolved QTiPs dataset showed the transition of CD11b+,Ly6G-,Ly6Chigh-low cells into M2-like macrophages which displayed increased antigen presentation capacities and bioenergetic demands late in infection. Our QTiPs approach precisely captures myeloid cell-macrophage transition in this population, and it is a novel platform for measuring temporospatial proteome transitions in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Sorted cells were pelleted and lysed in 6 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, containing Roche complete mini protease inhibitor mixture (1 tablet per 10 ml) (Roche, Madison, WI). Lysis was performed using a probe sonicator for 12 seconds on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 5 min and protein concentrations were determined using a BCA assay (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Rochford, IL). Cysteine residues were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 40 min at room temperature, then alkylated using 14 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min in the dark. Aliquots containing 50 ug of protein were diluted to 1.5 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin/protein, then again at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin/protein for 4 hrs. Digested peptides were desalted using 60 mg solid-phase C18 extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and lyophilized. Dried peptides were labelled using 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Rochford, IL) as previously described38. Samples were mixed equally, desalted using solid-phase C18 extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA), and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
TMT10-labeled samples were fractionated using high-pH reversed phase chromatography performed with an Onyx monolithic 100 x 4.6 mm C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). The flow rate was 800 uL/min and a gradient of 5% to 40% acetonitrile (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) was applied over 60 mins using an Agilent 1100 pump (Agilent) from which 12 fractions were collected. Fractions were desalted using homemade stage-tips as previously described39 and lyophilized. Each fraction was analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Rochford, IL) using an SPS-MS3 method as previously described38. Protein identification was performed using a database search against a mouse proteome database (downloaded from UniProtKB September, 2014) concatenated to a mammalian orthoreovirus 3 (Dearing strain) database (downloaded from UniProtKB September, 2014). All FDR filtering and protein quantitation was performed as previously described38.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid cells play a central role in the context of viral eradication, yet precisely how these cells differentiate throughout the course of acute infections is poorly understood. In this study, we have developed a novel quantitative temporal in vivo proteomics (QTiPs) platform to capture proteomic signatures of temporally transitioning virus-driven myeloid cells directly in situ, thus taking into consideration host-virus interactions throughout the course of an infection. QTiPs, in combination with phenotypic, functional, and metabolic analyses, elucidated a pivotal role for inflammatory CD11b<sup>+</sup>, Ly6G<sup>-</sup>, Ly6C<sup>high-low</sup> cells in antiviral immune response and viral clearance. Most importantly, the time-resolved QTiPs data set showed the transition of CD11b<sup>+</sup>, Ly6G<sup>-</sup>, Ly6C<sup>high-low</sup> cells into M2-like macrophages, which displayed increased antigen-presentation capacities and bioenergetic demands late in infection. We elucidated the pivotal role of myeloid cells in virus clearance and show how these cells phenotypically, functionally, and metabolically undergo a timely transition from inflammatory to M2-like macrophages in vivo. With respect to the growing appreciation for in vivo examination of viral-host interactions and for the role of myeloid cells, this study elucidates the use of quantitative proteomics to reveal the role and response of distinct immune cell populations throughout the course of virus infection.

### Keywords
Infection, Myeloid cells, M2-like macrophages, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Departments of Pathology and Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Departments of Pathology and Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.


