### Accession
PXD006448

### Title
Inhibition of DOT1L increases osteoclast fusion and resorption and aggravates bone loss

### Description
Osteoclasts are absorptive cells and play a critical role in homeostatic bone remodeling and pathological bone resorption. Emerging evidence suggests an important role for epigenetic regulation of osteoclastogenesis. In this study, we investigated the role of DOT1L, which regulates gene expression epigenetically by histone H3K79 methylation during osteoclast formation. DOT1L and H3K79me2 levels were upregulated during osteoclast differentiation. Small molecule inhibitor- (EPZ5676 or EPZ004777) or short hairpin RNA-mediated reduction in DOT1L expression promoted osteoclast differentiation and resorption. DOT1L inhibition also increased osteoclast area and accelerated bone mass reduction in a mouse ovariectomy (OVX) model of osteoporosis. DOT1L inhibitors did not alter osteoblast differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Proteomics data, together with bioinformatics analysis, revealed that DOT1L inhibition altered reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, autophagy activation, and cell fusion-related protein expression. ROS generation increased, and autophagy activation and cell migration ability enhancement were verified subsequently by flow cytometry and transwell migration assays. DOT1L inhibition increased NFATc1 nuclear translocation and NF-κB activation and strengthend osteoclast fusion and expression of resorption-related protein CD9, and MMP9 in osteoclasts derived from RAW264.7. Our findings support a new mechanism of DOT1L-mediated H3K79me2 epigenetic regulation of osteoclast differentiation, implicating DOT1L as a new therapeutic target for osteoclast dysregulation-induced disease.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-based quantitative proteomics Proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea. Protein concentration was measured using Nano Drop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Equal amounts of proteins from each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide IAA before dilution in 1 M urea. Proteins were digested in the presence of Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, WI, USA) for 12 h. Digested proteins were labeled using the TMT Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The corresponding TMT molecules for the different samples are shown in Figure 3a. After labeling, samples were pooled and dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Peptide fractionation Pooled TMT-labeled peptides of four samples in the 40-h DOT1L inhibitor treated cells were separated with Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Flow through from 15 acetonitrile (ACN) gradients (5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 32.5%, 35%, 40%, 50%, and 100%) was collected, dried, and resolved in 0.1% TFA for Mass spectrometry analysis. Pooled TMT-labeled peptides of six samples in 60-h DOT1L inhibitor treated cells were fractionated into 20 fractions with Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (Waters, MA, USA) on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 UPLC workstation (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Fractions were dried, and resolved in 0.1% TFA for Mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed as described previously [12, 13] with slight modifications. The peptide mixture was separated with the EASY-nLC 1000 system equipped with a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA, USA) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA). Peptides eluted using a 120-min gradient at a flow rate 0.300 μL/min were ionized by online electrospray ionization in Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) in positive-ion mode. The MS data were collected using Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) from a single full-scan mass spectrum in Orbitrap (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by a 3 s data-dependent MS/MS scan in an Ion Routing Multipole at 38% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Mass spectra data were extracted from raw data and searched against the SwissProt reviewed mouse protein database (released on 20161208, 16839 protein items). Precursor Mass Tolerance and Fragment Mass Tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Total Intensity Threshold and Minimum Peak Count were set at 20,000 and 200, respectively. Carbamidomethylation (on C) and TMT 6plex (on K and peptide N terminal) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (on M), phosphate (on S, T, Y) and deamination (on N) were set as dynamic modifications. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide was statistically significant (with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%). Default values were used for all other parameters. TMT 6plex was chosen as the quantification method. Proteins were quantified based on the unique peptide ratio. Search results were read using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with high peptide confidence filters. Proteins were filtered with scores >10 and unique peptide ratios >2. The differential expression threshold was defined >1.2-fold change or <0.85-fold change.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoclasts are absorptive cells that play a critical role in homeostatic bone remodeling and pathological bone resorption. Emerging evidence suggests an important role of epigenetic regulation in osteoclastogenesis. In this study, we investigated the role of DOT1L, which regulates gene expression epigenetically by histone H3K79 methylation (H3K79me), during osteoclast formation. Using RANKL-induced RAW264.7 macrophage cells as an osteoclast differentiation model, we found that DOT1L and H3K79me2 levels were upregulated during osteoclast differentiation. Small molecule inhibitor- (EPZ5676 or EPZ004777) or short hairpin RNA-mediated reduction in DOT1L expression promoted osteoclast differentiation and resorption. In addition, DOT1L inhibition increased osteoclast surface area and accelerated bone-mass reduction in a mouse ovariectomy (OVX) model of osteoporosis without alter osteoblast differentiation. DOT1L inhibition increase reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and autophagy activity, and cell migration in pre-osteoclasts. Moreover, it strengthened expression of osteoclast fusion and resorption-related protein CD9 and MMP9 in osteoclasts derived from RAW264.7. Our findings support a new mechanism of DOT1L-regulated, H3K79me2-mediated, epigenetic regulation of osteoclast differentiation, implicating DOT1L as a new therapeutic target for osteoclast dysregulation-induced disease.

### Keywords
Osteoporosis, Dot1l, Proteomics, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr wei.ge  
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China


