### Accession
PXD037654

### Title
Proteomics of cervical mucus in natural and stimulated cycle

### Description
Cervical mucus is a viscous fluid functioning as a uterine cervix plug. It is formed and produced by cervical glands located in the cervix. During ovulation, cervical mucus starts to become less viscous, which is a good window for non-invasive sampling. Our study focuses on the proteomic characterization of cervical mucus, which may thus act as a non-invasively acquired source of biomarkers for diseases and physiological conditions of the female genital tract. Our study aimed at two aims - the first is to optimize a proteomic workflow of cervical mucus processing. The second aim is to assess differences in the proteomic composition of cervical mucus in natural ovulatory cycles and IVF cycles with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. The sampling was done in cooperation with women undergoing intrauterine insemination in a natural ovulatory cycle and women undergoing controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for IVF. The optimization of proteomic workflow including an analysis on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer was performed. The results revealed the protein composition and the differences of the cervical mucus between natural and stimulated uterus.

### Sample Protocol
Cervical mucus was obtained during stimulated IVF-ICSI-ET cycle via flexible catether. The mucus was dissolved using 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, 4% SDS, pH 7.6 buffer and sonicated. The protein content was analyzed using Thermo Pierce 660 nm assay. The aliquot of 100 ug of proteins was processed by MED-FASP protocol. Peptice concetration was determined by BCA assay. The purification was done by STAGE tips. The LC-MS was performed using injection of 1 ug of peptides to liquid chromatograph Dionex UltiMate 3000 following mass analysis on Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument equipped with Proxeon Easy-Spray. HPLC separation consists of desalting on Acclaim PrepMap 100 column (100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 A) pre-column and analytical separation on PepMap RSLC (75 μm x 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 A). Sample loading and desalting was performed using HPLC’s loading pump at flow 6 µl. min-1 and 1% acetonitrile with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Ten minutes after loading, the column valve was switched and separation was performed using nanopump at flow 300 nl.min-1 until 125th minute with gradient raising from 2% to 40% of mobile phase B. Mobile phases used for separation was 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). After minute 95, the column was cleaned for 10 minutes with 95% B and equilibrated with 2% B until minute 125, when the run ended. The Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 was set up to the TopSpeed method with MS acquisition in orbitrap with resolution 120 000 and mass range 350 – 1500. The fragmentation was performed in a orbitrap using HCD fragmentation and 3s time frame for fragmentation between MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing, including peak list generation and protein search, was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.5. The peak list was recalibrated using Spectrum files re-calibration Uniprot human database downloaded 11. 3. 2019 with Trypsin (full) digestion and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as a static modification. The peak list generation was done using Spectrum Selector feature with MS1 precursor selection with threshold 350 – 5000 Da and ITMS as a mass analyzer. The main search was done using SequestHT as a searching engine searching through UniProt human database downloaded 11. 3. 2019. There were allowed maximally 2 missed cleavages, minimal length of the peptide was set to 6 amino acids and maximal to 144 amino acids. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.3 Da. The oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-terminus and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were selected as dynamic modifications. The validity of the search was checked by the Percolator. The chromatographic properties were extracted using Minora Feature detection. The consensus workflow started with the extraction of identified or quantified peptides from Msf Files. The Feature Mapper was used for retention time alignment with a maximum window shift of 10 minutes and a minimal signal to noise ratio of 5. Precursor Ion Quantifier was used to calculate label-free quantification from unique peptides, considering protein groups and using shared quantification results. Precursor quantification was based on ion intensity. Protein abundance was calculated based on the Top 3 Average method. The consensus workflow extracted Msf Files results in the second branch as well. This branch was focused on peptide and protein validation. The first node was PSM Grouper with Site Probability Threshold 95. The succeeding Peptide Validator used Automatic Validation Mode with a Strict Target FDR 0.01 and a Relaxed Target FDR 0.05 for both PSMs and peptides. The validated peptides were processed using Peptide and Protein Filter with Peptide Confidence At Least High, and minimum peptide length 6 amino acids. Keep Lower confidence PSMs and Remove Peptides without Protein Reference were set to False. Protein Filters were set to the minimum number of 2 peptide sequences, counting only rank 1 peptides. The following node was Protein Scorer, branching to Protein FDR validator set for Strict FDR 0.01 and relaxed FDR 0.05, and Protein Grouping using Apply strict parsimony function.

### Publication Abstract
Cervical mucus (CM) is a viscous fluid that is produced by the cervical glands and functions as a uterine cervix plug. Its viscosity decreases during ovulation, providing a window for non-invasive sampling. This study focuses on proteomic characterization of CM to evaluate its potential as a non-invasively acquired source of biomarkers and in understanding of molecular (patho)physiology of the female genital tract. The first objective of this work was to optimize experimental workflow for CM processing and the second was to assess differences in the proteomic composition of CM during natural ovulatory cycles obtained from intrauterine insemination (IUI) cycles and in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycles with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. Proteomic analysis of CM samples revealed 4370 proteins involved in processes including neutrophil degranulation, cellular stress responses, and hemostasis. Differential expression analysis revealed 199 proteins enriched in IUI samples and 422 enriched in IVF. The proteins enriched in IUI were involved in phosphatidic acid synthesis, responses to external stimulus, and neutrophil degranulation, while those enriched in IVF samples were linked to neutrophil degranulation, formation of a cornified envelope and hemostasis. Subsequent analyses clarified the protein composition of the CM and how it is altered by hormonal stimulation of the uterus.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Endometrioisis, Fluid, Proteomics, Mucus, Receptivity, Cervix, Endometrium, Cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine
Faculty of medicine, Palacky University
Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University in Olomouc Hněvotínská 5, Olomouc, 775 15 Cyech Republic

### Submitter
Tomáš Oždian

### Lab Head
Dr Marián Hajdúch
Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University in Olomouc Hněvotínská 5, Olomouc, 775 15 Cyech Republic


