### Accession
PXD026694

### Title
Serum and bile proteomics reveal candidates for new noninvasive serum markers of primary sclerosing cholangitis and of risk of disease progression and biliary neoplasia (BILE)

### Description
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic liver disease characterized by biliary strictures, cholestasis, and an increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma (CCA). Here, we have used label-free quantitative proteomics to analyze serum and bile samples from non-PSC controls and PSC patients, as well as from PSC patients divided into groups according to endoscopic retrograde cholangiography score (with a score of >4 indicating advanced disease) and presence or absence of biliary dysplasia/CCA. Further analyses subsequently identified multiple candidates of new noninvasive serum markers for the diagnosis of PSC, as well as new markers for the prediction of the risk of disease progression and biliary neoplasia for patients already diagnosed with PSC.

### Sample Protocol
Bile was collected from the patients, digested and run with RP-UPLC-UDMSE method.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed and analysied with Progenesis. We have two sets of data from the same pattients uploaded to Pride. Another set is from bile and another is from serum.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Bile. psc. mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland


