### Accession
PXD035122

### Title
Proteomic analysis of reticulocytes treated with the PIEZO-1 activator YODA

### Description
We performed a label free proteomic analysis on reticulocytes produced in vitro from CD34+ of healthy donors cells either exposed to DMSO as a control or to the PIEZO1 activator YODA1 at 1µM.

### Sample Protocol
For in vitro-produced reticulocytes, hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) were isolated from mobilized peripherical blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by magnetic sorting (AutoMACS Separator, Miltenyi Biotec). Cells were cultured as previously described (Caulier et al, Haematologica, 2020) and GPA+/Draq5- reticulocytes were sorted at day 24 on FACSAriaII.  Cells were lyzed in lysis buffer (Tris HCl 200 mM, pH8.5, 2% SDS) and boiled 5 minutes at 95°C. Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA kit, Pierce). After reduction and alkylation in 20 mM TCEP [(tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine] and 50 mM Chloroacetamide, 50 µg of proteins were digested using FASP method. Eluted peptides were then fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips in 5 fractions as previously described (Kulak NA et al., Nat Methods, 2014) and vacuum-dried while centrifuge in a Speed Vac (Eppendorf). Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC system coupled to an Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides from each SCX fraction were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid containing 10% acetonitrile and separated on a C18 column (2-mm particle size, 75-mm inner diameter, 25-cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and ending with 55% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid). MS data acquisition was performed throughout the elution process in a data-dependent scheme (top speed mode in 3 seconds) with full MS scans acquired with the orbitrap detector, followed by HCD peptide fragmentation and Ion trap fragment detection of the most abundant ions detected in the MS scan. Mass spectrometer settings for full scan MS were: 1.0E6 AGC, 60,000 target resolution, 350-1500 m/z range, maximum ion injection time (MIIT) of 60 ms. HCD MS/MS fragmentation was permitted for 2-7+ precursor ions reaching more than 5.0E3 minimum intensity. Quadrupole-filtered precursors within 1.6 m/z isolation window were fragmented with a Normalised Collision Energy setting at 30. 1.0E5 AGC Target and 60 ms MIIT were the limiting ions accumulation values. A 30 seconds dynamic exclusion time was set.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 2.0.3.0 (Cox et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2009). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (release 2021-07) and the list of contaminant sequences adapted from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constante modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ ratio. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 30 min.

### Publication Abstract
Hereditary xerocytosis is a dominant red cell membrane disorder characterized by an increased leak of potassium from the inside to outside the red blood cell membrane, associated with loss of water leading to red cell dehydration and chronic hemolysis. 90% of cases are related to heterozygous gain of function mutations in PIEZO1, encoding a mechanotransductor that translates a mechanical stimulus into a biological signaling. Data are still required to understand better PIEZO1-HX pathophysiology. Recent studies identified proteomics as an accurate and high-input tool to study erythroid progenitors and circulating red cell physiology. Here, we isolated red blood cells from 5 controls and 5 HX patients carrying an identified and pathogenic PIEZO1 mutation and performed a comparative deep proteomic analysis. A total of 603 proteins were identified among which 56 were differentially expressed (40 over expressed and 16 under expressed) between controls and HX with a homogenous expression profile within each group. We observed relevant modifications in the protein expression profile related to PIEZO1 mutations, identifying two main "knots". The first contained both proteins of the chaperonin containing TCP1 complex involved in the assembly of unfolded proteins, and proteins involved in translation. The second contained proteins involved in ubiquitination. Deregulation of proteins involved in protein biosynthesis was also observed in <i>in vitro</i>-produced reticulocytes after Yoda1 exposure. Thus, our work identifies significant changes in the protein content of PIEZO1-HX erythrocytes, revealing a "PIEZO1 signature" and identifying potentially targetable pathways in this disease characterized by a heterogeneous clinical expression and contra-indication of splenectomy.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Reticulocytes, Mechanotransduction, Piezo1, Xerocytosis

### Affiliations
UR4666 HEMATIM, Université Picardie Jules Verne
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Garçon
UR4666 HEMATIM, Université Picardie Jules Verne


