### Accession
PXD014058

### Title
The exploration of Missing Proteins by a combination approach to enrich the low abundance membrane proteins from several cancer cell lines

### Description
Our goal is the identification of more and more the missing proteins from cancer cell lines. This project focuses on the membrance proteins separated by the ultracentrifuge and the low abundant peptides enriched by the Proteominer Kit and the hydrophobic peptides extracted by the organic solvent Acetonitrile.

### Sample Protocol
1.The cell samples ultracentrifuge by 100,000g ,1 hour X 3 times. 2.Proteominer. 3.The organic solvent acetonitrile extracts the hydrophobic peptides after the digestion. 4.The peptides were fractionated by micro-HPLC and analyzed by LUMOS instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: The MS data was loaded to Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software with the processing workflow parameters as below: full trypsin and semi trypsin mode; maximum cleavage site 2; MS1 tolerance 20 ppm; MS2 tolerance 0.05 Da; database Swiss-Prot human;fixed modification carbamidomethy (C); variable modification oxidation (M) and diamidation (NQ).The PSM result was filtered by Percolator and 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The mission of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) to discover missing proteins (MPs) has become increasingly difficult due to the remaining low-abundance, high-hydrophobicity, or low-molecular-weight MPs. We have reported two approaches to resolve these identification problems for the low-abundance and high-hydrophobicity MPs, respectively. In this study, to improve the identification of low-abundance MPs with high hydrophobicity, we combined two approaches and obtained MPs from several different cancer cell lines. Their membrane fractions were isolated by ultracentrifugation, and the low-abundance proteins were enriched at the protein level with the ProteoMiner kit. After that, the peptides from the enriched proteins were separated by high concentrations of organic solvents according to their hydrophobicity as the first dimension of separation at the peptide level, and the second and third dimensions of separation involved a high pH reversed-phase and an acid reversed-phase column, respectively. In total, 16 MPs (at least two non-nested unique peptides with &#x2265;9 amino acids) with 61 unique peptides were identified from four human cancer cell lines, including 2, 8, 2, and 7 MPs from HeLa, HCT116, SNU-1, and HepG2 cells, respectively. Furthermore, all MPs were verified with two non-nested unique peptides through parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) by matching the peptides with their chemically synthesized peptides. Interestingly, two additional MPs were verified from the same cell line by PRM assay, although the two non-nested unique peptides with &#x2265;9 amino acids for each MP were identified from different MS injections or cell lines by data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Thus, a total of 18 MPs were dug out in this study. The data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD014058) and PeptideAtlas (PASS01388).

### Keywords
Proteomics, Missing protein, Lc-ms/ms, Cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
+86 18594239452
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
yuanliang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen


