### Accession
PXD020856

### Title
Harnessing Ionic Selectivity In Acetyltransferase Chemoproteomic Probes

### Description
Chemical proteomics (chemoproteomics) has emerged as a powerful strategy for the high-throughput annotation of protein function. This approach involves using an active site probe to capture an enzyme class of interest from cells, allowing the biological activity of multiple enzymes within that family to be assessed in parallel. Coenzyme A based chemoproteomic probes may have utility in studying the pharmacological interactions of additional enzyme classes, beyond histone acetyltransferases. However, one challenge in applying this approach is how to differentiate a ‘true hit’ from background. Many histone acetyltransferases utilize an ordered binding mechanism, with acetyl-CoA binding first, which allows their chemoproteomic capture to be competed by pre-incubating lysates with acetyl-CoA. However, for acetyltransferases that don’t exhibit this binding mode, or which bind to a different ligand, acetyl-CoA competition may not be evident, limiting our ability to discern selective chemoproteomic enrichment from noise. In this study, two physiochemically distinct capture probes were used to enrich proteins to distinguish true hits from background and identify new targets selectively enriched by CoA-based probes, thus expanding the scope of protein-ligand interactions open to chemoproteomic interrogation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins captured by one of two active site probes, without competition or competed with 0.1 M acetyl-CoA were washed on bead and digested with trypsin overnight. Peptides were lyophilized and stored at -20C until MS analysis.  Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and were purified using solid phase extraction (SepPak C18, 1cc, Waters).  Eluted peptides were dried and resuspended in 80uL of 100mM TEAB prior to labeling with TMT reagents using manufacturer protocol.  Labeled peptides were mixed in equal volumes. Peptides were eluted over 3 hours using an in-house packed column (75um id, 15cm, 1.9um resin) on the Ulitmate 3000 nano-UPLC controlled by the Dionex software.  The column was directly interfaced with the QE+ mass spectrometer. Peptides were collected in the MS1 at a resolving power of 70,000 and the top 15 peptides were selected for MS2 fragmentation by higher collision induced dissociation at 35% NCE with a resolving power of 35,000. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30s to extend the proteome coverage.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were directly uploaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Spectra were searched with SEQUEST against the human protein database (downloaded from NCBI 11-03-2019) and a database containing 426 common contaminants. Peptides were searched including static N-terminal TMT modification (+229.1629 Da) and variable modifications of methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da), lysine TMT (229.1629 Da), and lysine acetylation (42.0105 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were normalized to the most intense channel and TMT intensities were used for quantitation.  Data from Proteome Discoverer 2.4 were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Affinity capture, Tmt, Acetyltransferase

### Affiliations
Stowers Institute for Medical Research

### Submitter
Michaella Levy

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
Stowers Institute for Medical Research


