### Accession
PXD000627

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Pichia pastoris GS115

### Description
Pichia pastoris GS115 was cultured in YPD medium and protein were extracted and separated on SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion. Protein were also digested in-solution using trypsin and fractionated using SCX and bRPLC. A total of 101 peptide fractions were analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. The raw data was searched using Mascot, Sequest and MS Amanda search algorithms against P. pastorisGS115 NCBI RefSeq database through Proteome Discoverer software suite.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Pichia pastoris is a widely used eukaryotic host for production of recombinant proteins. We performed a proteogenomic analysis using high resolution Fourier transform MS to characterize the proteome of the GS115 strain. Our analysis resulted in identification of 46,889 unique peptides mapping to 3914 unique protein groups, which corresponds to &#x223c; 80% of the predicted genes. In addition, our proteogenomic analysis led to the discovery of 64 novel genes and correction of 11 predicted gene models. The strategy used here demonstrates the utility of high resolution MS-derived peptide sequence data to cover near complete proteomes of organisms. Given the popularity of P. pastoris as a protein expression host, this proteome map should provide a list of contaminants derived from the host to assist in optimization of heterologous protein production. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000627 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000627).

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Pichia

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head


