### Accession
PXD027221

### Title
Treatment of human K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cells with NK3.3-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Our study investigates the features and anti-tumor function of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from our well described NK cell line - NK3.3 - the only published clonal, normal human cell line to date.  Natural killer (NK) cells, critical for proper immune function, destroy tumor cells primarily through the release of granules containing potent cytolytic molecules.  NK cells also release these molecules within membrane-bound exosomes and microvesicles collectively known as EVs.  We show that NK3.3 EVs contain the cytolytic molecules perforin, granzymes A and B, and granulysin, and an array of common EV proteins.  We previously showed that the E3 ubiquitin ligase identified by our laboratory, natural killer lytic-associated molecule (NKLAM/RNF19b), is localized to NK granules and is essential for maximal NK killing; our current study shows NKLAM situated within the NK3.3 EV membrane. We demonstrate that treatment of an array of hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic tumor cell lines with NK3.3 EVs inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis and cell death while leaving normal cells unaffected.  The anti-tumor effects of NK3.3EVs were evaluated via proteomic analysis of K562 leukemia cells treated with NK3.3-derived EVs compared to treatment with non-cytotoxic HEK293 cell-derived EVs or PBS.  The results of this analysis suggest strong inhibitory regulation of cell cycle- and cell survival-associated proteins.  Taken together, our study suggests that NK3.3 EVs have the potential to be effective immunotherapeutic agents.

### Sample Protocol
NK3.3 cells in culture were stimulated with IL-2 overnight then degranulation was induced using PMA with ionomycin.  HEK293 cells were grown to 80% confluence.  EV precipitates from the culture supernatants were isolated using ExoQuick-TC (System Bioscience) and then resuspended in buffer. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific).  K562 cells were treated with 20µl of PBS alone or PBS containing 100µg of either NK3.3- or HEK293-derived EVs.  For proteomic analysis, the three cell protein samples were digested by trypsin, identified, and quantified using a nanoLC-MS/MS platform.  DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAA), formic acid (FA), acetonitrile (ACN), methanol, were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA), trypsin from bovine pancreas was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA).  Ultrapure water was prepared from a Millipore purification system (Billerica, MA, USA).  An Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system coupled with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with an ESI nanospray source.  An ultrasonic lysis device was used to lyse the cell pellet for protein extraction, and supernatants were collected for subsequent proteomics experiment.  For protein digestion, samples were transferred into Microcon devices YM-10 (Millipore).  The device was centrifuged at 12,000g at 4°C for 10 min.  Subsequently, 200μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate were added to the concentrate followed by centrifugation and repeat once.  After reduced by 10mM DTT at 56°C for 1 h and alkylated by 20mM IAA at room temperature in dark for 1h, the device was centrifuged at 12,000g at 4°C for 10 min and wash once with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Add 100μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and free trypsin into the protein solution at a ratio of 1:50, and then incubate the solution at 37°C overnight.  Finally, the device was centrifuged at 12,000g at 4°C for 10 min.  100μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added into the device and centrifuged, and then repeat once. Lyophilize the extracted peptides to near dryness.  Resuspend peptides in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Nanocolumn- trapping column (PepMap C18, 100Å, 100μm × 2cm, 5μm) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 100Å, 75μm × 50cm, 2μm).  Loaded sample- 1μg.  Mobile phase- A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Total flow rate: 250nL/min.  LC linear gradient- from 2 to 8% buffer B in 3 min, from 8% to 20% buffer B in 56 min, from 20% to 40% buffer B in 37 min, then from 40% to 90% buffer B in 4 min.  For mass spectrometry, the full scan was performed between 300–1,650 m/z at the resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z, the automatic gain control target for the full scan was set to 3e6.  The MS/MS scan was operated in Top 20 mode using the following settings- resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control target 1e5; maximum injection time 19ms; normalized collision energy at 28%; isolation window of 1.4 Th; charge sate exclusion- unassigned, 1, > 6; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The 3 MS raw files were analyzed and searched against human protein database based on the species of the samples using Maxquant (1.6.2.6).  The parameters were set as follows- the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da.  RAW files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
Natural killer (NK) cells are critical mediators of immune function, responsible for rapid destruction of tumor cells. They kill primarily through the release of granules containing potent cytolytic molecules. NK cells also release these molecules within membrane-bound exosomes and microvesicles - collectively known as extracellular vesicles (EV). Here we report the characterization and anti-tumor function of EVs isolated from NK3.3 cells, a well described clonal normal human NK cell line. We show that NK3.3 EVs contain the cytolytic molecules perforin, granzymes A and B, and granulysin, and an array of common EV proteins. We previously reported that the E3 ubiquitin ligase, natural killer lytic-associated molecule (NKLAM), is localized to NK granules and is essential for maximal NK killing; here we show it is present in the membrane of NK3.3 EVs. NK3.3-derived EVs also carry multiple RNA species, including miRNAs associated with anti-tumor activity. We demonstrate that NK3.3 EVs inhibit proliferation and induce caspase-mediated apoptosis and cell death of an array of both hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic tumor cell lines. This effect is tumor cell specific; normal cells are unaffected by EV treatment. By virtue of their derivation from a healthy donor and ability to be expanded to large numbers, NK3.3 EVs have the potential to be an effective, safe, and universal immunotherapeutic agent.

### Keywords
Natural killer cell, Ubiquitin ligase, Exosome, Nklam, Leukemia, Nk3.3, Extracellular vesicles, Rnf19b, Extracellular vesicle, Microvesicle

### Affiliations
Saint Louis University - Department of Pathology
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Saint Louis University, United States, St. Louis VA Medical Center(VHA), United States

### Submitter
Allyson Cochran

### Lab Head
Dr Jacki Kornbluth
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Saint Louis University, United States, St. Louis VA Medical Center(VHA), United States


