### Accession
PXD022872

### Title
GENETIC SUBTYPE- AND CELL TYPE-SPECIFIC PROTEIN SIGNATURES IN FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA

### Description
Frontotemporal dementia is characterized by progressive atrophy of frontal and/or temporal cortices and an early age of onset. The disorder is highly heterogenic, comprising several genetic causes as well as a diverse phenotypic landscape of sporadic cases. Here we investigated the proteomic signatures of human brain frontal and temporal cortical lobes to identify key pathways involved in the three most frequent genetic subtypes of frontotemporal dementia. We included 38 patients with either an autosomal dominant repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene (n = 16), or a mutation in the GRN gene (n = 9) or the MAPT gene (n = 13), and 11 non-demented controls. Using data-independent quantitative proteomic analysis on laser-dissected tissues we identified brain region-specific protein signatures for these genetic frontotemporal dementia subtypes compared to non-demented controls. Using published single cell RNA expression data for cell type enrichment we deduced the involvement of major brain cell types in driving these different protein signatures. Using gene ontology analysis, we identified distinct genetic subtype- and cell type-specific biological processes. In the GRN-mediated  subtype, we observed higher protein expression related to immune processes, with a role for endothelial cells and astrocytes, and lower protein expression implicating mitochondrial dysregulation, primarily in neurons. In the MAPT-mediated subtype, we observed higher protein expression associated with dysregulation of RNA processing in multiple cell types, and lower protein expression implicating altered neuronal functioning via dysregulation of oligodendrocytes. Comparison of the MAPT-mediated frontotemporal dementia signature with one obtained from Alzheimer’s disease brains demonstrated only partial overlap in protein dysregulation, thus separating general neurodegenerative processes and highlighting the frontotemporal dementia-specific involvement of altered RNA processing and oligodendrocyte dysfunction. Taken together, our results indicate a role for different brain cell types and biological mechanisms in frontotemporal dementia, revealing both genetic subtype-specific processes, and processes shared with other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue preparation and LCM Sections (10µm) of fresh frozen tissue were mounted on polyethylene naphthalate-membrane slides (Leica, Herborn, DE), fixed in 100% ethanol for 1 minute and stained using 1% (wt/vol) Toluidine Blue in H2O (Fluka Analytical, Buchs, Switzerland) for 1 minute. Laser micro dissection (LMD) was performed using a Leica AS LMD system. A volume of 1.2 mm3 of grey matter tissue from the frontal and temporal cortical regions was collected in Eppendorf tubes containing 30-µL M-PER lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) supplemented with reducing sodium dodecyl sulphate sample buffer (Thermo Scientific). Microdissected tissue was stored at -80°C until further use.  Protein separation by electrophoresis and in-gel digestion Microdissected tissue lysates were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by incubation with 50-mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were size separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using MOPS sodium dodecyl sulphate running buffer (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Gels were fixed and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 overnight while shaking. After destaining in ultrapure H2O, each gel lane was sliced into four equal-sized parts and each part was cut into blocks of approximately 1 mm3 and collected in a 96-wells plate. Destaining, trypsin digestion, and peptide extraction were done as described previously (Chen et al., 2015).  Micro LC and data-independent SWATH mass spectrometry for experimental samples Peptides were analysed by micro liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) coupled to the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex). Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5 μm particle size, Dionex) and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (300 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size). The acetonitrile concentration in the mobile phase was increased from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the TripleTOF MS with a micro-spray needle voltage of 5,500V. Data-independent acquisition SWATH experiments consisted of a parent ion scan of 150 msec followed by SWATH window of 8 Da with scan time of 80 msec, and stepped through the mass range between 450–770 m/z. The total cycle time was about 3.2 sec, which yielded in general 9–10 measurement points across a typical peptide with an elution time of 30 sec. The collision energy for each window was determined based on the appropriate collision energy for a 2+ ion, centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV.   Micro LC and data-dependent data acquisition mass spectrometry of SCX fractions for library preparation  The conditions used for liquid chromatography in library preparation were the same as those of the SWATH MS-based experiments. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with a single MS full scan (m/z 350-1250, 150 msec) followed by a top 25 MS/MS (m/z 200–1800, 150 msec) at high sensitivity mode in UNIT resolution, precursor ion > 150 counts/s, charge state from +2 to +5, with an exclusion time of 16 sec once the peptide was fragmented. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and a spread energy of 5 eV.

### Data Protocol
SWATH data extraction and analysis  We first performed data-dependent acquisition on tryptic peptides from pooled fractionated protein extracts from a mix of FTD-C9, FTD-GRN, FTD-MAPT, and NDC samples, for frontal and temporal cortical tissue separately, and identified 1,828 protein groups by MaxQuant search (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the human proteome using the UniProt FASTA (release February 2015) and Biognosys iRT FASTA databases. The proteins and their corresponding fragment ions were then converted into a spectral library with Spectronaut, version 11 (Bruderer et al., 2015). Analysis of data-independent acquisition data from the experimental samples was done in Spectrounaut using the default settings. The Q-value threshold for peptides imported from the MaxQuant msms.txt output table was set to 0.01, all other settings were left to default. Across-run normalization based on total peak areas was performed by Spectronaut. Peptide abundances were exported as a Spectronaut report and further processed using the R language for statistical computation, version: 3.4.4 (R Core Team, 2018). For a total overview of the studied samples, peptides were selected using a quality value cut-off condition of ≤10-3 in 50% of samples (this filter was applied per sample fraction). For further pairwise statistical comparison between conditions, peptides in each sample fraction were selected using a quality value cut-off condition of ≤10-3 in 50% of the samples of one condition. Peptide abundances were computed by summation of the peak area of the top two abundant fractions, preceded by peptide normalization using the normalizeCyclicLoess function from the limma R package, which was set to ‘fast’ and iterations were set to 3. Protein abundances were computed by summation of the normalized abundancies of the top five most abundant peptides for a respective protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Frontotemporal dementia; c9orf72; grn; mapt; human brain proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

### Submitter
Suzanne Miedema

### Lab Head
Dr August B. Smit
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


