### Accession
PXD017046

### Title
Identification of NPGPx-interacting proteins in activated T cells

### Description
The tyrosine kinase, ζ-chain-associated protein of 70 kDa (ZAP70), is essential for T cell development and activation. However, it remains elusive whether a direct redox regulation affects ZAP70 activity upon TCR stimulation. Here, we showed that deficiency of non-selenocysteine containing phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (NPGPx), a redox sensor, resulted in T cell hyperproliferation and elevated cytokine productions. Through proteomic approaches, ZAP70 is identified as the key interacting protein of NPGPx through disulfide bonding. Here we utilized the MS/MS spectra to identify the cysteine residues in ZAP70 for NPGPx-mediated regulation. Combined molecular approaches, our results elucidate a delicate redox mechanism that NPGPx serves as a modulator to curb ZAP70 functions in maintaining T cell homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
NPGPx-interacting proteins were immunoprecipitated from the crude whole-cell extract of anti-CD3 (5 μg/ml; OKT3)/anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml; CD28.2) co-stimulated NPGPx-expressed Jurkat T cells using NPGPx-specific monoclonal antibody (7E7-3B2). The immunoprecipitated samples were subjected to non-reducing SDS-PAGE analysis and the protein bands of interest were excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin, following analyzed by Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using Mascot Daemon for database search against Human entries of the SwissProt database (version 2016_04; 550,960 sequences, 196,692,942 residues) and cRAP contaminant database (version 2014_12; 116 sequences, 38,459 residues). Search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance 0.6 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with cleavage prior to proline permitted; variable modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C),Dimethyl (K),GlyGly (K),LeuArgGlyGly (K),Oxidation (M),Phospho (ST),Phospho (Y);  maximal two missed cleavages, maximal two variable posttranslational modifications per peptide. Only peptides with statistically significant peptide score (p < 0.05) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidences implicate the contribution of ROS to T cell activation and signaling. The tyrosine kinase, &#x3b6;-chain-associated protein of 70&#x202f;kDa (ZAP70), is essential for T cell development and activation. However, it remains elusive whether a direct redox regulation affects ZAP70 activity upon TCR stimulation. Here, we show that deficiency of non-selenocysteine containing phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (NPGPx), a redox sensor, results in T cell hyperproliferation and elevated cytokine productions. T cell-specific NPGPx-knockout mice reveal enhanced T-dependent humoral responses and are susceptible to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Through proteomic approaches, ZAP70 is identified as the key interacting protein of NPGPx through disulfide bonding. NPGPx is activated by ROS generated from TCR stimulation, and modulates ZAP70 activity through redox switching to reduce ZAP70 recruitment to TCR/CD3 complex in membrane lipid raft, therefore subduing TCR responses. These results reveal a delicate redox mechanism that NPGPx serves as a modulator to curb ZAP70 functions in maintaining T cell homeostasis.

### Keywords
Zap70, Npgpx, T cell activation

### Affiliations
National Taiwan Ocean University

### Submitter
Pang-Hung Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Pang-Hung Hsu
National Taiwan Ocean University


