### Accession
PXD021362

### Title
Metagenomic, Proteomic and Metabolomic Investigations of Biodesulfurization-Competent Microorganisms

### Description
The increasing global human population has been associated with the development of high-density urban communities. This has led to increase in fossil energy consumption and posed serious threats to the environment and human health. Organosulfur compounds found in crude oil and transportation fuels such as diesel have gained strong attention because they are hazardous to human and the ecosystem. Moreover, the sulfur oxide gases resulting from fuel combustion are a major cause of acid rain. Governments and environmental organizations worldwide have recognized the problem and implemented strict regulations and legislations that limit the amount of sulfur in diesel. Hydrodesulphurization (HDS) is commonly used by oil refineries to reduce sulfur content in refined fuels. However, HDS has many disadvantages. It is costly, environmentally polluting, and not sufficiently efficient. Accordingly, there has been increasing interest in the development of alternative desulfurization technologies to circumvent the problems associated with the conventional HDS. Biodesulfurization (BDS) has emerged as an alternative or a complement technology to overcome the drawbacks of the conventional HDS. BDS exploits the ability of dedicated microorganisms to remove sulfur from many organosulfur compounds that are commonly found in crude oil and refined fuels. As compared to thermochemical treatments like HDS, BDS is environmentally friendly, cost-effective and active towards organosulfur compounds that escape the conventional HDS. Nonetheless, lack of deep understanding of the physiology and metabolism, particularly sulfur metabolism, of biodesulfurizing microbes has impeded the development and implementation of a commercially viable BDS process. In this project, we apply metabolomics and proteomics to better understand the physiological adaptations and sulfur metabolism of in a model biodesulfurization-competent strain Rhodococcus qingshengii IGTS8.

### Sample Protocol
For shotgun proteomics, IGTS8 pellets were resuspended in Laemmli buffer and proteins were precipitated with TCA. After resuspension and protein concentration measurement, proteins were stacked in an acrylamide SDS-PAGE stacking gel. After tryptic digestion and peptides extraction, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS data was interpreted to do label-free extracted ion chromatogram-based differential analysis using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with full trypsin (Trypsin/P) specificity against an in-house sequenced and annotated protein database of the IGTS8 strain (6 734 sequences), member of the genus Rhodococcus. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search. The maximum false discovery rate was 1% at PSM, peptide and protein levels with the use of a target/decoy strategy. Label-free quantification was done on unique peptides (LFQ min. ratio count of 1) with the match between runs option. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 3. All other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Biodesulfurization, Sulfur metabolism, Metabolomic, Shotgun proteomics, Rhodococcus qingshengii igts8

### Affiliations
LSMBO, IPHC
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique (LSMBO), IPHC,UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Aurélie Hirschler

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique (LSMBO), IPHC,UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Strasbourg, France


