### Accession
PXD025055

### Title
Identification of a novel class of cytotoxic granules as origin of supramolecular attack particles in T lymphocytes

### Description
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) kill malignant and infected cells via cytotoxic proteins such as granzyme B (GzmB) that are released into the immunological synapse in the form of ~110 nm supramolecular attack particles (SMAPs). However, it is not known where SMAPs are stored in the cell and how they are released. To address this, we utilized knock-in mice to label fusogenic cytotoxic granules with synaptobrevin2-mRFP. We identified two classes of fusion-competent granules, single core granules (SCG) and multi core granules (MCG), with different diameter, morphology, and protein composition. Functional analyses demonstrate that both classes of granules fuse with the plasma membrane at the IS. SCG fusion resulted in rapid dispersal of GzmB. MCG labelled with the SMAP marker thrombospondin-1 and their fusion events resulted in deposition of SMAPs. The CTL attack strategy thus includes SCG fusion to disperse immediately active cytotoxic proteins and parallel MCG fusion to deposit concentrated latent SMAPs onto the target.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation of immuno-isolated vesicles for mass spectrometry-based proteomics Proteins of immuno-isolated samples were resolved on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gradient gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific), stained with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain (Expedeon) and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Briefly, entire gel lanes were cut into 23 pieces of 1 mm2, proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) overnight. Tryptic peptides were extracted, dried and reconstituted in solution containing 2% [v/v] acetonitrile and 0.05% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were analyzed on Q Exactive™ HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Samples were separated applying the following 48 min gradient: mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid [v/v], mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile/0.08% formic acid [v/v]. The gradient started at 5% B, increasing to 10% B within 3 min, followed by 10-45% of B within 33 min, then keeping mobile phase B constant at 90% for 6 min. After each gradient, the column was again equilibrated to 5% B for 6 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in positive mode using a data-dependent top 30-acquisition methods. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap covering a mass range of 350-1600 m/z. Injection time was set to 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) target to 1 x 106. Dynamic exclusion covered 25 s. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, all unassigned charge states were rejected and only precursors with a charge state of 2-7 were included. MS2 spectra were recorded with a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap, injection time was set to 60 ms, AGC target to 1 x 105 and the isolation window to 1.6 m/z. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30%.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis and visualization Raw files were processed by MaxQuant (MQ) software (version 1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016a) and its built-in Andromeda peptide search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with the following settings to identify proteins: trypsin/P was used as digestion enzyme with maximal two missed cleavage sites; tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were searched against a customized version of the April 2016 release of the UniProt complete Mus musculus proteome sequence database, in which the sequence of synaptobrevin-2 (VAMP-2) was completely replaced with sequence of C-terminally mRFP-tagged VAMP2 protein; carbamidomethylated cysteines were set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification (maximal allowed number of modifications per peptide was set to five); maximum false discovery rate was set to 0.01 both on peptide and protein levels. Further parameters were used as set by the default settings. MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (MaxLFQ) was applied to calculate a data matrix of LFQ intensities that allowed the relative comparison of protein amounts across samples (Cox et al., 2014). The default settings (MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1) for LFQ intensity calculations were applied, LFQ minimum ratio count of two for each pairwise comparison step was required, as well as unique and razor peptides were considered for the quantification. To interpret the protein quantitation and co-enrichment data, analysis was performed by using the software platform Perseus (version 1.6.2.2) (Tyanova et al., 2016b). ProteinGroups.txt file and the corresponding intensity matrices (LFQ intensities) were loaded and the results cleaned for reverse hits, contaminants and identified only by site. Positive intensity values were logarithmized (log2). Using the “categorical annotation rows” option, biological and technical replicates for the corresponding sample pairs (affinity purified gradient fraction 6 and 8 from stimulated and naïve (control) CTL) were set equal, (three and five biological replicates for fractions 8 and 6, respectively, each measured as technical duplicates). Only proteins identified in at least 50 per cent of all replicates (valid value filter set to 50% in at least one group) were taken under consideration for the significance analysis. Signals, that were originally zero prior to logarithmization, were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution (total matrix mode), whose mean and standard deviation were chosen to simulate low abundance values (width = 0.3; shift = 1.8). Significantly co-enriched proteins and interactors were determined by a volcano plot-based approach combining two sample t test-derived p values with (fraction # vs control) ratio information. Significance lines in the volcano plot corresponding to a given FDR were determined by a permutation-based method (Tusher et al., 2001). Threshold (=FDR) and SO (=curve bend) values were set equal to 0.05 (5%) and 0.1, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) kill malignant and infected cells through the directed release of cytotoxic proteins into the immunological synapse (IS). The cytotoxic protein granzyme B (GzmB) is released in its soluble form or in supramolecular attack particles (SMAP). We utilize synaptobrevin2-mRFP knock-in mice to isolate fusogenic cytotoxic granules in an unbiased manner and visualize them alone or in degranulating CTLs. We identified two classes of fusion-competent granules, single core granules (SCG) and multi core granules (MCG), with different diameter, morphology and protein composition. Functional analyses demonstrate that both classes of granules fuse with the plasma membrane at the IS. SCG fusion releases soluble GzmB. MCGs can be labelled with the SMAP marker thrombospondin-1 and their fusion releases intact SMAPs. We propose that CTLs use SCG fusion to fill the synaptic cleft with active cytotoxic proteins instantly and parallel MCG fusion to deliver latent SMAPs for delayed killing of refractory targets.

### Keywords
Correlative light and electron microscopy, Immunological synapse, Cytotoxic granules, Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, Multi core granules, Proteomics, Single core granules, Exocytosis, Supramolecular attack particles, Snare proteins

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry (Göttingen) and University Medical Center, Bioanalytics - Institute for Clinical Chemistry (Göttingen)

### Submitter
Momchil Ninov

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany


