### Accession
PXD007182

### Title
Tankyrase modulates insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle cells by regulating stability of GLUT4 vesicle proteins

### Description
Tankyrase1 and 2, members of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase family, play a role in multiple biological processes including Wnt signalling and glucose uptake. However, their role in glucose uptake remains elusive, particularly in skeletal muscle cells. Treatment of differentiated L6 myotubes with the small molecule tankyrase inhibitor XAV939 resulted in insulin resistance as determined by impaired insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. Proteomic analysis identified 109 proteins that were down-regulated and 109 proteins that were up-regulated in response to XAV939. Among the down-regulated proteins there were several glucose transporter GLUT4 storage vesicle (GSV) proteins including RAB10, VAMP8, SORT1 as well as GLUT4 itself. Knock down of tankyrase1 in L6 myotubes also led to a reduction in the level of GSV proteins and impaired insulin-mediated glucose uptake. Inhibition of the proteasome rescued protein levels of GSV proteins as well as insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in XAV939-treated L6 myotubes. These studies reveal an important role for tankyrase in maintaining the stability of key GLUT4 regulatory proteins that in turn plays a role in regulating cellular insulin sensitivity.

### Sample Protocol
L6 myotubes were washed with ice-cold PBS and harvested in lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS). After sonication, cell lysates were centrifuged at 15,000x g for 30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was precipitated using pre-chilled acetone overnight. Protein pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB. After reduction with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 60 min and alkylation with 25 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min in the dark, the protein mixture was digested using LysC (enzyme:substrate 1:100) at 30ºC for 2 h. The protein solution was then diluted 1:5 using 25 mM TEAB and further digested with trypsin (enzyme:substrate 1:50) at 37ºC overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted using stage-tips and dried by vacuum centrifugation for total proteome analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.24) (25) against a Uniprot rat database (May/2016, 37,402 entries) with default settings and minor changes: Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The ‘Rre-quantify’, ‘second peptides searching’ and ‘match between runs’ were enabled. Both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein FDR were set to 1%. “Label-free Quantification Method” (LFQ) (22) was used for protein quantification and normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Tankyrase 1 and 2, members of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase family, have previously been shown to play a role in insulin-mediated glucose uptake in adipocytes. However, their precise mechanism of action, and their role in insulin action in other cell types, such as myocytes, remains elusive. Treatment of differentiated L6 myotubes with the small molecule tankyrase inhibitor XAV939 resulted in insulin resistance as determined by impaired insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. Proteomic analysis of XAV939-treated myotubes identified down-regulation of several glucose transporter GLUT4 storage vesicle (GSV) proteins including RAB10, VAMP8, SORT1, and GLUT4. A similar effect was observed following knockdown of tankyrase 1 in L6 myotubes. Inhibition of the proteasome using MG132 rescued GSV protein levels as well as insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in XAV939-treated L6 myotubes. These studies reveal an important role for tankyrase in maintaining the stability of key GLUT4 regulatory proteins that in turn plays a role in regulating cellular insulin sensitivity.

### Keywords
Tankyrase, Gsv, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Leonard P Ullmann Chair in Metabolic Systems Biology, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School D17 - Charles Perkins Centre | The University of Sydney | NSW | 2006

### Submitter
Zhiduan Su

### Lab Head
Dr David James
Leonard P Ullmann Chair in Metabolic Systems Biology, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School D17 - Charles Perkins Centre | The University of Sydney | NSW | 2006


