### Accession
PXD020276

### Title
Mild hyperlipidemia in mice aggravates platelet responsiveness in thrombus formation: exploration of platelet proteome and lipidome.

### Description
Hyperlipidemia is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. Trillions of people worldwide display mildly elevated levels of plasma lipids and cholesterol due to diet and life-style. The relationship between severe hyperlipidemia and thrombosis has been extensively investigated, but the effects of the preliminary stages of hyperlipidemia on platelet function are unclear. Therefore, we investigated how moderate elevation of different plasma lipid profiles influence platelet activation and thrombus formation, as compared to higher plasma lipid concentrations. Hyperlipidemic Apoe-/- and Ldlr-/- and wild-type mice were fed a normal chow diet, resulting in mildly increased plasma cholesterol. Blood from both knockout mice was used in comparison to wild-type mice, for multiparameter ex vivo measurements of thrombus formation under flow. Whole blood (fibrin-)thrombus formation on collagen in the absence or presence of coagulation (with(out) tissue factor), indicated enhancement of the thrombotic process in both knockout mice. These effects were not further aggravated in aged mice, as well as in Apoe-/- mice on high fat diet with very high plasma cholesterol levels. Bone marrow chimeras of wild-type or Ldlr-/- platelets into irradiated Ldlr-/- recipient mice showed similar thrombus formation patterns. This suggested that hyperlipidemia itself, not the platelet LDL receptor deficiency is responsible for the altered platelet activation status in Ldlr-/- mice. Exploration of the platelet proteome revealed high similarity between the three genotypes, although some proteins showed significantly changed expression in Apoe-/- mice. Finally, platelet lipidomic analysis showed an increased lipid profile in mildly hyperlipidemic mice, which may further contribute to the observed prothrombotic phenotype

### Sample Protocol
A label-free quantification analysis was performed with mouse platelet samples. In short, the protein concentration of well-purified platelet samples (277-1390 x109/L) in 1% SDS lysis buffer was estimated using the Bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After equalizing protein concentration, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with iodoacetamide. Subsequently, 20 µg of protein sample were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), with a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin filter. Thus, digestion was conducted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 200 mM guanidinium hydrochloride and 2 mM CaCl2, pH 7.8 in the presence of trypsin (1:20 w/w, sequencing grade trypsin Promega, Madison WI, USA) for 14 h at 37 °C. For label free analysis 2 µg of peptide, were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS in DDA mode using a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For label free quantification the Progenesis LC-MS software version 4.1 from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used. Consequently, MS raw data were aligned in automatic mode. Exported peak lists were searched using SearchGUI 3.3.3, Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science), X! TANDEM Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) and MS-GF+ Release (v2018.04.09), with a concatenated target/decoy version of the mouse Uniprot database (July 2015, containing 16,716 sequences). Data analysis was done using PeptideShaker 1.16.23 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/), in order to maximize number of identified peptides and proteins. The following search parameters were used: trypsin as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys (57.021464) as fixed and as variable modification oxidation of Met (15.994915), acetylation of protein N-term and acetylation of K (42.010565). MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. In PeptideShaker, search results were combined and filtered at a FDR of 1% (high confidence filter) on the protein level prior to export and re-import into Progenesis. Peptide sequences containing pyro-Glu (derived from X!Tandem 2nd pass search), oxidized methionine and acetylation of lysine and protein N-terminal were omitted from further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperlipidemia is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. Millions of people worldwide display mildly elevated levels of plasma lipids and cholesterol linked to diet and life-style. While the prothrombotic risk of severe hyperlipidemia has been established, the effects of moderate hyperlipidemia are less clear. Here, we studied platelet activation and arterial thrombus formation in Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> and Ldlr<sup>-/-</sup> mice fed a normal chow diet, resulting in mildly increased plasma cholesterol. In blood from both knockout mice, collagen-dependent thrombus and fibrin formation under flow were enhanced. These effects did not increase in severe hyperlipidemic blood from aged mice and upon feeding a high-fat diet (Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> mice). Bone marrow from wild-type or Ldlr<sup>-/-</sup> mice was transplanted into irradiated Ldlr<sup>-/-</sup> recipients. Markedly, thrombus formation was enhanced in blood from chimeric mice, suggesting that the hyperlipidemic environment altered the wild-type platelets, rather than the genetic modification. The platelet proteome revealed high similarity between the three genotypes, without clear indication for a common protein-based gain-of-function. The platelet lipidome revealed an altered lipid profile in mildly hyperlipidemic mice. In conclusion, in Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> and Ldlr<sup>-/-</sup> mice, modest elevation in plasma and platelet cholesterol increased platelet responsiveness in thrombus formation and ensuing fibrin formation, resulting in a prothrombotic phenotype.

### Keywords
Thrombus formation, Mouse platelets, Platelet activation, Hyperlipidemia, Proteomics, Coagulation

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


