### Accession
PXD030020

### Title
Subcellular fractionation of boar spermatozoa provides a novel view of the perinuclear theca proteome

### Description
The perinuclear theca (PT) is a highly condensed, largely insoluble protein structure that surrounds the nucleus of eutherian spermatozoa. While this structure is known to be important for fertilization, little is known regarding its proteomic composition. Recent reports have indicated that the PT unexpectedly houses several somatic proteins, such as core histones, which may be important post-fertilization during re-modelling of the male pronucleus. To explore the proteomic composition of the PT we performed the first in depth, label-free proteomic characterization of the PT of boar spermatozoa. To do this, a unique subcellular fractionation protocol was first performed to isolate the PT and increase our ability to detect lowly abundant sperm proteins. Through the use of this subcellular fractionation technique we were able to quantify 1802 proteins, a result that represents unparalleled depth of coverage for the boar sperm proteome and exceeds the entire known proteome of the Sus scrofa species so far. In the PT structure itself we identified 813 proteins and confirmed the presence of previously characterized PT proteins including the core histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4, as well as Ras-related protein Rab-2A (RAB2A) and Rab-2B (RAB2B) amongst other RAB proteins. In addition to these previously characterized PT proteins, our data also revealed that the PT is replete in proteins critical for sperm-egg fusion including: Izumo sperm-egg fusion proteins 1-4 (IZUMO1-4) and phosphoinositide phospholipase C (PLCZ1).

### Sample Protocol
To separate the sperm heads and tails, Percoll washed sperm cells (1x108) were resuspended in 1.5 mL PBS with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and sonicated on ice at nine microns using an MSE Ltd Soniprep 150 sonicator (East Sussex, UK) at 15-s bursts with 45-s interval for 3 cycles until >99% of all sperm heads were detached from tails. Sonicated sperm cells were loaded on a 62% (w/v) sucrose gradient to isolate the sperm heads and tails as previously described (14). Isolation of perinuclear theca (PT) proteins was performed via methods originally described by Oko and Maravei,1994 (19) and described in full in Zhang et al., 2021(14) (for schematic see Figure 1). Briefly, purified sperm heads underwent continuous extraction steps in 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100 and 1M KCl for 1 h at RT with agitation. Following this incubation, the resulting pellets were washed twice before the next extraction and/or fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for immunodetection. The PT proteins were obtained by incubating the resulting pellets in 0.1 M NaOH overnight at 4 °C with agitation. The sperm heads, tails and PT fractions were used directly or frozen at -80°C for later analysis.

### Data Protocol
1000 ng of peptides from each biological replicate were first injected onto an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system on a 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm) coupled online to an Orbitrap HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC-MS settings were used as in the article of Hidalgo-Gutiérrez et al.,2021 (22) with minor modifications. After 5 min of loading with 100% buffer A (H2O with 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with a 95-min gradient from 10% to 40% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 20% H2O with 0.1% formic acid). For MS acquisition, we used an MS1 Orbitrap scan at 120,000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106 ions and maximum inject time of 120 ms from 310 to 1600 m/z; the 15 most intense ions were submitted to MS2 Orbitrap scan at 30,000 resolution, AGC target of 1 × 105 ions and maximum inject time of 54 ms (isolation window of 1.4 m/z, NCE at 28% and dynamic exclusion of 16 seconds).

### Publication Abstract
The perinuclear theca (PT) is a highly condensed, largely insoluble protein structure that surrounds the nucleus of eutherian spermatozoa. Recent reports have indicated that the PT unexpectedly houses several somatic proteins, such as core histones, which may be important post-fertilization during re-modelling of the male pronucleus, yet little is known regarding the overall proteomic composition of the PT. Here, we report the first in depth, label-free proteomic characterization of the PT of boar spermatozoa following the implementation of a long-established subcellular fractionation protocol designed to increase the detection of low abundance proteins. A total of 1,802 proteins were identified, a result that represents unparalleled depth of coverage for the boar sperm proteome and exceeds the entire annotated proteome of the <i>Sus scrofa</i> species so far. In the PT structure itself, we identified 813 proteins and confirmed the presence of previously characterized PT proteins including the core histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4, as well as Ras-related protein Rab-2A (RAB2A) and Rab-2B (RAB2B) amongst other RAB proteins. In addition to these previously characterized PT proteins, our data revealed that the PT is replete in proteins critical for sperm-egg fusion and egg activation, including: Izumo family members 1-4 (IZUMO1-4) and phosphoinositide specific phospholipase &#x3b6; (PLCZ1). Through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, we found surprising enrichment of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteins and the ER-stress response in the PT. This is particularly intriguing as it is currently held that the ER structure is lost during testicular sperm maturation. Using the String and Cytoscape tools to visualize protein-protein interactions revealed an intricate network of PT protein complexes, including numerous proteasome subunits. Collectively, these data suggest that the PT may be a unique site of cellular homeostasis that houses an abundance of protein degradation machinery. This fits with previous observations that the PT structure dissociates first within the oocyte post-fertilization. It remains to be explored whether proteasome subunits within the PT actively assist in the protein degradation of paternal cell structures post-fertilization and how aberrations in PT protein content may delay embryonic development.

### Keywords
Boar sperm, Perinuclear theca proteome, Head tail division

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
UCL Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J R Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands


