### Accession
PXD016391

### Title
Structural basis for lipid binding and function by an evolutionally conserved protein, Serum Amyloid A

### Description
Serum amyloid A (SAA) is a plasma protein that transports lipids during inflammation. To explore SAA solution conformations and lipid binding mechanism, we used hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, lipoprotein reconstitution, sequence analysis and molecular dynamics simulations.  Solution conformations of lipid-bound and lipid-free mSAA1 at pH~7 agreed in details with the crystal structures but also showed important differences. The results revealed that amphipathic α-helices h1 and h3 comprise a lipid-binding site that is partially pre-formed in solution, is stabilized on lipoproteins, and shows lipid-induced folding of h3. This site sequesters apolar ligands via a concave hydrophobic surface in SAA oligomers. The largely disordered C-terminal region is conjectured to mediate promiscuous binding of other ligands. The h1-h2 linker region forms an unexpected β-hairpin that may represent an early amyloidogenic intermediate. The results establish structural underpinnings for understanding SAA interactions with lipids and other ligands, its evolutional conservation, and its transition to amyloid.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  HDX MS experiments for free SAA and SAA-POPC were obtained under conditions similar to those previously described [Das et al., 2016. J. Mol. Biol. 428(2ptB),449].  To initiate deuterium labeling of free SAA, 1 µl of 0.5 mg/ml protein in standard buffer [10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5] was diluted 18-fold with labeling buffer [10 mM sodium phosphate, pD 7.5, 99.9% D2O] at 5, 15 or 25 °C.  The labeling was quenched by a 2-fold dilution with ice-cold quench buffer [150 mM sodium phosphate, pH 2.3, H2O], at time points ranging from 5 s to 4 hrs.  For SAA-POPC, SAA was mixed with POPC at ratios of 1:10 (to obtain lipoproteins of ~10 nm in size ) to 1:80 (to obtain lipoproteins of ~80nm in size).  After dialysis against the standard buffer, the labeling protocol as described above was followed.  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested with pepsin (10 mg/mL, Sigma P6887; Lot#SLBL1721V) for 5 minutes on ice, then injected into an M-class Acquity UPLC with HDX technology (Waters).  The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min, eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column.  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile:95% water.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.30 Da in this experimental setup.  The trap column and analytical column were washed with a blank run between each sample.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/ μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned 0.4 scans/second over the range 50 to 2000 m/z with ion mobility engaged.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.  Analyses of SAA alone vs SAA-POPC 1:10 (particles prepared using 1:10 SAA:POPC molar ratio) at 5 °C were performed 4 times, 2 technical replicates each of two different protein batches.  Analyses comparing SAA with SAA-POPC 1:10 at 15 °C and 25 °C were performed once at 15 °C and once at 25 °C.  Analyses of SAA-POPC lipoproteins obtained using 1:30 or 1:80 SAA:POPC molar ratios were each recorded once at 5 °C for comparison with those obtained using 1:10 molar ratio.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, RRID: SCR_016664, 720001408EN) using multiple replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum consecutive products of 2; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.2, 10 ppm error. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  The error bars in all the deuterium uptake plots represent variation supplied by DynamX software, which is determined for each peptide using different charge states for all technical and biological replicates.  Deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
Serum amyloid A (SAA) is a plasma protein that transports lipids during inflammation. To explore SAA solution conformations and lipid-binding mechanism, we used hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, lipoprotein reconstitution, amino acid sequence analysis, and molecular dynamics simulations. Solution conformations of lipid-bound and lipid-free mSAA1 at pH~7.4 agreed in details with the crystal structures but also showed important differences. The results revealed that amphipathic &#x3b1;-helices h1 and h3 comprise a lipid-binding site that is partially pre-formed in solution, is stabilized upon binding lipids, and shows lipid-induced folding of h3. This site sequesters apolar ligands via a concave hydrophobic surface in SAA oligomers. The largely disordered/dynamic C-terminal region is conjectured to mediate the promiscuous binding of other ligands. The h1-h2 linker region is predicted to form an unexpected &#x3b2;-hairpin that may represent an early amyloidogenic intermediate. The results help establish structural underpinnings for understanding SAA interactions with its key functional ligands, its evolutional conservation, and its transition to amyloid.

### Keywords
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry; molecular dynamics simulations; lipoprotein nanoparticle; intrinsically disordered protein; β-hairpin misfolding intermediate; inflammation and immunity

### Affiliations
Dept of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Dept of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


