### Accession
PXD008888

### Title
Chromatin proteomics experiments for ProteomeHD

### Description
These is a collection of chromatin proteomics experiments that make up the 80 "in-house" biological conditions covered by ProteomeHD (see publication for more details). All experiments use SILAC, resulting in 80 SILAC ratios comparing the impact of various drugs (estradiol, TSA, hydroxytamoxifen, etc.), growth factors (TNFalpha) or other treatments (ionizing radiation) on chromatin composition. For a more detailed description see the Supplementary Table S2 of the publication, which can also be downloaded from here.

### Sample Protocol
65 samples are prepared using Chromatin Enrichment for proteomics (ChEP) and 15 samples are prepared using the Nascent Chromatin Capture (NCC) method. The ChEP protocol is available at Nature Protocols (PMID: 25101823). The NCC protocol is described in Alabert et al (PMID: 24561620). SILAC labels are either Arg10 + Lys8 or Arg6 + Lys8. Triple SILAC labels are Arg6 + Lys4 (medium) and  Arg10 + Lys8 (heavy).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8, using several parameter groups that differ only in SILAC labels. The experimentaldesigntemplate shows which raw files belong to which experiment. The experiment names also indicate the SILAC labels and parameter groups used for each (g1 = Arg10, Lys8; g2 = Arg10, Lys6; g3 =  Arg6, Lys4 (M) and Arg10, Lys8 (H); g4 = Arg6, Lys8). A human SwissProt database (FASTA file attached) was used for the search. MQ default settings were used except for the following parameters: • Group specific parameters, General tab, Match type “No matching” • Global parameters – General: Enable “Re-quantify” • Global parameters – Protein quantification: Min. ratio count set to 1 and disable “Discard unmodified counterpart peptide” • Global parameters – Tables: Disable all • Number of threads used: 78  The data were processed as part of a much larger protein co-regulation analysis that contained many addition experiments in PRIDE (see paper or attached Table S2 for full list). The MQ result files (proteinGroups, evidence etc.) include the complete set of experiments used to compile the ProteomeHD data matrix. Finally, we used the treeClust algorithm and the topological overlap measure to generate pairwise co-regulation scores for all proteins. These scores are also attached here.

### Publication Abstract
Assigning functions to the vast array of proteins present in eukaryotic cells remains challenging. To identify relationships between proteins, and thereby enable functional annotation of proteins, we determined changes in abundance of 10,323 human proteins in response to 294 biological perturbations using isotope-labeling mass spectrometry. We applied the machine learning algorithm treeClust to reveal functional associations between co-regulated human proteins from ProteomeHD, a compilation of our own data and datasets from the Proteomics Identifications database. This produced a co-regulation map of the human proteome. Co-regulation was able to capture relationships between proteins that do not physically interact or colocalize. For example, co-regulation of the peroxisomal membrane protein PEX11&#x3b2; with mitochondrial respiration factors led us to discover an organelle interface between peroxisomes and mitochondria in mammalian cells. We also predicted the functions of microproteins that are difficult to study with traditional methods. The co-regulation map can be explored at www.proteomeHD.net .

### Keywords
Chep, Silac, Chromatin proteomics, Ncc, Proteomehd

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Edinburgh

### Submitter
Georg Kustatscher

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, Edinburgh


