### Accession
PXD014593

### Title
pFAIMS: An optimized workflow for quantitative multiplexed phosphorylation analysis using high-Field Asymmetric waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS)

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is vital for the regulation of cellular signaling. Isobaric tag-based proteomic techniques, such as tandem mass tags (TMT), can measure the relative phosphorylation states of peptides in a multiplexed format. However, the overall low stoichiometry of protein phosphorylation constrains the analytical depth of phosphopeptide analysis by mass spectrometry, thereby requiring robust and sensitive workflows. Here we evaluate and optimize high-Field Asymmetric waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled to Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometers for the analysis of TMT10plex-labeled phosphopeptides. We determined that using FAIMS-SPS-MS3 with three compensation voltages (CV) in a single method minimizes inter-CV overlap and maximizes peptide coverage (e.g., CV=-40V/-60V/-80V) and that consecutive analyses using CID-MSA and HCD fragmentation at the MS2 stage increases the depth of phosphorylation analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The HCT116 human cell line was grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin until 80% confluent. The cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS, and harvested on plate with 8M urea, 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 plus 1X cOmplete protease and phosphatase inhibitor), syringe lysed (10 times with 21-gauge needle) and stored at -80°C until use.  Mouse brain tissue was a gift from Alexander S. Banks and all previous animal experiments were performed according to procedures approved by Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Brain tissue from mice (B6.Cg-Lepob/J-Jackson Labs) had been immediately stored in liquid nitrogen after dissection. Tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 1X Roche Protease Inhibitors, 1X Roche PhosStop phosphatase inhibitors) at a tissue concentration of approximately 10-15 mg/mL using a polytron tissue grinder. The homogenized sample was passed 10 times through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube) and stored at -80°C until use. Following a BCA assay to estimate protein concentration, all lysates were reduced (20 min with 5mM TCEP at room tempe  rature), alkylated (20 min with 10mM iodoacetamide, at room temperature in the dark), and quenched (20 min with 10mM DTT, at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were precipitated by chloroform methanol precipitation, as described previously. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 (~1mg/ml) and digested first with LysC (Wako) for 3 hr 37°C shaking on a vortexer (speed =50%) followed by a 6 hr trypsin digestion at 37°C (sequencing grade, Pierce). The digests were acidified and desalted (C18 SepPak, Waters) prior to enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit and desalted (C18 SepPak, Waters). Enriched phosphopeptides were labeled with TMT as described previously with TM11-plex reagent (7). The labeled peptides were mixed 1:1 across all channels, and desalted (C18 SepPak, Waters) prior to use.

### Data Protocol
Labeled peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN/2% formic acid at 1 mg/mL and loaded at 1 μg, unless otherwise noted, on an in-house pulled C18 column (30-35 cm, 2.6 um Accucore (Thermo Fisher), 100um ID), and eluted using a linear gradient from 0% to 30% buﬀer B (95% ACN, 0.125% formic acid). Eluted peptides were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Classic or Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer over a 2 to 2.5 hr gradient. For high-resolution MS2 (HRMS2) methods, the scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2E5, maximum injection time 50 ms). The compensation voltage was set as indicated in the associate plots. The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), MS2 AGC of 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) at 37.5, 50,000 resolution, maximum injection time of 120 ms, and isolation window at 0.5 Th. For SPS-MS3 methods, the scan sequence began with the same MS21 scan as above and the precursors selected for MS2 analysis where based on TopSpeed = 1 sec per CV. The compensation voltage was set as indicated in the associate plots. MS2 analysis consisted of HCD or CID with multistage activation (MSA) using a neutral loss of 97.9763 Th, Turbo scan speed ion trap analysis, MS2 AGC of 2E4, NCE of 32 for HCD and 35 for CID , maximum injection time 120 ms, and isolation window at 0.5 (Lumos) or 0.7 (Fusion) Th. MS3 precursors (up to 10) were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the human or mouse Uniprot database (download April 2014). Each database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation (79.966) were set as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Data analysis and visualization was performed in Microsoft Excel or R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Isobaric, Tmt, Faims, Lumos, Sl-tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Joao A. Paulo Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Joao A. Paulo Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115


