### Accession
PXD027820

### Title
The application of open searching based approaches for the identification of Acinetobacter baumannii O-linked glycopeptides decorated with diverse capsule derived glycans

### Description
Protein glycosylation is being increasingly recognised as a common modification within microbial organisms, contributing to protein functionality and optimal infectivity of pathogenic species. Due to this, the interest in characterising microbial glycosylation events is increasing - requiring high-throughput robust analytical tools. Although bottom-up proteomics now readily enables the generation of rich microbial glycopeptide data, the breath and diversity of glycans observed in microbial species makes the identification of microbial glycosylation events extremely challenging. Traditionally, manual determination of glycan structures within proteomic datasets have been required, making this a largely bespoke analysis restricted to field specific experts. Recently, open searching (OS) based approaches have emerged as a powerful alternative for the identification of previously unknown modifications. OS techniques leverage the frequency of observations of unique modifications on multiple peptide sequences to enable their identification within complex samples. Within this article, we highlight a streamlined workflow for the generation of glycoproteomic data and demonstrate how OS techniques can be used to identify bacterial glycopeptides without prior knowledge of the glycan compositions. Using this approach, glycopeptides within samples can rapidly be identified to understand glycosylation differences, as well as to identify the glycoproteome within a microbe of interest. Using Acinetobacter baumannii as a model, we demonstrate how these approaches enable the comparison of glycan structures between strains and enable the identification of novel glycoproteins. Combined, this work demonstrates the versatility and robustness of open database searching techniques for the characterisation of microbial glycosylation, making characterisation of glycoproteomes easier than ever before.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were resuspended in 4% SDC in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 and boiled for 10minutes. The protein content was quantified using a BCA assay and the required protein amounts then reduced/alkylated for 1 hour with 10 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide. Samples were then digested overnight at 37C with Trypsin/Lys-C (resuspended in 100mM Tris, pH 8.5) with a final protease:protein ratio of 1:100. Digested samples were adjusted to 60% Isopropanol and acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA before being cleaned up with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of SDB-RPS material. Columns were conditioned with 100% acetonitrile, followed by 30% methanol, 1% TFA and then 90% isopropanol, 1% TFA. Acidified samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of 90% isopropanol, 1% TFA followed by 10 bed volumes of 1% TFA in Milli-Q H2O. Bound peptides were eluted with 5% ammonium hydroxide in 80% acetonitrile before being dried then stored at -20˚C.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched using MSfragger version 15. For open searching searches the open searching option was enabled while for the searching of specific glycoforms glycan specific searches were undertaken. To enable data visualisation the individual search results were combined in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomics, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas E Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.


