### Accession
PXD022345

### Title
Effect of fluvastatin-treatment on the proteome and phosphor-proteome in metastatic pancreatic cancer cells

### Description
Fluvastatin has been identified as novel inhibitors of metastasis in pancreatic cancer. In multiple in vivo and in vitro experiments the compounds phenotypic effects was validated. Since under drug treatment the transcriptomic changes in examined cell lines were rather small, we expected the underlying mechanistic effect to be on the level of the proteome and more importantly the phospho-proteome. To evaluate this assumption we performed label-free full proteome and phosphoproteomics experiments on Fluvastatin treated ASPC1 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Frozen cell pellets treated with Fluvastatin or DMSO (control) were ground in 1× PBS and then sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, 4 °C, 10 cycles each 1 min maximum energy followed by 30 sec pause). The samples were then cleared by centrifugation and the supernatant transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. A volume corresponding to 30 µg of protein was removed for each sample and Methanol/Chloroform precipitated (Wessel & Flügge, 1984 ). The protein pellet was rehydrated in 6M Urea and the proteins subjected to sequential in-solution digestion (ISD) using first Trypsin then LysC. Cleared tryptic digests were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007 ).  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed accordin to the EasyPhos protocoll (Humphrey, S.J., Azimifar, S.B., and Mann, M. (2015). High-throughput phosphoproteomics reveals in vivo insulin signaling dynamics. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 990-995.) LC-MS/MS settings Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap LUMOS instrument (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 ultre-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo). The UPLC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 46 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation PRSO-V2) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was set to 50 °C during sample loading and data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides from full proteome samples were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 105 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 9% B; gradient 9% to 40% B for 90 min; gradient 40% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 5 min). Phospho proteome samples were separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 5% B; gradient 5% to 40% B for 120 min; gradient 40% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 5 min). The flow rate for both gradients was 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was controlled by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tune Application (version 3.3.2782.28) and operated using the Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 375-1500 and at a resolution of 120000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005 ). For full proteome analysis product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at turbo scan rate. For phosphoproteome samples product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the Orbitrap (OTMS) in a variable scan range and at resolution 30000.  The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 2.3 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a “Top Speed” regime (repeating cycle of full precursor ion scan (AGC target “standard” or 50 ms) followed by dependent MS2 scans for 3 seconds (minimum intensity threshold 3×103)). The precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window 1.2 m/z). After Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision energy set to “fixed” and 30%) the product ions were measured in the ion trap (full proteome samples, normalized AGC target 300% or 60 ms, mass range “auto”) or in the Orbitrap (phosphor proteome samples, normalized AGC target “standard” or 54 ms, mass range “auto”). During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds. Only charge states between 2-7 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant.  RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox  et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) using the default settings (Cox  & Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014 ). For H. sapiens we used the uniprot reference database (UP000005640_9606.fasta, 20668 entries, one protein sequence per gene, downloaded from 10/24/2019). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) and for Phospho proteomics samples Phospho (STY) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. For full proteome experiments further analysis and filtering of the results was performed in Perseus v1.6.2.3. (Tyanova et al. 2016 ). For quantification we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in at least one categorical group in a minimum of 3 out of 4 biological replicates. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant, MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014 ).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fluvastatin, Pancreatic cancer, Statins

### Affiliations
Farnusch Kaschani, Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany
University Duisburg-Essen

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Farnusch Kaschani, Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


