### Accession
PXD009661

### Title
Quantitative temporal phosphoproteomics of aging C.elegans under different environmental temperatures

### Description
Temperature is one of the primary environmental factors that affect aging, in which protein phosphorylation is an important regulator. Currently, the understanding of phosphorylation events in regulatory networks during aging has remained rather limited. Therefore, the phosphoproteomes of C.elegans of different age groups cultured at 20°C in natural aging process and 25°C in accelerated aging process were analyzed. Through using the iTRAQ-labeled phosphoproteomics method, 2375 phosphoproteins and 9063 phosphosites were identified. Volcano plots illustrated that 208 proteins during natural aging and 130 during accelerated aging, were significantly changed. Gene ontology and pathway analysis revealed that these proteins were mainly involved in temperature response, DNA transcription, protein translation, tissue system development and animal behavior processes. Moreover, our results uncovered those kinases CK2, MAPK and CAMK2 might play important roles in aging regulation. In summary, our results provided a new insight into the complicated phosphor-regulatory network system during aging and an important resource for future studies of protein phosphorylation in worms.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Worm Maintenance and Strains     Wild type N2 was maintained and cultured as previously described [13]. Wild type N2 was obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC). The worms were cultured on NGM plates using E. coli OP50 as food. 2.2 Culturing and Sampling     Age-synchronized populations were isolated initially from gravid adult nematodes as previously described [14]. Late L4 animals were obtained from age-synchronized L1 on NGM plates at 20°C. A half of L4 animals were still cultivated at 20°C; others were transferred to 25°C. The worms, of the stage L4, Day1, Day5, and Day10, were collected in above temperature, washed with M9 buffer, and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.   2.3 Protein extraction, digestion, and iTRAQ labeling     Briefly, the lysis buffer (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail) was added to the samples and the protein was extracted by sonication. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000g for 20 min at 4°C. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin utilizing the FASP method [15]. Peptide mixtures were labeled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer's protocol. Samples (L4, Day1 at 20°C, Day1 at 25°C, Day5 at 20°C, Day5 at 25°C, Day10 at 20°C, Day10 at 25°C, and Mixture) were labeled with 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 tags, respectively. 2.4 Peptide fractionation using high pH HPLC  HPLC separation of iTRAQ-labeled samples was performed by Extend-C18 analytical column (2.6 µm, 100 mm × 3 mm) using Solvent A (10 mM NH4Cl, pH 10.0) and Solvent B (10 mM NH4Cl and 80% ACN). 40 fractions were collected from 0 to 40 minutes.   2.5 Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 affinity chromatography Peptide fractionations were mixed to 6 tubes and lyophilized. Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 affinity chromatography was carried out as reported before [16].

### Data Protocol
2.6 Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)          LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in H2O (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in ACN (Solvent B). The peptide separation was performed using the following gradients: 2-5% B in 2 min, 5-28% B in 98 min, 28-35% B in 5 min,   35-90% B in 2 min, 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan were automatically selected and fragmented in HCD mode.  2.7 Database search and data analysis Raw data were proceeded by Proteome Discover (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and matched against the C.elegans database (20161228, 17,392 sequences) scoring through the Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Data were searched using the following parameters: up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethylation on cysteine, iTRAQ8plex on lysine and N-term as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine, phosphoralytion on STY (serine, threonine and tyrosine) as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 were accepted for discussion. Functional annotation of phosphoproteins was performed by David bioinformatics resources [17] and Protein–protein networks were analyzed using STRING [18]. Subcellular location was predicted through Wolf PSORT [19]. Motif analysis of kinase substrates was extracted from the data through Motif-X [20].

### Publication Abstract
Temperature is one of the primary environmental factors that affect aging, in which protein phosphorylation is an important regulator. Currently, the understanding of phosphorylation events in regulatory networks during aging has remained rather limited. Herein, the phosphoproteomes of C.elegans of different age groups cultured at 20&#x202f;&#xb0;C (natural aging) and 25&#x202f;&#xb0;C (accelerated aging) were analyzed. Through using the iTRAQ-labeled phosphoproteomics method, 2375 phosphoproteins and 9063 phosphosites were identified. Volcano plots illustrated that 208 proteins during natural aging and 130 proteins during accelerated aging, were significantly changed. Gene ontology and pathway analysis revealed that these proteins were mainly involved in translation, development, metabolisms, and animal behavior processes. Moreover, our results uncovered those kinases CK2, MAPK and CAMK2 might play important roles in aging regulation. Functional experiments confirm that the candidated phosphoprotein GTBP-1 could regulate C.elegans lifespan at 20&#x202f;&#xb0;C or 25&#x202f;&#xb0;C and is more resistant to heat and oxidative stresses. In summary, our results provided an important resource for future studies of protein phosphorylation in worms. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009661.

### Keywords
C.elegans; phosphoproteomics; itraq; natural aging; accelerated aging

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
Jichang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


