### Accession
PXD031331

### Title
Proteomic analysis of differential anther development from sterile/fertile lines in Capsicum annuum L.

### Description
Background: Pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) is a major cash crop throughout the world. Male sterility is an important characteristic in crop species that leads to a failure to produce functional pollen, and it has crucial roles in agricultural breeding and the utilization of heterosis.  Objectives: In this study, we identified many crucial factors and important components in metabolic pathways in anther and pollen development, and elucidated the molecular mechanism related to pollen abortion in pepper.  Methods: Pepper pollen was observed at different stages to detect the characteristics associated with male sterility and fertility. The phytohormone and oxidoreductase activities were detected in spectrophotometric and redox reaction assays, respectively. Proteins were extracted from male sterile and fertile pepper lines, and identified by TMT/iTRAQ (Tandem mass tags/isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) and LC-MS/MS (liquid chromatograph-mass spectrometer) analysis. Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were analyzed based on Gene Ontology annotations and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database according to |fold change)| > 1.3 and P value < 0.05. DAPs were quantified in the meiosis, tetrad, and binucleate stages by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Results: In this study, we screened and identified one male sterile pepper line with abnormal cytological characteristics in terms of pollen development. The peroxidase and catalase enzyme activities were significantly reduced and increased, respectively, in the male sterile line compared with the male fertile line. Phytohormone analysis demonstrated that the gibberellin, jasmonic acid, and auxin contents changed by different extents in the male sterile pepper line. Proteome analysis screened 1645 DAPs in six clusters, which were mainly associated with the chloroplast and cytoplasm based on their similar expression levels. According to proteome analysis, 45 DAPs were quantitatively identified in the meiosis, tetrad, and binucleate stages by PRM, which were related to monoterpenoid biosynthesis, and starch and sucrose metabolism pathways.   Conclusions: We screened 1645 DAPs by proteomic analysis and 45 DAPs were related to anther and pollen development in a male sterile pepper line. In addition, the activities of peroxidase and catalase as well as the abundances of phytohormones such as gibberellin, jasmonic acid, and auxin were related to male sterility. The results obtained in this study provide insights into the molecular mechanism responsible for male sterility and fertility in pepper.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, TMT labeling, HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography) fractionation, and LC-MS/MS analysis All samples for protein extraction were ground in liquid nitrogen and sonicated three times using an ultrasonic processor in cool lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor). Each solution was centrifuged at 12,000  g and 4C for 10 min. The protein concentration in the supernatant was assayed using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To digest the proteins, 5 mM dithiothreitol was added to the supernatant solution, which was heated for 30 min at 56C and then treated with 10 mM iodoacetamide to alkylate for 15 min at 56C in darkness. The protein solution was diluted with 100 μL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Finally, trypsin was added to the protein sample solution at a trypsin:protein mass ratio of 1:50 and the first protein digestion was conducted overnight at 37C. For the second protein digestion, the trypsin:protein mass ratio was 1:100. For the TMT/iTRAQ assay, 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate was added to the peptide solution and reconstituted using the TMT/iTRAQ kit. One unit of reagent was thawed in acetonitrile for 2 h at 25C. All peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) with an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system connected to a Q Exactive™ Plus quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer. Protein identification and bioinformatics analysis The LC/MS data were processed using the Capsicum_annuum_4072 (35548 sequences) database according to a peptide tolerance of 10.0 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da. Two amino acids were cleaved by trypsin and the fixed modifications comprised carbamido methylation of cysteine. DAPs were selected according to |(fold change)| > 1.3 and P value < 0.05. All DAPs were functionally classified into biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components based on Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (http://www.geneontology.org/), and enriched subcategories and metabolic pathways using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html). In addition, all DAPs were searched against the STRING database (V10.1) to detect protein–protein interactions (PPIs) based on confidence score > 0.7. Arabidopsis thaliana was used as the reference species for establishing PPI networks. Data visualization in venn diagram were used by Tbtools software (Chen et al., 2020). The PCA diagram, volcano plot and heat map were completed by online software (ptmbiolab.com). The bar charts in this study were made by origin software (V.7.0). Targeted protein quantification by PRM Protein extraction and trypsin digestion were performed in the TMT experiment for targeted protein quantification. After LC-MS/MS analysis, the data obtained for each sample were processed using the PRM acquisition method to quantify the abundances of targeted proteins. Each protein with more than two unique peptides was quantified, but only one peptide segment was identified for some proteins due to sensitivity and other reasons. Three biological replicates of each sample were performed and 15–20 proteins were randomly selected and quantified. PRM analysis was conducted by Jingjie PTM BioLabs (Hangzhou, China) for this study.

### Data Protocol
DAPs during anther development To elucidate the molecular mechanisms related to male sterility, proteomic analysis was conducted to determine the differences between the male sterile and fertile pepper lines. The total proteins were extracted from the sterile and fertile lines in the meiosis, tetrad, and binucleate stages, and subjected to proteomic analysis. The proteomic analysis workflow is shown in Figures 2A and 2B. The good repeatability of samples indicates that the result data is highly reliable (Figure 2C). In total, 8516 proteins  and 1646 DAPs were identified in all of the samples (Figure 2D and Table S1). The distributions of all DAPs and their overlapping in different developmental stages were visualized by venn diagram analysis.  GO analysis of DAPs To clarify the functional categories for DAPs in the male sterile and fertile pepper lines, the DAPs were assigned to three categories comprising biological process, cellular component, and molecular function (Figure 4). Cellular process, metabolic process, and response to stimulus were the most highly enriched terms in all three stages in the biological process category, but especially in the binucleate microspore stage, and the numbers of DAPs assigned to other terms were slightly lower (Figure 4). Interestingly, more DAPs were mainly assigned to peroxisome and microbody process in the microspore tetrad stage (Figures 4 and S1). In the cellular component category, DAPs were significantly enriched in the cell, organelle, and membrane terms (Figure 4). Many DAPs were assigned to translation, cytosolic ribosome process, and amide biosynthesis in the meiosis stage (Figure S1). However, less DAPS were assigned to the extracellular region term in the meiosis stage compared with the binucleate microspore and microspore tetrad stages. Catalytic activity and binding were the most highly enriched molecular function terms in all three stages (Figure 4).   Subcellular localizations and domain enrichment analysis for DAPs We also analyzed the subcellular compartment localizations of the DAPs, i.e., cytoplasm, chloroplast, nucleus, plasma membrane, extracellular region, mitochondrion, vacuolar membrane, and endoplasmic reticulum. As shown in Figure 6, the DAPs in all three stages were localized in the cytoplasm, chloroplast, and nucleus, which accounted for 20–30% of the total, thereby demonstrating that proteins in these three compartments had important roles in the male sterile and fertile lines. Interestingly, the distributions of the DAPs mainly differed in the chloroplast and cytoplasm. More DAPs were localized in the cytoplasm (29%) in the meiosis stage compared with the microspore tetrad stage (24%) and binucleate microspore stage (26%) (Figure 6A). However, more DAPs were localized in chloroplasts in the microspore tetrad stage (30%) and binucleate microspore stage (31%) compared with the meiosis stage (25%) (Figures 6B, 6C). These different distributions indicate that many proteins in chloroplast compartments affected pollen development in the microspore tetrad and binucleate microspore stages. Protein domain analysis was performed at P < 0.05 using the InterPro database. In the BY_JS vs KY_JS comparison, the enriched domains for DAPs included alpha/beta hydrolase fold, NB-ARC, and PIC domains (Figure 6D), whereas most DAPs contained protease inhibitor and trypsin domains in BY_SF vs KY_SF, and all were upregulated proteins (Figure 6E). In BY_SH vs KY_SH, the enriched domains included trypsin and protease inhibitor, PIC, and glycosyl hydrolase domains (Figure 6F). Interestingly, the DAPs containing trypsin and protease inhibitor domains or glycosyl hydrolase domains were upregulated proteins, whereas the DAPs containing PIC domains were downregulated (Supplementary Table S2).  PPI networks and cluster analysis To understand the relationships among DAPs, we determined the PPI networks in different stages using the STRING 11.0 database. For BY_JS vs KY_JS, 14 upregulated proteins (A0A2G2YPH5, A0A2G3AGR1, A0A1U8FF28, and others) were assigned to a ribosome network, and six upregulated proteins and one downregulated protein were clustered in a proteomic interaction network (Figure 7A). However, only 19 DAPs comprised one small network with 13 upregulated proteins and six downregulated proteins for BY_SF vs KY_SF (Figure 7B). In addition, more than 100 proteins in metabolic pathways, TCA cycle (tricarboxylic acid cycle), ribosome, and basal transcription factor established a large and complex interaction network, which was closely related to plant male sterility for BY_SH vs KY_SH (Figure 7C). These PPI networks indicate that anther development is regulated by a complex network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Male sterility； proteomic；parallel reaction monitoring (prm)；phytohormone； pepper (capsicum annuum l.)

### Affiliations
Institute of Horticulture Crops, Ningxia Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences
College of Forestry and Horticulture, Xinjiang Agricultural University；Institute of Horticulture Crops, Ningxia Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences；

### Submitter
hongxia pei

### Lab Head
Dr Hongxia pei
College of Forestry and Horticulture, Xinjiang Agricultural University；Institute of Horticulture Crops, Ningxia Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences；


