### Accession
PXD025066

### Title
Furan warheads for covalent trapping of weak protein-protein interactions: specific cross-linking of thymosin β4 to actin

### Description
We describe furan as a triggerable ‘warhead’ for site-specific cross-linking using the actin and thymosin β4 (Tβ4)-complex as model of a weak and dynamic protein-protein interaction with known 3D structure and with application potential in disease contexts. The presented in vitro validation of covalently acting ‘furan-armed’ Tβ4-variants provides initial proof to further exploit furan-technology for covalent drug design.

### Sample Protocol
The SDS-PAGE gel bands were firstly submitted to in-gel tryptic digestion and later to in solution digestion by AspN or Chymotrypsin. Briefly, the excised gel bands were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile. After, protein bands were alkylated for 30 min in the dark with IAM (Iodoacetamide) 55 mM and the excess of IAM removed with ACN and 50 mM NH4HCO3 washes. Then, in-gel digestion was performed with trypsin (0.1 μg/μL) (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega Cat# V511) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37ᵒC overnight. The digestion was stopped with 5% formic acid (FA) and peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and, later, 5% FA aqueous solution. The sample volumes were reduced in SpeedVac until 3 μL; later, 57 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 were added. Samples were in solution redigested with AspN (0.1 μg) (Sequencing Grade Asp-N, Promega Cat# V1621) or Chymotrypsin (0.1 μg) (Sequencing Grade Chymotrypsin, Promega Cat# V1062) at 37ᵒC overnight. Digested peptides were diluted in 1% FA, 3% ACN in H2O. Samples were loaded to a 100 µm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, C18 (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC (50 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å) (Thermo Scientific)) with a 90 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 1 to 35% B in 63 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% B in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85% B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 k resolution (defined at 200 m/z). For MS2, we set top speed fragmentation with a cycle time of 3 s. We used a 28% HCD collision energy and detection in the orbitrap at 30 k. The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey MS1 scans and 10,000 for the MS2. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Searches for crosslinked proteins were performed with xiSEARCH v1.7.6.14. This search had to be adapted to our system because we are not using a conventional crosslinker nor a standard amino acid. In the Tβ4-actin complex, thymosin has a furanalanine in position 24 instead of a glutamic acid which can react with a lysine or tyrosine of actin linking both proteins. xiSEARCH does not allow to include new amino acids (no natural amino acids), so we first defined a known amino acid (in this case, alanine) in the thymosin 24 residue and then a crosslink between this amino acid and a Lys or a Tyr incorporating the mass difference derived from the reaction between the oxidized furan moiety of E24FuaTβ4 and Lys or Tyr residues of actin (for the crosslinker definition we only need the molecular formula). We modified the fasta database accordingly, in order to contain protein P68135 (actin) and P62328 (Thymosin beta-4) with E24A modification, both without the first methionine. The defined crosslinkers were the following: C4H2O2 (82.00548 Da, linking A-K and A-Y) and the dehydrated form C4O (63.99491 Da, linking A-K) (see Figure SX).   The main xiSEARCH parameters were: Trypsin/AspN or Trypsin/Chymotrypsin as digesting enzymes allowing three missed cleavage sites and a minimum peptide length of four residues; carbamidomethyl in C as static modification; oxidation in M, W and Y; dioxidation in W, W to kynurenin, and acetylation in N-terminus as dynamic modification; 10 ppm and 20 ppm as MS1 and MS2 mass tolerances, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Furan, Covalent, Actin, Thymosin β4, Cross-linked peptide, Cross-link, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Organic and Biomimetic Chemistry Research Group, Department of Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281 S4, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Annemieke Madder
Organic and Biomimetic Chemistry Research Group, Department of Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281 S4, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


