### Accession
PXD017769

### Title
The Hypervariable Amino-Terminus of P1 Protease Modulates Potyviral Replication and Host Defense Responses

### Description
The replication of many RNA viruses involves the translation of polyproteins, whose processing by endopeptidases is a critical step for the release of functional subunits. P1 is the first protease encoded in plant potyvirus genomes; once activated by an as-yet-unknown host factor, it acts in cis on its own C-terminal end, hydrolyzing the P1-HCPro junction. Earlier research suggests that P1 cooperates with HCPro to inhibit host RNA silencing defenses. Using Plum pox virus as a model, we show that although P1 does not have a major direct role in RNA silencing suppression, it can indeed modulate HCPro function by its self-cleavage activity. To study P1 protease regulation, we used bioinformatic analysis and in vitro activity experiments to map the core C-terminal catalytic domain. We present evidence that the hypervariable region that precedes the protease domain is predicted as intrinsically disordered, and that it behaves as a negative regulator of P1 proteolytic activity in in vitro cleavage assays. In viral infections, removal of the P1 protease antagonistic regulator is associated with greater symptom severity, induction of salicylate-dependent pathogenesis-related proteins, and reduced viral loads. We suggest that fine modulation of a viral protease activity has evolved to keep viral amplification below host-detrimental levels, and thus to maintain higher long-term replicative capacity.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentration was determined using RC/DC protein assay (BioRad).   For digestion, 40 ug of protein from each condition was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 20 µl 6 M guanidine hydrochloride/100mM HEPES, pH 7.5, (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH), reduced with 1 µL of 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, AB SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 60°C for 30 min and followed by 2 µL of 200mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 120 µL to reduce guanidine concentration with 50mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding 1.5 µL (1 µg/µL) sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample in a ratio 1/10 (w/w), which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness. Each peptide solution was labelled at room temperature for 2 hours with a half unit of iTRAQ Reagent Multi-plex kit (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) previously reconstituted with 80 μl of 70% ethanol/50mM TEAB. In the iTRAQ labelling, tags 114 and 116 were used for WT biological replicates and 115 and 117 for mutant replicates. Afterwards, all labelled samples were combined and labelling reaction stopped by addition of 100 µL of 50% ACN and evaporation in a Speed Vac. The digested, labelled and pooled peptide mixture was desalted using a Sep-PAK C18 Cartridge (Waters), following manufacture indications; then cleaned tryptic peptides were evaporated to dryness and storaged at -20°C for further analysis.  A 2.5 µg aliquot of the resulting mixture was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX , Foster City, CA) with a duo spray ionization source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The trap column was a C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA), 3 µm particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 300 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions, using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Gradient elution was performed according the following scheme: isocratic conditions of 98% A: 2% B for 1 minutes, a linear increase to 30% B in 210 minutes, a linear increase to 40% B in 10 minutes, a linear increase to 90% B in 5 minutes, isocratic conditions of 90% B for 5 minutes and return to initial conditions in 2 min. Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2800 V, curtain gas (CUR) 20, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 20, declustering potential (DP) 85 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.5 software (AB SCIEX, USA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 15 MS/MS scans of 250ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4.04 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data obtained for pooled samples were processed using Analyst® TF 1.5.1 Software (AB SCIEX). Raw data file conversion tools generated mgf files which were also searched against a customized database from Nicothiana benthamiana (taxonid:4100) and PPV proteins, containing 76391 protein coding genes and their corresponding reversed entries using the Mascot Server v. 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, iTRAQ4plex (N-term and K) and beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 20 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p<0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% False Discovery Rates (FDR) threshold were considered correctly identified. Only proteins having at least two quantitated peptides were considered in the quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The replication of many RNA viruses involves the translation of polyproteins, whose processing by endopeptidases is a critical step for the release of functional subunits. P1 is the first protease encoded in plant potyvirus genomes; once activated by an as-yet-unknown host factor, it acts in cis on its own C-terminal end, hydrolyzing the P1-HCPro junction. Earlier research suggests that P1 cooperates with HCPro to inhibit host RNA silencing defenses. Using Plum pox virus as a model, we show that although P1 does not have a major direct role in RNA silencing suppression, it can indeed modulate HCPro function by its self-cleavage activity. To study P1 protease regulation, we used bioinformatic analysis and in vitro activity experiments to map the core C-terminal catalytic domain. We present evidence that the hypervariable region that precedes the protease domain is predicted as intrinsically disordered, and that it behaves as a negative regulator of P1 proteolytic activity in in vitro cleavage assays. In viral infections, removal of the P1 protease antagonistic regulator is associated with greater symptom severity, induction of salicylate-dependent pathogenesis-related proteins, and reduced viral loads. We suggest that fine modulation of a viral protease activity has evolved to keep viral amplification below host-detrimental levels, and thus to maintain higher long-term replicative capacity.

### Keywords
Salicylic acid, Nicotiana benthamiana, Plum pox virus, Nahg

### Affiliations
Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Antonio García
Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.


