### Accession
PXD040197

### Title
Label Free Quantitative mass spectropmetry of Plasmodium falciparum Cullin2 protein in wild type and knock down conditions

### Description
Label free quantification of PfCullin2 in wild type and knock down conditions were also performed to check differential regulation of biological pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For label free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics, 150 μg of the wild type and knock down parasite lysates were mixed with 0.02% bromophenol blue containing 10% glycerol, and ran on 12% SDS PAGE gel. The gel was stained and each protein lane was cut into 8 slices, and each slice was processed for mass spectrometry as has been described above for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For LFQ, the MS data of each of the 8 slices of WT and KD were run separately against the P. falciparum Uniprot database and abundance values were obtained using label free quantification tool of Sequest HT. The abundance values from biological replicates were analyzed to find log2-fold change of protein levels in KD sample as compared to the WT, and p-values for significance of the difference between WT and KD data sets were calculated using student’s T-test. A log2-fold change of ≥+1 was considered as up- regulated and ≤-1 was considered as down-regulated, and that between +1 to -1 was considered as unchanged. Up- and down-regulated proteins with p-values ≤0.05 were further analyzed for differential regulation using VolcanoseR online tool, and pathway enrichment was obtained by GSEA analysis with the R programme.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cullin2, Kd, Lfq-ms, Wt, Plasmoium

### Affiliations
CSIR-CCMB
CSIR-Centre for cellular and molecular biology (CCMB)

### Submitter
Zeba Rizvi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Puran Singh Sijwali
CSIR-CCMB


