### Accession
PXD018902

### Title
O-Fucosylation of ADAMTSL2 Thrombospondin Type 1 Repeats is Required for Secretion and is Impacted by Geleophysic Dysplasia-Causing Mutations

### Description
A disintegrin-like and metalloprotease domain with thrombospondin type 1 repeats-like 2 (ADAMTSL2) is a matricellular protein that interacts with latent TGF-b binding protein 1 and fibrillin-1. ADAMTSL2 mutations cause an autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder named geleophysic dysplasia 1 (GPHYSD1, OMIM #231050), which is characterized by short stature, small hands and feet, and cardiac defects. ADAMTSL2 contains seven thrombospondin type-1 repeats (TSRs), six of which contain the consensus sequence for serine or threonine glycosylation by protein O-fucosyltransferase 2 (POFUT2). O-fucose modified TSRs are subsequently elongated to a Glucose1-3Fucose (GlcFuc) disaccharide by b3-glucosyltransferase (B3GLCT). B3GLCT mutations cause Peters Plus Syndrome (PTRPLS, OMIM #261540), which is characterized by skeletal defects similar to those of GPHYSD1. Several ADAMTSL2 TSRs have consensus sequences for C-mannosylation, and one TSR contains a sequon for N-glycosylation that overlaps with an O-fucosylation site. Six reported GPHYSD1 mutations occur within the TSRs and two lie near O-fucosylation sites. To investigate the effects of TSR glycosylation on ADAMTSL2 function, we used mass spectrometry to identify glycan modifications at the predicted consensus sequences. We found that most TSRs were modified with the GlcFuc disaccharide at high stoichiometry at O-fucosylation sites and variable mannose stoichiometry at C-mannosylation sites. Loss of ADAMTSL2 secretion in POFUT2 knockout but not in B3GLCT knockout cells suggested that impaired ADAMTSL2 secretion is not responsible for skeletal defects in PTRPLS patients lacking B3GLCT. In contrast, secretion of mouse ADAMTSL2 carrying GPHYSD1 mutations (S641L in TSR3 and G817R in TSR6) was significantly reduced in HEK293T cells. Moreover, S641L eliminated O-fucosylation of TSR3. Combined these results provide strong evidence that developmental abnormalities in GPHYSD1 patients with this mutation are caused by loss of O-fucosylation on TSR3 and impaired ADAMTSL2 secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant full-length mouse ADAMTSL2-Myc-6xHis WT or S641L mutant were expressed in HEK293T cells and purified via Ni-NTA gravity chromatography. Approximately 1ug of purified protein was denatured in 8 M urea and 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Thermo Fisher) for 5 min at 50 ℃, alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature and diluted with mass spec grade H2O to a final urea concentration of 2 M. Samples were then digested with 0.5ug of trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) or chymotrypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4 hrs at 37 ℃, acidified with 5% formic acid, sonicated for 20 min, then desalted using C18 ZipTips (EMD Millipore), eluted in 50% acetonitrile/0.1% acetic acid mixture. Samples were diluted to 2 ng/µl in 20% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid prior to injection into the mass spectrometer. 10 ng of each sample was injected and detected on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy nano-LC HPLC system with a C18 EasySpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 μm × 15 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of glycopeptides was carried out using a 30 min binary gradient consisting of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The resulting spectra were acquired in the positive polarity/ion mode over a range of 350-2000 m/z at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target value of 1x106. The top 10 most abundant precursor ions in each full MS scan were isolated and subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation-tandem mass spectrometry (HCD-MS/MS) and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 27%, an automatic gain control target value of 2x105 with an isolation window of 3 m/z at a fragment resolution of 17,500 and dynamic exclusion enabled. Peak lists and .raw data files were generated using Xcalibur software set to its default settings.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher) and were searched against a mouse ADAMTSL2 database (Accession No. Q7TSK7 v1 (October 1, 2003)). Byonic software v.2.10.5 (Protein Metrics) was used as a module inside Proteome Discoverer for identifying peptides with glycan modifications. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl on cysteines; variable modifications were Hex on tryptophan, oxidation on methionine, dHex on serine and threonine, dHexHex on serine and threonine. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10ppm and mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. False discovery rate (strict) for peptides was 0.01. False discovery rate for peptides (relaxed) was 0.05. Extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) for all peptides were generated using Xcalibur Qual Browser 4.0.27.19 (Thermo Fisher). The glycoform distribution on each TSR was quantified based on area under the curve of each EIC for all biological and technical replicates.

### Publication Abstract
<i>ADAMTSL2</i> mutations cause an autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder, geleophysic dysplasia 1 (GPHYSD1), which is characterized by short stature, small hands and feet, and cardiac defects. ADAMTSL2 is a matricellular protein previously shown to interact with latent transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; binding protein 1 and influence assembly of fibrillin 1 microfibrils. ADAMTSL2 contains seven thrombospondin type-1 repeats (TSRs), six of which contain the consensus sequence for <i>O</i>-fucosylation by protein <i>O-</i>fucosyltransferase 2 (POFUT2). <i>O-</i>fucose-modified TSRs are subsequently elongated to a glucose &#x3b2;1-3-fucose (GlcFuc) disaccharide by &#x3b2;1,3-glucosyltransferase (B3GLCT). <i>B3GLCT</i> mutations cause Peters Plus Syndrome (PTRPLS), which is characterized by skeletal defects similar to GPHYSD1. Several ADAMTSL2 TSRs also have consensus sequences for <i>C-</i>mannosylation. Six reported GPHYSD1 mutations occur within the TSRs and two lie near <i>O-</i>fucosylation sites. To investigate the effects of TSR glycosylation on ADAMTSL2 function, we used MS to identify glycan modifications at predicted consensus sequences on mouse ADAMTSL2. We found that most TSRs were modified with the GlcFuc disaccharide at high stoichiometry at <i>O</i>-fucosylation sites and variable mannose stoichiometry at <i>C-</i>mannosylation sites. Loss of ADAMTSL2 secretion in <i>POFUT2</i><sup>-/-</sup> but not in <i>B3GLCT</i><sup>-/-</sup> cells suggested that impaired ADAMTSL2 secretion is not responsible for skeletal defects in PTRPLS patients. In contrast, secretion was significantly reduced for ADAMTSL2 carrying GPHYSD1 mutations (S641L in TSR3 and G817R in TSR6), and S641L eliminated <i>O-</i>fucosylation of TSR3. These results provide evidence that abnormalities in GPHYSD1 patients with this mutation are caused by loss of <i>O-</i>fucosylation on TSR3 and impaired ADAMTSL2 secretion.

### Keywords
Thrombospondin type 1 repeats, Geleophysic dysplasia, Tsr glycosylation, Adamtsl2 o-fucosylation

### Affiliations
The University of Georgia
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, The University of Georgia, U.S.A.

### Submitter
Ao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S. Haltiwanger
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, The University of Georgia, U.S.A.


