### Accession
PXD038899

### Title
Snapper: a high-sensitive algorithm to detect methylation motifs based on Oxford Nanopore reads

### Description
The Oxford Nanopore technology has a great potential for the analysis of genome methylation, including full-genome methylome profiling. However, there are certain issues while identifying methylation motif sequences caused by low sensitivity of the currently available motif enrichment algorithms. Here, we present Snapper, a new highly-sensitive approach to extract methylation motif sequences based on a greedy motif selection algorithm. Snapper has shown higher enrichment sensitivity compared with the MEME tool coupled with Tombo or Nanodisco instruments, which was demonstrated on H. pylori strain J99 studied earlier using the PacBio technology. In addition, we used Snapper to characterize the total methylome of a new H.pylori strain A45. The analysis revealed the presence of at least 4 methylation sites that have not been described for H. pylori earlier. We experimentally confirmed a new CCAG-specific methyltransferase and indirectly inferred a new CCAAK-specific methyltransferase.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase column (15 cm × 75 μm i.d. , Agilent Technologies, USA) packed with Zorbax 300SB-C18 resin (particle size – 3 um, pore diameter – 100 A) that was coupled to a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) via a nanoelectrospray source Nanospray Flex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Source voltage was set at 2200 V and capillary temperature at 325°C. Each sample was introduced through EASY-nLC (Thermo, USA) chromatography system in trap-elute configuration (trap column was a 2 cm × 75 μm i.d. Acclaim PepMap column by Dionex, USA, with C18 resin with 3 um-particles with 100 A pores). Samples were introduced onto trap-column with 10 uL of solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid) at constant pressure 500 bar. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of0 5 to 50 % (v/v) of solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid, 79.9% v/v acetonitrile) across 60 minutes at flowrate of 500 nl/min in 3 linear steps (10 minutes to 10% B, 25 min to 20% B, 15 min to 35% B, 10 min to 50% B). After each elution system and columns were washed with 100% of solvent B for 10 minutes and regenerated with 5% of solvent B for 20 minutes. The mass-spectrometer was operated in positive mode in a data-dependent experiment with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400 within m/z range of 200-1600 with automatic gain control set for 3x106 and maximum injection time of 32 ms. As many as 20 of the most abundant precursor ions with a charge +2 and above from the survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation. The normalized collision energy was 27. MS2 spectra were acquired at resolution of 7500 at m/z 400, automatic gain control was set for 2x105 and maximum injection time for 32 ms. After fragmentation ions were dynamically excluded from consideration for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were relatively quantified using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43. Raw files were searched with an integrated Andromeda search engine against the core peptide database that consisted of peptides that could be produced by strictly one protein. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and two missed cleavages were permissible, minimum peptide length was 7. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptide spectral matches. Protein abundance was estimated as a total intensity of its 3 most intense peptides. Difference in each protein’s abundance was considered significant if it allowed the FDR to be below 0.05, in addition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicobacter pylori, Methylation, Strain

### Affiliations
Scientific Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation
SRI for Systems Biology and Medicine

### Submitter
Ivan Butenko

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Butenko
SRI for Systems Biology and Medicine


