### Accession
PXD020367

### Title
Autophagosome Proteomics of HEK293 cells

### Description
Pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk acts as an inhibitor of peptide:N-glycanase (NGLY1); an endoglycosidase which cleaves N-linked glycans from glycoproteins exported from the endoplasmic reticulum during ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Pharmacological N-glycanase inhibition by Z-VAD-fmk or siRNA knockdown (KD) induces GFP-LC3 positive puncta in HEK293 cells. Activation of ER stress markers or reactive oxygen species (ROS) induction are not observed. In NGLY1 inhibition or KD, upregulation of autophagosome formation without impairment of autophagic flux are observed. Enrichment and proteomics analysis of autophagosomes after Z-VAD-fmk treatment or NGLY1 KD reveals similar autophagosomal protein content. Autophagy represents a cellular adaptation to NGLY1 inhibition or KD, and ATG13-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) show reduced viability under these conditions. In contrast, treatment with pan-caspase inhibitor, Q-VD-OPh does not induce cellular autophagy. Therefore, experiments with Z-VAD-fmk are complicated by the effects of NGLY1 inhibition and Q-VD-OPh represents an alternative caspase inhibitor free from this limitation.

### Sample Protocol
Stably transfected GFP-LC3 HEK cells were cultured, treated with Z-VAD-fmk (50 µM) for 72 h or transfected with NGLY1 siRNA (25 nM) and used 5 days post-transfection. Cells (80 million per replicate) were treated with Bafilomycin A1 (100 nM) for 1 h to allow accumulation of autophagosomes. Following treatment with Bafilomycin, cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS and harvested by treatment with Trypsin-EDTA (0.25%) (Thermofisher). Cells were pelleted and thrice washed in ice cold PBS. Cells were lysed in 1 % Triton in PBS by dounce homogenisation and incubated for 0.5 h at 4°C. The resultant lysate was centrifuged at 6000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and centrifuged again at 20 000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet re-suspended in PBS (500 µl) and added to filter spin column with Chromotek GFPTrap® agarose beads (50 µl) or Chromotek agarose beads (50 µl) washed 3x in PBS. Samples were tumbled for 1 h at 4°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 2 500 g for 2 min and, the flow-through discarded. Samples were washed 7x in ice-cold PBS-T by centrifugation. Samples were eluted by 0.2 M glycine, pH 2.5 (50 µl) for 1 min with constant vortexing. Beads were centrifuged into a fresh, low protein binding tube. Elution was repeated and samples pooled. Samples were neutralised by the addition of 1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Eluted material was then processed for proteomics analysis by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Tryptic digests were desalted and then analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.2.3), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot homo sapiens database (version 20180104, number of entries: 20,256). A reverse decoy database approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and asparagine deamidation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 0.7 and 20 minutes respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The polycaspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk acts as an inhibitor of peptide: N-glycanase (NGLY1), an endoglycosidase which cleaves N-linked glycans from glycoproteins exported from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) during ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Both pharmacological N-glycanase inhibition by Z-VAD-fmk and siRNA-mediated knockdown (KD) of NGLY1 induce GFP-LC3-positive puncta in HEK 293 cells. The activation of ER stress markers or induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is not observed under either condition. Moreover, Ca<sup>2+</sup> handling is unaffected when observing release from intracellular stores. Under conditions of pharmacological NGLY1 inhibition or NGLY1 KD, upregulation of autophagosome formation without impairment of autophagic flux is observed. Enrichment of autophagosomes by immunoprecipitation (IP) and mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis reveals comparable autophagosomal protein content. Gene ontology analysis of proteins enriched in autophagosome IPs shows overrepresentation of factors involved in protein translation, localization and targeting, RNA degradation and protein complex disassembly. Upregulation of autophagy represents a cellular adaptation to NGLY1 inhibition or KD, and ATG13-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) show reduced viability under these conditions. In contrast, treatment with pan-caspase inhibitor, Q-VD-OPh, does not induce cellular autophagy. Therefore, experiments with Z-VAD-fmk are complicated by the effects of NGLY1 inhibition, including induction of autophagy, and Q-VD-OPh represents an alternative caspase inhibitor free from this limitation. ENZYMES: Peptide:N-glycanase1, Peptide-N(4)-(N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminyl)asparagine amidase [EC:3.5.1.52].

### Keywords
Autophagy; autophagosome; ngly1; n-glycanase; z-vad-fmk; off-target

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility,  MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences,  Du Cane Road,  London W12 0NN,  United Kingdom
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Kramer
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility,  MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences,  Du Cane Road,  London W12 0NN,  United Kingdom


