### Accession
PXD033454

### Title
A Bioorthogonal Chemical Reporter for the Detection and Identification of Protein Lactylation

### Description
L-Lactylation is a recently discovered post-translational modification occurring on histone lysine residues to regulate gene expression. However, the substrate scope of lactylation, especially that in non-histone proteins, remains unknown, largely due to the limitations of current methods for analyzing lactylated proteins. Herein, we report an alkynyl-functionalized bioorthogonal chemical reporter, YnLac, for the detection and identification of protein lactylation in mammalian cells. Our in-gel fluorescence and chemical proteomic analyses show that YnLac is metabolically incorporated into lactylated proteins and directly labels known lactylated lysines of histones. We further apply YnLac to the proteome-wide profiling of lactylation, revealing many novel modification sites in non-histone proteins for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were treated with YnLac. The same concentration of L-lactate was used as the vehicle control. For both YnLac labeling and L-lactate control treatment, four biological replicates were performed in the proteomics analysis. Cells were harvested and lysed to separate the nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions as described above. Cell lysates from both fractions were centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min to remove cellular debris. Protein concentrations were determined by the BCA assay. The cell lysates were then clicked with acid cleavable azido-DADPS-biotin in the presence of TCEP, TBTA, and CuSO4. Methanol-precipitated and washed protein pellets were again resuspended in 4% SDS buffer. Protein concentrations were determined and equal amounts of each protein sample were diluted 1/4 by volume with 50 mM triethanolamine buffer to 1% SDS. Then prewashed streptavidin agarose beads were added to each sample. The protein and beads mixtures were incubated at room temperature on a nutating mixer for 1.5 h. The beads were then washed 4~6 times with 1% SDS with rotation for 5 min and transferred into spin-columns. The beads were then washed with 5 M urea, followed by washes with PBS and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. The beads were then transferred into new 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes and incubated with 10 mM DTT for 1 h, followed by treatment with 20 mM iodoacetamide for another 1 h in the dark. After that, the beads were washed with 100 mM ABC buffer and digested with 0.5 μg of trypsin in ABC buffer at 37 °C overnight. The beads were again washed with ABC buffer and ddH2O. Finally, the beads were resuspended with 5% formic acid in ddH2O to cleave the DADPS linker. The elution was repeated twice and the supernatants were pooled and dried by SpeedVac for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software v1.5.3.8 using the Andromeda search engine and searched against the human UniProt Reference Proteome without isoforms concatenated with common known contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing maximum four missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For identification of lactylation sites, a variable modification on lysine residues (C11H17O3N3, + 239.12699 Da) was included. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Minimum length of peptides was set to seven amino acids, and maximum mass was set to 4,600 Da. The false discovery rates were set to 1% for peptide spectrum match, protein, and site decoy fraction levels. Minimum score and delta score for modified peptides were set to 40 and 6, respectively. Other parameters in MaxQuant were kept at default values. The search results from MaxQuant on lactylation sites were analyzed with Perseus v1.6.10.0 and Microsoft Excel. Known contaminants, reverse hits, and hits only identified by site were removed.

### Publication Abstract
l-Lactylation is a recently discovered post-translational modification occurring on histone lysine residues to regulate gene expression. However, the substrate scope of lactylation, especially that in non-histone proteins, remains unknown, largely due to the limitations of current methods for analyzing lactylated proteins. Herein, we report an alkynyl-functionalized bioorthogonal chemical reporter, YnLac, for the detection and identification of protein lactylation in mammalian cells. Our in-gel fluorescence and chemical proteomic analyses show that YnLac is metabolically incorporated into lactylated proteins and directly labels known lactylated lysines of histones. We further apply YnLac to the proteome-wide profiling of lactylation, revealing many novel modification sites in non-histone proteins for the first time. Moreover, we demonstrate that lactylation of a newly identified substrate protein PARP1 regulates its ADP-ribosylation activity. Our study thus provides a powerful chemical tool for characterizing protein lactylation and greatly expands our understanding of substrate proteins and functions of this new modification.

### Keywords
Chemical reporter, Chemical proteomics, Lactylation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

### Submitter
Tao Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Peng
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Oncogenomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China


