### Accession
PXD017431

### Title
Novel biallelic mutations in POLR1A: expansion of the phenotype and insight into the molecular mechanism

### Description
The eukaryotic genome is transcribed by three RNA polymerases (Pol) I, II and III; each transcribing different classes of RNAs. Pol I transcribes ribosomal DNA and produces the polycistronic rRNA 47S, which releases 28S, 18S and 5.8S rRNAs. Heterozygous mutations in the Pol I subunit POLR1A have been described in three patients presenting with Acrofacial Dysostosis, Cincinnati Type (MIM 616462), while a homozygous mutation in POLR1A was identified in two siblings, presenting developmental regression and several brain anomalies. We present three patients with homozygous mutations in POLR1A. Patient 1, a Norwegian male homozygous for POLR1A p.T642N, presented severe neurodegeneration with epilepsy, and died at 16 years of age. Patient 2, a 5.4-years-old Mexican male homozygous for POLR1A p.R667H, presented with severe neurodegeneration, epilepsy, and skeletal anomalies. Patient 3, a 2-year-old Dutch girl homozygous for POLR1A p.T642N, manifested severe global developmental delay, and brain anomalies. Structure superimposition of POLR1A wild-type and POLR1A T642N or R667H suggested a possible abnormal interaction between POLR1A and POLR2H. In vitro experiments showed that POLR1A T642N has higher transcriptional activity, abnormal rRNA processing, increased autophagy, deprotected telomeres, and reduced levels of p53. Proteomics analysis of patients 1 supported these findings, identifying dysfunction of pathways related to protein synthesis, ubiquitination, phagosome activities, and cell survival. In conclusion, we expand the phenotype of this rare disease and document a transcriptional defect affecting multiple processes, which impact cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
Skin fibroblasts (2 x 106 cells) from one patient and two controls were used to obtain nuclear and cytoplasmic protein extracts as previously described (Vascotto 2014; DOI:10.1038/onc.2013.251).   Cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were stored at -20 °C in aliquots. The proteins were precipitated with 2-D Clean Up-Kit (GE healthcare) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The pellets were resuspended in 40 ul with 0.2% ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested into peptides with trypsin according to the ProteaseMax protocol. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore).  Each peptide mixture was analyzed by a nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive Plus (ThermoElectron) with EASY Spray PepMap®RSLC column using a 120 minutes liquid chromatography (LC) separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 (Tyanova 2016; DOI:10.1038/nprot.2016.136) for protein identification and label free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. The Uniprot database with ‘human’ entries (January 2016) was used for the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
RNA polymerase I transcribes ribosomal DNA to produce precursor 47S rRNA. Post-transcriptional processing of this rRNA generates mature 28S, 18S and 5.8S rRNAs, which form the ribosomes, together with 5S rRNA, assembly factors and ribosomal proteins. We previously reported a homozygous variant in the catalytic subunit of RNA polymerase I, POLR1A, in two brothers with leukodystrophy and progressive course. However, the disease mechanism remained unknown. In this report, we describe another missense variant POLR1A NM_015425.3:c.1925C&gt;A; p.(Thr642Asn) in homozygosity in two unrelated patients. Patient 1 was a 16-year-old male and Patient 2 was a 2-year-old female. Both patients manifested neurological deficits, with brain MRIs showing hypomyelinating leukodystrophy and cerebellar atrophy; and in Patient 1 additionally with hypointensity of globi pallidi and small volume of the basal ganglia. Patient 1 had progressive disease course, leading to death at the age of 16.5 years. Extensive in vitro experiments in fibroblasts from Patient 1 documented that the mutated POLR1A led to aberrant rRNA processing and degradation, and abnormal nucleolar homeostasis. Proteomics data analyses and further in vitro experiments documented abnormal protein homeostasis, and endoplasmic reticulum stress responses. We confirm that POLR1A biallelic variants cause neurodegenerative disease, expand the knowledge of the clinical phenotype of the disorder, and provide evidence for possible pathological mechanisms leading to POLR1A-related leukodystrophy.

### Keywords
Defective rrna processing; neurodegenerative disease; seizures; childhood disease, Rna polymerase i, Polr1a

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


