### Accession
PXD014666

### Title
Decoding the genomic basis of osteoarthritis

### Description
Osteoarthritis, a serious joint disease for which we currently have no disease-stratifying or modifying therapy, causes pain and functional disability for almost a quarter of a billion people world-wide. In this study chondrocytes, synoviocytes and peripheral blood from 100 patients with osteoarthritis to construct a deep molecular quantitative trait locus (molQTL) map of the disease for transcriptomics and proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and TMT Labeling The protein content of each sample was precipitated by the addition of 30 μL TCA 8 M at 4 °C for 30 min. The protein pellets were washed twice with ice cold acetone and finally re-suspended in 40 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS with pulsed probe sonication. Equal aliquots containing at least 10 μg of total protein were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 1h at 60 °C, alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide and subjected to overnight trypsin (70 ng/μL) digestion. TMT 10-plex (Thermo Scientific) labelling was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions at equal amounts of tryptic digests. Samples were pooled and the mixture was dried with speedvac concentrator and stored at -20 °C until the peptide fractionation.   Peptide fractionation For sets 01-10, offline peptide fractionation was based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was dissolved in 100 μL mobile phase A, centrifuged and injected for fractionation. The gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min included the following steps: 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Signal was recorded at 280 nm and fractions were collected every one minute. For sets 11-24, peptide fractionation was performed on reversed-phase OASIS HLB cartridges at high pH and up to 9 fractions (10-25% acetonitrile elution steps) were collected for each set. The collected fractions were dried with SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -20 °C until the LC-MS analysis.   LC-MS Analysis   LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and a volume of 7 μL was loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the μlPickUp mode at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then analysed with a gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column retrofitted to an electrospray emitter (New Objective, FS360-20-10-D-20) at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient method at flow rate 300 nL/min was: for 90 min gradient to 38% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 13 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 2 min, for 10 min isocratic at 10% B. Precursors were selected with 120k mass resolution, AGC 3×105 and IT 100 ms in the top speed mode within 3 sec and were targeted for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 1.2 Th. Collision energy was set at 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 35 ms. MS3 quantification spectra were acquired with further HCD fragmentation of the top 10 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) excluding neutral losses of maximum m/z 18. Iontrap isolation width was set at 0.7 Th for MS1 isolation, collision energy was applied at 55% and the AGC setting was at 6×104 with 100 ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired within 110-400 m/z with 60k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.  Sets 11-24 were analyzed at the MS2 level with a top15 HCD method (CE 40%, 50k resolution) and a maximum precursor intensity threshold of 5×107 using the same MS1 parameters as above in a 360 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
To carry out protein identification and quantification, we submitted the mass spectra to SequestHT search in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm (Orbitrap Velos data, cohort 1) or 20 ppm (Fusion data, cohorts 2-4). For the CID spectra, we set the fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.5 Da; for the HCD spectra, to 0.02 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages and minimum length of 6 amino acids. We specified static modifications as TMT6plex at N-termimus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C; dynamic modifications included deamidation of N,Q and oxidation of M. For each peptide, we allowed for a maximum two different dynamic modifications with a maximum of two repetitions. We used the Percolator node to estimate peptide confidence. We set the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% and based validation on the q-value and decoy database search. We searched all spectra against a UniProt fasta file that contained 20,165 reviewed human entries. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a TMT-6plex (Velos data, cohort 1) or TMT-10plex (Fusion data, cohorts 2-4) custom Quantification Method with integration window tolerance at 20ppm or 15 ppm, respectively. As integration methods, we used the Most Confident Centroid at the MS2 or MS3 level. We only used peptides uniquely belonging to protein groups for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


