### Accession
PXD005567

### Title
Kv7.2 LC-MSMS -  Updating in vivo and in vitro phosphorylation and methylation sites of voltage-gated Kv7

### Description
Voltage-gated Kv7.2 potassium channels regulate neuronal excitability. The gating of Kv7 channels is regulated by various mediators and neurotransmitters acting via G protein-coupled receptors; the underlying signalling cascades involve phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), Ca2+/Calmodulin and phosphorylation. Recent studies have reported that PIP2 sensitivity of Kv7.2 channels is affected by two PTMs, phosphorylation and methylation, harboured in the PIP2 binding domains. Here this project aimed to update phosphorylation and methylation sites on Kv7.2 from heterologous cells, the rat brain and GST-fusion Kv7.2 N- and C-terminal ends proteins.

### Sample Protocol
CFT-tagged Kv7.2 proteins were stably expressed in HEK293 cell line and immunoprecipitated by using an anti-GFP antibody. Brain Kv7.2 proteins were immuneprecipitated from rat brain membrane fraction by using an anti-Kv7.2 antibody. GST-fusion proteins of Kv7.2 N- and C-termini (GST-Kv7.2N and GST-Kv7C) were purified from bacterial cells for in vitro phosphorylation analyses with recombinant protein kinases CDK5, PKCα, PKA, p38 MAPK, CamKIIα, GSK3β, and DNAPK. After size-fractionation by SDS-PAGE, the colloidal blue stained bands were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin at 37 °C for 2 to 18 hrs. The digested samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Dionex) with a PepMap100 C-18 analytic column (75 μm x 150 mm). Eluted peptides were then directly sprayed into an ESI-Q-TOF (Compact, Bruker) or ESI-ITMS (HCT and amaZon, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were recorded and interpreted with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against a customized database with 551,766 sequences including Swissprot (551,705 sequences, released in August 2016) and all isoforms of Kv7.2 proteins (We have submitted customized FASTA file, JWY-SwissProt_20160922.fasta in HEK1 group). The taxonomy was restricted to homo sapiens (human; 20235 sequences) for Kv7.2 from cell lines and GST fusion Kv7.2 proteins and rodentia (rodents; 26483 sequences) for rat Kv7.2 proteins purified from the rat brain. The search parameters were used with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Q-TOF) or 0.5 Da (ITMS), an MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da (Q-TOF) or 0.5 Da (ITMS); 3 missing cleavage sites and carbamidomethylation on Cys, oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser (S)/Thr (T), and mono- and di-methylation on Arg (R) were initially allowed. As a competition for the identification of methylation sites, mono-methylation on Arg (R), Lys (K) and Asp (D)/Glu (E) and di-methylation on Arg and Lys were also allowed. However, here we only considered arginine and lysine methylation because we used 20% methanol in the colloidal staining of SDS-PAGE gels and this can cause artefactual methylation on D/E. Each filtered MS/MS spectrum exhibiting possible phosphorylation and methylation was carefully examined based on the existence of a neutral loss of H3PO4 (98 Da) and mass shift of MS peaks by 14.015 Da (mono-methylation) or 28.031 Da (di-methylation), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Voltage-gated Kv7.2 potassium channels regulate neuronal excitability. The gating of these channels is tightly controlled by various mediators and neurotransmitters acting via G protein-coupled receptors; the underlying signaling cascades involve phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP<sub>2</sub> ), Ca<sup>2+</sup> /calmodulin, and phosphorylation. Recent studies found that the PIP<sub>2</sub> sensitivity of Kv7.2 channels is affected by two posttranslational modifications, phosphorylation and methylation, harboured within putative PIP<sub>2</sub> -binding domains. In this study, we updated phosphorylation and methylation sites in Kv7.2 either heterologously expressed in mammalian cells or as GST-fusion proteins exposed to recombinant protein kinases by using LC-MS/MS. In vitro kinase assays revealed that CDK5, protein kinase C (PKC) alpha, PKA, p38 MAPK, CamKII&#x3b1;, and GSK3&#x3b2; could mediate phosphorylation. Taken together, we provided a comprehensive map of phosphorylation and methylation in Kv7.2 within protein-protein and protein-lipid interaction domains. This may help to interpret the functional roles of individual PTM sites in Kv7.2 channels. All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD005567.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kv7.2, Kcnq2, Methylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology Center for Physiology and Pharmacology Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Jae-Won Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jae-Won Yang
Institute of Pharmacology Center for Physiology and Pharmacology Medical University of Vienna, Austria


