### Accession
PXD015310

### Title
YBEY is an essential biogenesis factor for mitochondrial ribosomes

### Description
The aim was to evaluate the protein composition of human mitoribosomes in YBEY knockout cells. We compared the parental cell line HEK293T-REx with the YBEY knockout cells HEK293T-RExΔYBEY.

### Sample Protocol
293T-REx cells (three technical replicates) were harvested from 600 cm2 and the three YBEY knockout clones from 1,200 cm2. Cell pellet was resuspended in 4 ml of chilled RSB buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 10 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM CaCl2) and incubated for 15 min on ice. Cells were homogenized with a small glass douncer. An equal volume of chilled MS buffer (420 mM mannitol, 140 mM sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 5 mM EDTA) was added and the suspension was gently mixed. Nuclei and cell debris were removed and mitochondria pelleted at 10,000g at 4 °C for 8 min. The mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in 1 ml RSB/MS buffers (1:1), pelleted again, resuspended in 200 µl of M1 buffer (600 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA) and loaded on a sucrose step gradient (1 M sucrose over 1.5 M sucrose in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA) formed in a 14×89 mm tube (Beckman Coulter, Cat#331372). After centrifugation at 20,000g for 30 min at 4°C on a SW 41 Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter), the mitochondrial interphase was transferred to a fresh tube and an equal amount of 1× TE buffer was added. Mitochondria were pelleted at 10,000g at 4°C for 6 min and washed once with chilled M3 buffer (210 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 10 mM KCl, 6 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1 mM DTT and 0.1% proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Cat#11863170001). The mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in chilled M3 buffer supplemented with 1 mM DTT, 0.1% proteinase inhibitor cocktail and 0.02% digitonin and incubated for 10 min on ice. The mitochondrial pellet was washed once with chilled M3 buffer supplemented with 1 mM DTT and 0.1% proteinase inhibitor cocktail and stored at -80°C for further use. The mitochondrial pellet was dissolved in 200 µl of lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES_KOH, pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 25 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, 0.01% proteinase inhibitor cocktail and 1.7% Triton X-100) and incubated on ice for 15 min. After clearing the lysate by centrifugation at 30,000g for 20 min at 4°C, the lysate was loaded on a sucrose cushion (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, 0.01% proteinase inhibitor cocktail, 1% Triton X-100, 1 M sucrose) in a 11×34 mm polypropylene tube (Beckman Coulter, Cat#347357) and centrifuged for 6 hours at 55,000 rpm at 4°C on a TLS-55 rotor (Beckman Coulter) in a TL-100 ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter). The pellet was dissolved in RapiGest SF (Waters, Cat#186002122) and the protein concentration was determined (Bio-Rad protein assay, Bio-Rad, Cat#5000006). The mitoribosomal lysates were frozen in liquid nitrogen and analyzed at the Proteomics core facility of the Medical University of Vienna.

### Data Protocol
Before mass spectrometric detection and analysis, peptides were also identified using the UV at 214 nm in a 3nl cell. Mass spectrometric detection and MS/MS analysis was performed using the Q-Exactive Orbitrap BioPharma (ThermoFisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were introduced into the nano electrospray source (ESI) after the UV cell and the ionization was performed using the steel needle with 20 µm inner diameter and 10µm tip. Needle voltage was set to 2kV in positive mode and the top 10 ions were selected for MS/MS analysis (fragmentation), resolution was set to 70.000 for full MS scans, ions with single charge were excluded from MS/MS analysis and fragmented ions were excluded for 60 seconds from further fragmentation.  Database search was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) with following settings:  1. Swissprot Human Database version of January 2019 2. Enzyme: Trypsin 3. Max. Missed Cleavage 2 4. Min Peptide Length: 6 amino acids 5. Max. Peptide Length: 144 amino acids 6. Precursos mass tolerance: 10 ppm 7. Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02Da 8. Dynamic modification: Oxidation on M, Acetylation on N-terminus 9. Fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation on C 10. False Discovery Rate: 1%

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome biogenesis requires numerous trans-acting factors, some of which are deeply conserved. In Bacteria, the endoribonuclease YbeY is believed to be involved in 16S rRNA 3'-end processing and its loss was associated with ribosomal abnormalities. In Eukarya, YBEY appears to generally localize to mitochondria (or chloroplasts). Here we show that the deletion of human YBEY results in a severe respiratory deficiency and morphologically abnormal mitochondria as an apparent consequence of impaired mitochondrial translation. Reduced stability of 12S rRNA and the deficiency of several proteins of the small ribosomal subunit in YBEY knockout cells pointed towards a defect in mitochondrial ribosome biogenesis. The specific interaction of mitoribosomal protein uS11m with YBEY suggests that the latter helps to properly incorporate uS11m into the nascent small subunit in its late assembly stage. This scenario shows similarities with final stages of cytosolic ribosome biogenesis, and may represent a late checkpoint before the mitoribosome engages in translation.

### Keywords
Ribosomes, Mitochondira

### Affiliations
Head Proteomics Core Facility Medical University of Vienna
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulovic
Head Proteomics Core Facility Medical University of Vienna


