### Accession
PXD037800

### Title
Whole cell proteome of U2OS cells or Saos-2 cells depleted for SENP3

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a complex and energy demanding process requiring tight coordination with cell growth and proliferation. Impairment of ribosome biogenesis activates a well-defined cell-cycle checkpoint that primarily relies on the activation of p53 signaling. However, there is mounting evidence that p53-independent signaling networks connect impaired ribosome biogenesis to cell cycle-checkpoints. So far, however, these pathways have remained largely enigmatic. By characterizing the nucleolar SUMO isopeptidase SENP3 and SENP5 we found that both isopeptidases control the SUMOylation state of specific ribosome biogenesis factors and regulate the 60S and 40S ribosome maturation pathways. Accordingly, inactivation of SENP3 and SENP5 induces a canonical p53-mediated G1/S arrest. Intriguingly, however, we discovered that inactivation of SENP3 or SENP5 drastically and specifically downregulates the expression of the key-cell cycle regulator CDK6 in a p53-independent process. Accordingly, depletion of SENP3 or SENP5 impairs G1/S transition and cell proliferation in both p53-proficient and p53-deficient cells. Strikingly, we further revealed that impaired ribosome maturation induced by depletion of a panel of ribosome biogenesis factors or by chemical inhibition of RNA polymerase I, generally triggers loss of CDK6 independent of the cellular p53 status. Altogether our data unveil a long-sought p53-independent checkpoint of impaired ribosome biogenesis. Since CDK6 represents a dependency in a subset of cancer entities, such as AML and lymphoma, we propose that this checkpoint can serve as an actionable drug target in tumor therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell proteome (WCP) analysis was accomplished in either Saos-2 or U-2-OS cell lines transfected with siRNA against SENP3 (siSENP3-1 or siSENP3-2) or control siRNA. For each condition four replicates were used. 72 h after transfection cells were scraped in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µg/ml Aprotinin, 2 µg/ml Leupeptin, 1 µg/ml Pepstatin A, pH 8.5). Methanol and Chloroform were used to precipitate the proteins. Pellets were dissolved (8M urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.2) at 37°C for 30 min before determination of the protein concentration using BCA assay (Thermo). 50 µg of protein was digested overnight by Trypsin and Lys-C. Afterwards samples were desalted using tC18 Sep-Pak SPE cartridges (Waters), dried by speed-vac and resolved in 200 mM EPPS, 10 % ACN, pH 8.2. The microBCA assay kit (Thermo) was used to determine the peptide concentration prior to TMT labelling. 10 µg peptide per sample was supplemented with 1 µl (25 µg) of the respective TMTpro™ reagent (Thermo). Successful labelling was tested by MS before samples were finally pooled, concentrated and desalted on STAGE tips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003). The Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo) was used to generate 8 fractions. Proteomic analysis was performed on an easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted by non-linear gradient for each fraction over 210 minutes and afterwards directly sprayed into a Fusion Lumos MS with a nanoFlex ion source (Thermo Fisher). Top-Speed method (1.5s cycle time) with the RF lens at 30% was used for MS analysis. A resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 4 x 105 were used to get full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z). The Ion trap (Rapid) was used to obtain MS2 scans applying an isolation window of 0.7 Th and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. CID with a collision energy of 35% was used to achieve ion fragmentation. The 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions were used for SPS-MS3 analysis (isolation window 0.7 Th (MS1) and 2 m/z (MS2)). Fragmentation of the ions was done using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 65. For final analysis the Orbitrap was set to a scan range of 110-500 m/z, a AGC target value of 1.5 x 105, a resolution setting of 50,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 45 seconds and 7 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was done using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4) selecting SequenceHT node for database searches. The human trypsin digested proteome (Homo sapiens SwissProt database [20531]) was used for protein identification, while contaminants were spotted using MaxQuant “contamination.fasta”. TMTpro (K, +304.207 Da) at the N terminus and carbamidomathyl (+57.021 Da) at cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications, while TMTpro (K, +304.207 Da), methionine oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) and Acetyl (+42.011 Da) at the N terminus were set as dynamic modifications. Fragment and precursor mass tolerance were set to 0.02 Da and 7 ppm respectively. Quantification of reporter ions was done using default settings in consensous workflow. Microsoft Excel was used to determine significant hits by using following criteria: log2 ratio >= 0.58, -log10 p-value >= 1.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sumo, Senp, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IBCII, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, Medical School
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)


### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
IBCII, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, Medical School


