### Accession
PXD039404

### Title
Proteome of Caco-2 cells, transfected with KRAS-G12D and stimulated with different conditions.

### Description
Description: (Supplemental data for Project PXD035399) “Analysis of context-specific KRAS-effectors (sub)complexes in Caco-2 cells”. Proteome of Caco-2 cells, transfected with KRAS-G12D and stimulated with different conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Caco-2 cells were transfected with FLAG-KRASG12D in serum free DMEM for 4 h and then stimulated in various growth conditions (unstimulated, DMOG, IL-6, PGE2, EGF and TNF-a) at 20 ng/ml for 18 h. Afterwards, the cells were harvested and directly lysed. Cell lysate were prepared for mass spectrometry as descrided in Project PXD035399 “Analysis of context-specific KRAS-effectors (sub)complexes in Caco-2 cells”.  Mass Spectrometry The peptides were analysed using a shotgun proteomics technique. This technique allows a sensitive bottom-up approach that consists of separating peptides resulting from protein digestion by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Samples were run on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer connected to an Evosep One liquid chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid and each sample was loaded onto an Evosep tip. The Evosep tips were placed in position on the Evosep One, in a 96-tip box. The autosampler is configured to pick up each tip, elute and separate the peptides using a set chromatography method (1). The chromatography buffers used were buffer B (99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer A (99.9 % water, 0.1 % formic acid). All solvents are LCMS grade. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.89 seconds (2). References 1. Bache, Nicolai, et al. "A novel LC system embeds analytes in pre-formed gradients for rapid, ultra-robust proteomics." Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 17.11 (2018): 2284-2296. 2. Meier, F. et al. Online Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) with a Novel Trapped Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometer. Mol Cell Proteomics 17, 2534-2545, doi :10.1074/mcp. TIR118.000900 (2018).

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was done using MaxQuant software. The raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) with the search engine Maxquant (release 2.0.3.0). Specific parameters for trapped ion mobility spectrometry data-dependent acquisition (TIMS DDA) were used: Fixed Mod: carbamidomethylation; Variable Mods: methionine, oxidation; Trypsin/P digest enzyme (maximum 2 missed cleavages); Precursor mass tolerances 10 ppm; Peptide FDR 1%; Protein FDR 1%. The normalized protein intensity of each identified protein was used for label-free quantitation (LFQ) using the MaxLFQ algorithm (3). Reference 3. Cox, Jürgen, et al. "Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ." Molecular & cellular proteomics 13.9 (2014): 2513-2526. 3. Cox, Jürgen, et al. "Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ." Molecular & cellular proteomics 13.9 (2014): 2513-2526.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caco-2 cells, Proteome, Kras

### Affiliations
Associate Professor of Systems Biology Department of Molecular Medicine University of Pavia 9, via A Ferrata/ 27100 Pavia / Italy
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Kiel
Associate Professor of Systems Biology Department of Molecular Medicine University of Pavia 9, via A Ferrata/ 27100 Pavia / Italy


