### Accession
PXD037928

### Title
circRIG-I associated proteins in HEK293T

### Description
We use Proximity biotinylation to find circRIG-I associated proteins in HEK293T.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing MS2 coating protein (MCP)-TurboID fusion protein and 4 × MS2 tagged circRIG-I. After 24 hours of transfection, biotin was added at a final concentration of 100 μM for 30 minutes. Cells were washed four times with ice cold PBS before harvesting. Cells were lysed by RIPA (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) at 4°C for 30 minutes. Streptavidin agarose beads (Millipore, 69203) were used to enrich biotin labeled proteins at 4°C for 3 hours. The beads were subsequently washed with RIPA lysis buffer twice, 1 M KCl once, 0.1 M Na2CO3 once, 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8.0) once and RIPA lysis buffer twice. Finally, biotinylated proteins were eluted by boiling the beads with elution buffer (55 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8.0), 0.1% SDS, 6.66 mM DTT, 2 mM biotin) for 10 minutes and were subjected to NuPAGE 4%-12% gel (Invitrogen) and sliver staining (Pierce, 24612). The excised gel segments were subjected to mass spectrum analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid and auto-sampled directly onto a 100 μm × 10 cm fused silica emitter made in our laboratory packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm and 120 Å; Ammerbuch, Germany). Samples were then eluted for 50 min with linear gradients of 5–32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometry data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) with a target value of 3,000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against a database from the UniProt protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293t, Circrig-i

### Affiliations
Peking University
Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Jia Song

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Lu
Peking University


