### Accession
PXD028099

### Title
Proteomics to study cardiotoxic noxae in adults

### Description
The heart tissue is a potential target of various noxae contributing to the onset of cardiovascular diseases. However, underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are largely unknown. Human stem cell-derived models are promising, but a major concern is the cell immaturity when estimating risks for adults. In this study, 3D aggregates of human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes were cultivated for 300 days and characterized regarding degree of maturity, structure, and cell composition. Furthermore, effects of ionizing radiation (X rays, 0.1–2 Gy) on matured aggregates were investigated, representing one of the noxae that are challenging to assess. Video-based functional analyses were correlated to changes in the proteome after the irradiation. Cardiomyocytes reached maximum maturity after 100 days in cultivation, judged by α-actinin lengths, displayed typical multinucleation and branching. At this time, aggregates contained all major cardiac cell types, proven by the patch-clamp technique. Matured and X-ray-irradiated aggregates revealed a subtle increase in beat rates and decrease in rhythmicity in a dose-dependent manner compared to non irradiated sham controls. The proteome analysis provides first insights into signaling mechanisms contributing to cardiotoxicity. Here, we propose an in vitro model suitable to screen various noxae to target adult cardiotoxicity by preserving all benefits of a 3D tissue culture.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation and measurement Ten µg of sample were enzymatically digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol as described by (Wisniewski et al., 2009; Grosche et al.,MCP 2016). Peptides were stored at -20°C until MS measurement. Mass spectrometry (MS) measurement was performed in data dependent (DDA) mode. MS data were acquired on a Q Exactive (QE) high field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) as described in Hladik et al 2019: PMID: 31657930

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data Processing – Protein Identification Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against Swissprot mouse data base (Release 2020_02, 17061 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle.   Data processing – Label-free quantification The quantification of proteins, was based on the area value of the abundance values for unique plus razor peptides. Abundance values were normalized in a retention time dependent manner to account for sample loading errors. The protein abundances were calculated summing up the abundance values for admissible peptides. The final protein ratio was calculated using median abundance values three replicate analyses each. The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the T-test approach described in [24] which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes for proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner. Proteins identified with at least two unique peptides and with fold change ratios greater than 1.50-fold or less than 0.66-fold (adjusted p < 0.05) were defined as being significantly differentially expressed. The analyses of protein-protein interaction and signaling networks were performed by the analysis tool g:Profiler (version e104_eg51_p15_3922dba) [25]. Graphs were created with the GraphPad Prism program.

### Publication Abstract
The heart tissue is a potential target of various noxae contributing to the onset of cardiovascular diseases. However, underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are largely unknown. Human stem cell-derived models are promising, but a major concern is cell immaturity when estimating risks for adults. In this study, 3D aggregates of human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes were cultivated for 300 days and characterized regarding degree of maturity, structure, and cell composition. Furthermore, effects of ionizing radiation (X-rays, 0.1-2 Gy) on matured aggregates were investigated, representing one of the noxae that are challenging to assess. Video-based functional analyses were correlated to changes in the proteome after irradiation. Cardiomyocytes reached maximum maturity after 100 days in cultivation, judged by &#x3b1;-actinin lengths, and displayed typical multinucleation and branching. At this time, aggregates contained all major cardiac cell types, proven by the patch-clamp technique. Matured and X-ray-irradiated aggregates revealed a subtle increase in beat rates and a more arrhythmic sequence of cellular depolarisation and repolarisation compared to non-irradiated sham controls. The proteome analysis provides first insights into signaling mechanisms contributing to cardiotoxicity. Here, we propose an in vitro model suitable to screen various noxae to target adult cardiotoxicity by preserving all the benefits of a 3D tissue culture.

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Maturation, Proteomics, Cardiomyocytes

### Affiliations
Biophysics Department, GSI Helmholtz Center for Heavy Ion Research GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Insa s. Schroeder
Biophysics Department, GSI Helmholtz Center for Heavy Ion Research GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany


