### Accession
PXD009235

### Title
Clostridium sordellii outer spore proteins

### Description
Bacterial spores play an important role in disease initiation, transmission and persistence. The outermost spore layer, the exosporium, is important as it is the first point of contact between the spore and the environment and may be involved in spore adherence, protection and germination. Clostridium sordellii is a highly lethal, spore forming pathogen that causes soft-tissue infections, enteritis and toxic-shock syndrome. Despite the importance of C. sordellii spores in disease, spore proteins from this bacterium have not been defined or interrogated functionally. In this study, we identified the C. sordellii outer spore proteome and two of the identified proteins, CSA and CSB, were characterised using a genetic and phenotypic approach. Both proteins were essential for the correct formation and positioning of the C. sordellii spore coat and exosporium. The absence of CSA reduced sporulation levels and increased spore sensitivity to heat, sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid. By comparison, CSB was required for normal levels of spore adherence to cervical, but not vaginal, cells, with csb mutant spores having increased adherence properties. The establishment of a mouse infection model of the gastrointestinal tract for C. sordellii allowed the role of CSA and CSB to be interrogated in an infected host. Following the oral administration of spores to mice, the wild-type strain efficiently colonized the gastrointestinal tract, with the peak of bacterial numbers occurring at one day post-infection. Colonization was reduced by two logs at four days post-infection. By comparison, mice infected with the csb mutant did not show a reduction in bacterial numbers. The absence of CSB therefore allows the csb mutant to persist within the gastrointestinal tract. We conclude that C. sordellii outer spore proteins are important for the structural and functional integrity of spores, and for colonization and persistence during infection. Finally, Clostridium difficile, Bacillus cereus and Bacillus anthracis encode proteins with homology to CSA and CSB but these bacteria produce spores that are structurally dissimilar to those of C. sordellii, and the function of the proteins in these hosts is different to that in C. sordellii. These findings suggest that, despite their homology, spore proteins can have variable functions in different bacterial species which highlights the necessity of studying each spore protein in the cognate species from which it originates.

### Sample Protocol
Outer spore proteins were prepared from 2 independent biological spore stocks and MS performed independently on each extract. C. sordellii outer spore proteins were extracted from purified spores. The extracts were then dialysed against phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1.4 mM KH2PO4, 4.3 mM Na2HPO4) using a molecular weight cut-off between 6000-8000. The proteins were reduced with 25 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetic acid and then trypsin digested in a 1:25 trypsin to protein ratio. The peptides were desalted and concentrated using a peptide trap (Michrome peptide Captrap) with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile at 8-10 µl min-1. The peptides were then eluted from the column in a linear gradient (0 %-90 % acetonitrile, in 0.1% formic acid) over 80 min using a flow rate of 0.5 µl/min. Each sample was then subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray MS (QSTAR, SCIEX at the Australian Proteome Analysis facility), operated in information acquisition mode, and a time-of-flight-MS survey scan was acquired (m/z 380-1600). From the survey scan, the 3 most intense multiply charged ions (counts ≥25) were selected for MS/MS analysis (m/z 100-1600).

### Data Protocol
Using ProteinPilot version 5 (SCIEX), MS data was used to search against the C. sordellii strain ATCC9714 sequence obtained from UniProt (taxonomy ID 1292036). The protein false discovery rate was set at 1%, and proteins were reported only if at least 1 unique peptide was identified in both independent biological replicates analysed. C. sordellii exosporial proteins identified by MS in this study were then used to search for orthologs in the proteome of C. difficile (taxonomy ID 1496). These orthologs were only recorded if they had previously been identified in the C. difficile exosporium by MS. The C. sordellii proteins labeled as ‘putative uncharacterised proteins’ were searched for orthologs in the proteomes of C. difficile (taxonomy ID 1496) and B. cereus (taxonomy ID 1396) to determine any homology to a characterized protein. BLASTP (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) was used for this analysis with a maximum identity of ≥ 30% and an e-value of ≤ 0.005% to determine orthologs present. C. sordellii exosporial proteins categorised as cytosolic proteins were excluded from this analysis, to be consistent with the proteins classified as exosporial proteins in C. difficile.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial spores play an important role in disease initiation, transmission and persistence. In some species, the exosporium forms the outermost structure of the spore and provides the first point of contact between the spore and the environment. The exosporium may also be involved in spore adherence, protection and germination. Clostridium sordellii is a highly lethal, spore forming pathogen that causes soft-tissue infections, enteritis and toxic-shock syndrome. Despite the importance of C. sordellii spores in disease, spore proteins from this bacterium have not been defined or interrogated functionally. In this study, we identified the C. sordellii outer spore proteome and two of the identified proteins, CsA and CsB, were characterised using a genetic and phenotypic approach. Both proteins were essential for the correct formation and positioning of the C. sordellii spore coat and exosporium. The absence of CsA reduced sporulation levels and increased spore sensitivity to heat, sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid. By comparison, CsB was required for normal levels of spore adherence to cervical, but not vaginal, cells, with csB mutant spores having increased adherence properties. The establishment of a mouse infection model of the gastrointestinal tract for C. sordellii allowed the role of CsA and CsB to be interrogated in an infected host. Following the oral administration of spores to mice, the wild-type strain efficiently colonized the gastrointestinal tract, with the peak of bacterial numbers occurring at one day post-infection. Colonization was reduced by two logs at four days post-infection. By comparison, mice infected with the csB mutant did not show a reduction in bacterial numbers. We conclude that C. sordellii outer spore proteins are important for the structural and functional integrity of spores. Furthermore, outer spore proteins are required for wild-type levels of colonization during infection, possibly as a result of the role that the proteins play in spore structure and morphology.

### Keywords
Clostridium sordellii, Spore, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Monash University

### Submitter
Rommel Mathias

### Lab Head
Dr Rommel Mathias
Monash University


