### Accession
PXD039395

### Title
Svf1-GFP pulldowns from Limar et al. 2023 JCB

### Description
Svf1-GFP pulldowns compared to untegged WT cells from SILAC labelled yeast cells. See Limar et al. 2023 JCB

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis was performed as described previously (Fröhlich et al., 2013). Briefly, cells were grown in SDC medium containing either light or heavy lysine to a concentration of 30 mg/ml. Main cultures were inoculated in 500 ml SDC medium to an OD600 0.1 from a pre-culture containing light or heavy lysine (30 mg/ml) and grown over day to an OD600 0.7-1.2. The same amount of OD units from both cultures were harvested at 4,000 rpm, 4 °C for 5 min, washed with ice cold water and snap frozen as pellets. Cells were lysed with 500 µl acid-washed glass beads in 500 µl GFP-Trap pull-down buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM potassium acetate, 5% glycerol, 1% n-octyl-β-D-glucoside and 1 pill/10 ml buffer cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA free (Roche) using the FastPrep (MP biomedicals). After a centrifugation step at 14,000 rpm and 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatants of light and heavy lysine cultured strains were incubated for 10 min at RT on a turning wheel with 12.5 µl in GFP-Trap pull-down buffer equilibrated GFP Trap beads (Chromotek). The beads were washed in total six times first with the pull-down buffer and then with the washing buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM potassium acetate, 5% glycerol). Afterwards the beads were combined and the proteins on the beads were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC at 37 °C overnight. Resulting peptides were transferred to a glass vial and 10 µl were used to perform reversed-phase chromatography on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a QExactivePLUS mass spectrometer (Thermo) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm PepMap C18 easy spray column (Thermo) with an inner diameter of 75 µm. The column temperature was kept at 40 °C. The peptides were eluted from the column via a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 12-35% in 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min followed by a 20 min increase to 60% and finally 10 min to reach 90% buffer B.  Eluted peptides from the column were directly electro sprayed into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired on the Q ExactivePlus in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 50 ms, with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense multiply charged ions (z≥2) from the survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Th and fragment with higher energy collision dissociation (Olsen et al., 2007) with normalized collision energies of 27. Target values for MS/MS were set at 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. To avoid repetitive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set at 20 s. The resulting MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0, www.maxquant.org/ (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). All calculations and plots were performed using the R software package (www.r-project.org/; RRID:SCR_001905).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0, www.maxquant.org/ (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). All calculations and plots were performed using the R software package (www.r-project.org/; RRID:SCR_001905).

### Publication Abstract
Ceramides, as key components of cellular membranes, play essential roles in various cellular processes, including apoptosis, cell proliferation, and cell signaling. Ceramides are the precursors of all complex sphingolipids in eukaryotic cells. They are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and are further processed at the Golgi apparatus. Therefore, ceramides have to be transported between these two organelles. In mammalian cells, the ceramide transfer protein forms a contact site between the ER and the trans-Golgi region and transports ceramide utilizing its steroidogenic acute regulatory protein-related lipid transfer domain. In yeast, multiple mechanisms of nonvesicular ceramide transport have been described. This involves the nuclear-vacuolar junction protein Nvj2, the yeast tricalbin proteins, and the lipocalin-like protein Svf1. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of nonvesicular ceramide transport mechanisms and their relevance in cellular physiology. We will highlight the physiological and pathological consequences of perturbations in nonvesicular ceramide transport and discuss future challenges in identifying and analyzing ceramide transfer proteins.

### Keywords
Svf1-gfp pulldowns from yeast svf1

### Affiliations
Osnabrueck University Department of Biology/Chemistry Bioanalytical Chemistry Section
University of Osnabrueck; DEpartment of Biology/Chemistry

### Submitter
Florian Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Fröhlich
Osnabrueck University Department of Biology/Chemistry Bioanalytical Chemistry Section


