### Accession
PXD012617

### Title
Peroxiredoxin promotes longevity and H2O2-resistance in yeast through redox-modulation of protein kinase A

### Description
Peroxiredoxins are modulators of aging in yeast and multicellular organisms. The mechanisms by which peroxiredoxins stimulate H2O2 resistance and slow down aging are, however, unclear. Here we show that the yeast peroxiredoxin Tsa1 boosts H2O2 resistance and prevents aging independent of cellular H2O2 levels, but in a manner dependent on H2O2 signaling. More specifically, we pin-point a role of Tsa1 in repressing nutrient signaling via protein kinase A (PKA) that governs both H2O2 resistance and longevity. Tsa1 controls PKA activity at the level of the catalytic subunits and Tpk1 is redox-modified by Tsa1 on a conserved cysteine residue (Cys243) in Tpk1 upon H2O2 addition boosting cellular H2O2 resistance. Tpk1 redox modification dephosphorylates a conserved threonine 241 in the activation loop reducing enzyme activity. We discuss these results in the context of an integrative view on aging where nutrient signaling pathways constitute hubs integrating information from multiple aging-related conduits.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing Tpk1-HBH (poly histidine, biotinylation signal) were grown at 30°C in yeast extract/peptone (YP) medium, containing 2% glucose as carbon source. Three independent experimental replicates were performed for each experimental condition. For each replicate, we inoculated 750ml YPD cultures, which were incubated (with shaking) overnight until OD600 = 1. Oxidative stress was induced by adding 0.4 mM or 0.8 mM (final concentration) H2O2 for 10 minutes. HB (poly histidine, biotinylation signal) tandem affinity purifications were performed as described elsewhere (Reiter et al., 2012). Cells were harvested by filtration and immediately deep frozen in liquid N2, ground using a SPEX Freezer Mill 6870 (SPEXSamplePrep, Metuchen, NJ, USA) with the following settings: 7 cycles: 3 min breakage (15 CPS), 3 min cooling, resuspended in buffer 1 (6 M guanidine HCl, 50 mM Tris pH8.0, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 0.1% Tween, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland, 11 873 580 001), pH 8) and cleared of debris by centrifugation 13.500 x g, 15 min, 4°C. Cleared extracts were incubated (4 hours, room temperature) with Ni2+-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK, 17–5318-06), washed with urea buffer (8M urea, 50mM sodium phosphate buffer pH8.0, 300mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween20) and urea buffer pH 6.3. Proteins were eluted in urea buffer pH 4.3 containing 10mM EDTA, incubated overnight with streptavidin-agarose beads, washed using urea wash buffer containing 1% SDS and urea wash buffer without SDS. Beads were washed five times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Cys-residues were alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Excess IAA was washed out by ABC. Proteins were digested with 300 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final concentration) and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). 50 fmol of the Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture (PRTC, Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were spiked in each sample for quality control. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher). A segmented linear gradient from 2% to 35% solvent B (solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A: 0.1% formic acid) was applied at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. A Proxeon nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective) was used for ionization. The capillary temperature was set to 200°C. Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380-1500 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4E5. The max. cycle time was set to 2.5 s and the most abundant precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% collision energy. Fragmented precursors were excluded from further fragmentation for 30s (with +/- 5 ppm accuracy) and peptides with charge +1 or > +6 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. The most abundant Tpk1 Cys containing peptide forms have been added to an inclusion list as specified in the raw files. PRM: Peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient (HPLC setup as described above). PRM data acquisition was performed using a scheduled method with 20 min windows for each target based on the retention time determined in the shotgun-approach. Raw data were obtained on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer applying the following settings: survey scan with 60k resolution, AGC 1E6, 60 ms IT, over a range of 400 to 1400 m/z, PRM scan with 30 k resolution, AGC 1E5, 200 ms IT, isolation window of 1.0 m/z with 0.3 m/z offset, and NCE of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Closed Database Search including Specific Modifications:Peptide identification and label free quantification (LFQ) were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) with default parameters. Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference proteome database (UniProt, version July 2018) in combination with a common laboratory contaminants database (MQ) was used for peptide spectrum matching. N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, tri-oxidation and glutathionylation of cysteine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable protein modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed. A maximum of 5 variable modifications per peptide was allowed. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide was allowed. ‘Requantify’ and “Match between runs” was activated. MaxLFQ (implemented in the MaxQuant package) was used for MS1-based label free quantification and normalization of protein groups. Open Database Search: To screen for protein modifications in a rather unbiased manner we initially performed an open search using MSFragger in FragPipe (Kong et al., 2017). The default open search parameters were used, with trypsin specificity, +/- 500 Da windows and oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as variable modifications. The observed mass shifts were inspected and filtered for the most abundant and relevant modifications occurring at Tpk1. PRM: Data analysis, manual validation of all transitions (based on retention time, relative ion intensities, and mass accuracy), and relative quantification was performed in Skyline. Up to six characteristic transitions were selected for each peptide and their peak areas were summed for peptide quantification (total peak area). MS1 signals of PRTC standards were used as global standards for normalization in Skyline to account for fluctuations in instrument performance. The mean of the log2 Tpk1 non-modified peptide intensities was used to normalize Tpk1 modified peptides and Tsa1 peptides to account for differences in Tpk1 levels. Tsa1 peptide intensities (anti-log) were summed up to obtain values for relative protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxiredoxins are H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> scavenging enzymes that also carry out H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> signaling and chaperone functions. In yeast, the major cytosolic peroxiredoxin, Tsa1 is required for both promoting resistance to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and extending lifespan upon caloric restriction. We show here that Tsa1 effects both these functions not by scavenging H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, but by repressing the nutrient signaling Ras-cAMP-PKA pathway at the level of the protein kinase A (PKA) enzyme. Tsa1 stimulates sulfenylation of cysteines in the PKA catalytic subunit by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and a significant proportion of the catalytic subunits are glutathionylated on two cysteine residues. Redox modification of the conserved Cys243 inhibits the phosphorylation of a conserved Thr241 in the kinase activation loop and enzyme activity, and preventing Thr241 phosphorylation can overcome the H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> sensitivity of Tsa1-deficient cells. Results support a model of aging where nutrient signaling pathways constitute hubs integrating information from multiple aging-related conduits, including a peroxiredoxin-dependent response to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Prm, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Mikael Molin
Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


