### Accession
PXD042259

### Title
K29-linked unanchored polyubiquitin chains disrupt ribosome biogenesis and direct ribosomal proteins to the Intranuclear Quality control compartment (INQ)

### Description
Ribosome assembly requires precise coordination between the production and assembly of  ribosomal components. Mutations in ribosomal proteins that inhibit the assembly process orribosome function are often associated with Ribosomopathies, some of which are linked to defects in proteostasis. In this study, we examine the interplay between several yeast proteostasis enzymes, including deubiquitylases (DUBs), Ubp2 and Ubp14, and E3 ligases, Ufd4 and Hul5, and we explore their roles in the regulation of the cellular levels of K29-linked unanchored polyubiquitin (polyUb) chains. Accumulating K29-linked unanchored polyUb chains associate with maturing ribosomes to disrupt their assembly, activate the Ribosome assembly stress response (RASTR), and lead to the sequestration of ribosomal proteins at the Intranuclear Quality control compartment INQ). These findings reveal the physiological relevance of INQ and provide insights into mechanisms of cellular toxicity associated with Ribosomopathies.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 10 mg of protein were digested with trypsin (enzyme/total protein: 1/25) overnight at 37°C with mild vortexing. Samples were desalted on Oasis HLB columns (Waters, Cambridge, MA) and dried down. The PTMScan ubiquitin branch motif (K-ε-GG) immunoaffinity beads (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) from one vial were washed three times with 1 mL of 200 mM triethanolamine pH 8.3. For cross-linking, 1 mL of 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) in 200 mM triethanolamine pH 8.3 was added and the sample was incubated for 1 h at room temperature under gentle rotation. The reaction was quenched by adding 50 μL of 1 M Tris–HCl pH 7.5 and incubating for 30 min under gentle rotation. Cross-linked beads were washed three times with icecold PBS, resuspended in 300 μL of PBS, and stored at 4 °C. For the ubiquitin IP, digests were reconstituted in 1 mL of PBS and incubated with 100 μL of anti-K(GG)-coupled agarose beads in PBS for 2 h at 4 °C under gentle rotation. Anti-K(GG)-coupled beads were washed two times. 1 mL of IAP buffer (50 mM 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid (MOPS)/NaOH, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) and three times with 1 mL of ice-cold water. Ubiquitylated peptides were eluted two times with 55 μL of 0.2% formic acid in water and filtered through a 0.45 μm spin tube. Eluted peptides were dried down by SpeedVac and stored at −80 °C for MS analysis. Peptides were loaded and separated on a home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 200 mm) with a 56-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on a Easy nLC-1000 connected to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 60,000 was followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for a maximum of 3s. TandemMS experiments were performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a Uniprot human database (20349 entries). Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.3 Da, respectively. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C). Variable selected posttranslational modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY) and GlyGly(K). LOESS normalization was achieved with the R package Normalizer

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome assembly requires precise coordination between the production and assembly of ribosomal components. Mutations in ribosomal proteins that inhibit the assembly process or ribosome function are often associated with Ribosomopathies, some of which are linked to defects in proteostasis. In this study, we examine the interplay between several yeast proteostasis enzymes, including deubiquitylases (DUBs), Ubp2 and Ubp14, and E3 ligases, Ufd4 and Hul5, and we explore their roles in the regulation of the cellular levels of K29-linked unanchored polyubiquitin (polyUb) chains. Accumulating K29-linked unanchored polyUb chains associate with maturing ribosomes to disrupt their assembly, activate the Ribosome assembly stress response (RASTR), and lead to the sequestration of ribosomal proteins at the Intranuclear Quality control compartment (INQ). These findings reveal the physiological relevance of INQ and provide insights into mechanisms of cellular toxicity associated with Ribosomopathies.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin homeostasis, Intranuclear quality control compartment, Unconventional k29-linked unanchored polyubiquitin chains, Protein aggregation, Dub-e3 ligase interplay, Ribosome assembly stress response, Ribosomopathies

### Affiliations
Proteomic Platform
Univeristy Of Toronto

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Brenda Andrews
Univeristy Of Toronto


