### Accession
PXD005978

### Title
Signaling network diversification during differentiation sensitizes AML cells to PAK and MEK inhibitors

### Description
A main requirement for precision medicine is the identification of patients that are more likely to respond to a particular drug. AML is a heterogeneous disease in which molecules associated to kinase signaling are frequently mutated. However, no kinase inhibitor has been approved for the treatment of this malignancy. Thus, patient stratification requires new molecular profiling techniques in addition of to the current sequencing strategies. We have used a multiomics approach that combines proteomics, phosphoproteomics, mass cytometry and DNA sequencing to classify primary AML cells derived from 36 patients. Comprehensive integrative analysis identified molecular signatures based on phosphopeptide abundance or surface marker expression that separate AML cases according to their differentiation status. Differentiated cells presented a particular pattern of protein phosphorylation, an enrichment in the activity of several kinases and a higher sensitivity to PAK, MEK and PKC/FLT3 inhibitors. In addition, mutations in proteins closely linked to kinase signaling were more frequent on differentiated cells. Interestingly the set of patients with differentiated cells as clustered by marker expression signatures showed an increased overall survival in our set of patients and in the TCGA database registered cohort. Thus, molecular differentiation signatures could be used as prognosis and drug response markers in order to implement the application of precision medicine in AML patients.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Cell were harvested by centrifugation at 500xg at 4C for 5 min, washed twice with cold PBS supplemented with 1mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM NaF, snap frozen and stored at -80C until further processing. Cell pellets were lysed in urea buffer (8M urea in 20 mM in HEPES pH 8.0 supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1mM Na4P2O7 and 1 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate) for 30 min and further homogenized by sonication (60 cycles of 30s on 40s off; Diagenode Bioruptor® Plus, Liege, Belgium). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 20.00xg for 10 min at 5C and protein in the cell extracts was quantified by BCA analysis. For phosphoproteome analysis, 250 µg of protein were reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 10 mM DTT and 16.6 mM iodoacetamyde for 1h. Then, urea concentration was diluted to 2M with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 80 µL conditioned trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin (Thermo Scientific; Cat. #20230) conditioned with 3 washes of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0)) were added and left for 16h at 37C and agitation. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation at 2,000g for 5 min at 5C. For the phosphoproteome analysis, 100 µg of protein were used.  Peptide solutions were desalted using 10 mg OASIS-HLB cartridges (Waters, Manchester, UK). Briefly, OASIS cartridges were accommodated in a vacuum manifold (5 Hg), activated with 1 mL ACN and equilibrated with 1.5 mL washing solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). After loading the samples, cartridges were wash with 1 mL of washing solution. For phosphoproteomics, peptides were eluted with 500 µL of glycolic buffer 1 (1 M glycolic acid, 50% ACN, 5% TFA) and subjected to phosphoenrichment while for proteomics peptides were eluted with 500 µL of ACN solution (30% ACN, 0.1% TFA), dried in a sped vac (RVC 2-25, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Osterode am Harz, Germany) and stored at -80C. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 (GL Sciences). Sample volumes were normalized to 1 mL using glycolic buffer 2 (1 M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA),  50 µL of TiO2 beads (50% slurry in 1% TFA) were added to the peptide mixture,  incubated for 5 min at room temperature in agitation and centrifuged for 30s at 1500xg. For each sample, 80% of the supernatant was transfer to fresh tubes and stored in ice and the remaining 20% used to resuspend bead pellets that were loaded into an empty prewashed PE-filtered spin-tips (Glygen, MD, USA) and packed by centrifugation at 1500g for 3 min. After loading the rest of the supernatant by centrifugation at 1500xg for 3 mim, spin tips were sequentially washed with 100 µL of glycolic buffer2, ammonium acetate buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and 10% ACN by RT centrifugation for 3 min at 1500xg. For phosphopeptide recovery, the addition 50 µL of 7% ammonium water followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 1500xg was repeated 4 times. Eluents were snap frozen in dry ice, dried in a speed vac and peptide pellets stored at -80C. For phosphoproteomics, peptide pellets were resuspended in 12 µL of recon buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 5 µL were injected in a LC-MS/MS system consisting in a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC directly coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For proteomics, pellets were resuspended in recon buffer (0.5 µg/µL) and 2 µL were injected. The LC system used mobile phases A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and B (100% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were trap in a μ-pre-column (catalog no 160454) and separated in an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 ;catalog no 164569). The following parameters were used: 3% to 23% B gradient for 120 min with a background pressure of 155 bar and a nanoflow of 0.3 µL/min. Peptides were infuse into the online connected Q Exactive Plus system that performed a 2.1s duty cycle. Thus, acquisition of full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) with a 70,000 resolution was followed by, data dependent acquisition in which the 20 more intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200-2,000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500. A 30 s dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion list of 10 ppm mass window. This duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of about 30 s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with least 10 data points.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Daemon 2.5.0 was used to automate peptide identification from MS data. Peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data were generated with Mascot Destiller 2.5.1.0 and loaded in the Mascot 2.5 search engine in order to mach MS peaks to peptides. The searches were performed against the SwissProt Database with a FDR of ~1% and the following parameters: 2 trypsin miss cleavages,  mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the MS scans and 25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as fix modification, PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. For phosphoproteomics experiments Phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr was also included as variable modification. The in-house developed Pescal software was used for label-free peptide quantification, XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples were constructed applying 7 ppm and 2 min restriction windows. Peak areas from all XICs were calculated. Below detectable readings were considered as 0, values of 2 technical replicates per sample were averaged and intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Phosphoproteomics, Kinase-inhibitors, Kinase-signalling

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London


