### Accession
PXD027098

### Title
Post-translational responses to elevated c-di-GMP levels in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
To analyze the impact of elevated c-di-GMP concentrations in P. aeruginosa, we expressed pleD* on an inducible vector (pHERD20T) in the PAO1 wild-type strain. PleD is a DGC from Caulobacter cresentusand the pleD* construct variant encodes for a constitutively active enzyme due to four amino acid exchanges (T120N, T214A, P234H, N357Y).We aimed to analyze the cellular consequences of increased c-di-GMP levels in the opportunistic pathogen P. aeruginosa on a global scale. We therefore grew the pleD* harboring PAO1 as well as the empty vector control PAO1 in LB medium, added arabinose (0.2%) to the medium to induce pleD* expression and harvested the cells in exponential growth phase, when the cells exhibited elevated c-di-GMP levels of about two-fold (see manuscript). We are discribing the characteristics of elevated c-di-GMP with a Multi-Omics-Dataset.

### Sample Protocol
The arabinose-induced strains were cultured in LB and pleD-expression was induced using 0.2% (w/v) arabinase. The cells were harvested at an OD600 of 0.7 and washed three times with ice cold PBS. Cells were lysed by mild sonification in SDS-lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM ABC, pH 8.0, 2% (w/v) SDS, 1x Protease inhibitor (Roche)). Proteins were precipitated by phenol/chloroform-method, shortly dried and then reconstituted and incubated in alkylation buffer (100 mM ABC, 0.1% SDC, 12 mM CAA, 5 mM TCEP) for 30 min. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Tryptic digestion was per-formed for 16 h at 37 °C. Samples were acidified to pH 2.1 using 10 % formic acid and centri-fuged at 14.000 x g for 10 min to remove the SDC. Supernatants were collected to a new tube and dried under vacuum. Samples were desalted using Oasis HLB µElution plates. In the final step of the elution, 60 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid was used. Digested peptides were then analyzed using a LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 180 min HPLC-gradient run.

### Data Protocol
To identify and quantify proteins, raw files generated by the LC-MS/MS analysis were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.3.3) with the implemented search engine Andromeda and a FDR of 1 %. The database of P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 from pseudomonas.com with an addition of the PleD* amino acid sequence from Cau-lobacter cresentus, in total consisting of 5,567 entries, was used.  The log2-intensities of the peptides were summarized across all the samples and runs, and separately for each protein, in a Tukey's median polish model implemented in MSstats. Peptides that contained only 1 or 2 measurements across runs were removed. Proteins that have only 1 recovered peptide were removed

### Publication Abstract
C-di-GMP signaling can directly influence bacterial behavior by affecting the functionality of c-di-GMP-binding proteins. In addition, c-di-GMP can exert a global effect on gene transcription or translation, for example, via riboswitches or by binding to transcription factors. In this study, we investigated the effects of changes in intracellular c-di-GMP levels on gene expression and protein production in the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We induced c-di-GMP production via an ectopically introduced diguanylate cyclase and recorded the transcriptional, translational as well as proteomic profile of the cells. We demonstrate that rising levels of c-di-GMP under growth conditions otherwise characterized by low c-di-GMP levels caused a switch to a non-motile, auto-aggregative P. aeruginosa phenotype. This phenotypic switch became apparent before any c-di-GMP-dependent role on transcription, translation, or protein abundance was observed. Our results suggest that rising global c-di-GMP pools first affects the motility phenotype of P. aeruginosa by altering protein functionality and only then global gene transcription.

### Keywords
Elevated c-di-gmp levels, Multi-omics dataset, Pled-overexpression

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Bacteriology, TWINCORE GmbH, Center of Clinical and Experimental Infection Research, a joint venture of the Hannover Medical School and the Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Hannover, Germany.
TWINCORE GmbH and Proteomics Core Unit MHH

### Submitter
Julius Ned Witte

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Hauessler
Institute for Molecular Bacteriology, TWINCORE GmbH, Center of Clinical and Experimental Infection Research, a joint venture of the Hannover Medical School and the Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Hannover, Germany.


