### Accession
PXD038298

### Title
A degron blocking strategy towards improved CRBN recruiting PROTAC selectivity

### Description
The different layers of complexity in PROTAC design have slowed the broad implementation of this novel pharmacological approach. Given the challenges and opportunities of CRL4CRBN hijacking PROTACs we set out to identify and develop broadly implementable strategies to generate PROTACs with improved specificity for their targets. We used structural analysis of known neo-substrate degrons to generate “degron blocked IMiD” analogues and validated that they did not degrade any known neo-substrates using quantitative proteomics. We then applied this strategy to a known BRD9 PROTAC (dBRD9-A) to generate a degron-blocking analogue with a specific degradation profile.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Samples for quantitative proteomics were prepared using the SimPLIT workflow (PMID: 35848491). Briefly, the cell pellets were lysed in a buffer containing 150 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl, 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), universal nuclease, and supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were bath sonicated for 5 min, incubated at RT for 45 min and protein concentration was measured with the Bradford Protein Assay (Biorad) according to manufacturer instructions. Aliquots containing 30 μg of total protein were used for protein digestion. The resultant peptides were labelled with a tandem mass tag (TMTpro) multiplex reagent vial (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. All the TMT-labelled samples were combined in equal amounts to a single tube. The TMT-peptide mixture was acidified with 1% formic acid and the precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation. The sample was then dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  High-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation. Offline peptide fractionation was based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system at a 0.85% gradient with flow rate 0.2 mL/min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide, and mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. Retention time-based fractions are collected and pooled into thirty samples for LC-MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. LC–MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were analysed with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 50 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method was as follows: 90 min gradient up to 38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 10 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. For MS analysis, precursors between 375 and 1,500 m/z were selected, with mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control (AGC) of 4 × 105, and IT (injection time) of 50 ms, with the top speed mode in 3 s, and the precursors were isolated for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th (Thomson unit). Collision energy was set at 35%, with AGC at 1 × 104 and IT at 50 ms. MS3 quantification was obtained with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with synchronous precursor selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65%, and the AGC setting was at 1 × 105 with IT at 105 ms. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100 to 500 with a resolution of 50,000. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 s with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification. The SEQUEST-HT search engine was used to analyse the acquired mass spectra in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 mis-cleavages. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.9848 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator. The peptide FDR was set at 0.01, and validation was based on the q value and a decoy database search. All spectra were searched against UniProt-SwissProt proteomes of Homo sapiens protein entries appended with contaminants. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMTpro quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, with protein groups considered for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with an average reporter signal-to-noise ratio of >3 were used for protein quantification. Correction for isotopic impurity of reporter quantification values is applied. Only spectra with at least 50% of the SPS masses matching to the identified peptides are used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Small molecules inducing protein degradation are important pharmacological tools to interrogate complex biology and are rapidly translating into clinical agents. However, to fully realise the potential of these molecules, selectivity remains a limiting challenge. Herein, we addressed the issue of selectivity in the design of CRL4<sup>CRBN</sup> recruiting PROteolysis TArgeting Chimeras (PROTACs). Thalidomide derivatives used to generate CRL4<sup>CRBN</sup> recruiting PROTACs have well described intrinsic monovalent degradation profiles by inducing the recruitment of neo-substrates, such as GSPT1, Ikaros and Aiolos. We leveraged structural insights from known CRL4<sup>CRBN</sup> neo-substrates to attenuate and indeed remove this monovalent degradation function in well-known CRL4<sup>CRBN</sup> molecular glues degraders, namely CC-885 and Pomalidomide. We then applied these design principles on a previously published BRD9 PROTAC (dBRD9-A) and generated an analogue with improved selectivity profile. Finally, we implemented a computational modelling pipeline to show that our degron blocking design does not impact PROTAC-induced ternary complex formation. We believe that the tools and principles presented in this work will be valuable to support the development of targeted protein degradation.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Protacs

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti S. Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


