### Accession
PXD008564

### Title
Aberrant Glycosylation Promotes Pancreatic Inflammation

### Description
CA19-9 is a glycan elevated in human gastrointestinal pathologies, but absent from rodents. We humanized the mouse glycome and found that CA19-9 is not only a correlative biomarker of pancreatic disease, but also plays a causative role in the initiation of pancreatitis. Elevation of CA19-9 results in the activation of EGFR signaling in the normal pancreatic ductal compartment through secretion of Fibulin 3. These signaling changes can be blocked by blocking either CA19-9 or Fibulin 3.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were fractionated using High pH first dimension chromatography followed by low pH second dimension chromatography. Each sample was separated into 8 fractions and analyzed using an orbtrap in datadependant mode.

### Data Protocol
Peaklist files were generated by Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science). Protein identification and quantification was carried using Mascot 2.4 against the Uniprot Human sequence database (88,698 sequences; 35,138,129 residues). Methylthiolation of cysteine and N-terminal and lysine iTRAQ modifications were set as fixed modifications, methionine oxidation and deamidation (NQ) as variable. Trypsin was used as cleavage enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm for intact peptide mass and 0.3 Da for fragment ions. Search results were rescored to give a final 1% FDR using a randomized version of the same Uniprot Human database. Protein-level iTRAQ ratios were calculated as intensity weighted, using only peptides with expectation values < 0.01. Global ratio normalization (summed) was applied across all iTRAQ channels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ca19-9

### Affiliations
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory ( lab head )

### Submitter
Keith Rivera

### Lab Head
Dr David Tuveson
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory ( lab head )


