### Accession
PXD008614

### Title
zebrafish embryos proteome for slbp2 KO F3 and wild type

### Description
zebrafish embryos proteome for slbp2 KO F3 and wild type at 2.5hpf and 3.5hpf, three replicates for every sample. There are 12 samples in total. Then we analyse the different expressed genes and hope to find out clue which result in serious phenotype of slbp2 KO F3.

### Sample Protocol
We get the fertilized zebrafish embryos from slbp2 ko F3 and wild type by artificial insemination, which make sure all the embryos develop synchronously. After fertilization, all embryos were incubated at 28.5°C. We collected the embryos at 2.5hpf and 3.5hpf, then quick-frozen by liquid nitrogen.

### Data Protocol
An automated software called IQuant for quantitatively analyzing the labeled peptides with isobaric tags. It integrates Mascot Percolator, a well performing machine learning method for rescoring database search results, to provide reliable significance measures. To assess the confidence of peptides, the PSMs were pre-filtered at a PSM-level FDR of 1%. Then based on the "simple principle" (The parsimony principle), identified peptide sequences are assembled into a  set of confident proteins. In order to control the rate of false-positive at protein level, an protein FDR at 1%, which is based on Picked protein FDR strategy, will also be estimated after protein inference(Protein-level FDR <= 0.01). The protein quantification process includes the following steps: Protein identification, Tag impurity correction, Data normalization, Missing value imputation, Protein ratio calculation, Statistical analysis, Results presentation.

### Publication Abstract
Stem-loop binding protein (SLBP) is required for replication-dependent histone mRNA metabolism in mammals. Zebrafish possesses two <i>slbps</i>, and <i>slbp1</i> is necessary for retinal neurogenesis. However, the detailed expression and function of <i>slbp2</i> in zebrafish are still unknown. In this study, we first identified zebrafish <i>slbp2</i> as an oocyte-specific maternal factor and then generated a maternal-zygotic <i>slbp2</i> F3 homozygous mutant (MZ<i>slbp2</i>&#x394;4<sup>-/-</sup>) using CRISPR/Cas9. The depletion of maternal Slbp2 disrupted early nuclear cleavage, which resulted in developmental arrest at the MBT stage. The developmental defects could be rescued in <i>slbp2</i> transgenic MZ<i>slbp2</i>&#x394;4<sup>-/-</sup> embryos. However, homozygous mutant MZ<i>slbp1</i>&#x394;1<sup>-/-</sup> developed normally, indicating <i>slbp1</i> is dispensable for zebrafish early embryogenesis. Through comparative proteome and transcriptome profiling between WT and MZ<i>slbp2</i>&#x394;4<sup>-/-</sup> embryos, we identified many differentially expressed proteins and genes. In comparison with those in WT embryos, four replication-dependent histones, including H2a, H2b, H3, and H4, all reduced their expression, while histone variant <i>h2afx</i> significantly increased in MZ<i>slbp2</i>&#x394;4<sup>-/-</sup> embryos at the 256-cell stage and high stage. Zebrafish Slbp2 can bind histone mRNA stem-loop in vitro, and the defects of MZ<i>slbp2</i>&#x394;4<sup>-/-</sup> embryos can be partially rescued by overexpression of H2b. The current data indicate that maternal Slbp2 plays a pivotal role in the storage of replication-dependent histone mRNAs and proteins during zebrafish oogenesis.

### Keywords
Slbp2 zebrafish embryos mbt

### Affiliations
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
wenxia he

### Lab Head
Dr jian fang, gui
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


