### Accession
PXD039864

### Title
PABPN1-protein Interactome

### Description
Identification of PABPN1 interacting proteins by proximity labeling with TurboID coupled with mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The TurboID-EGFP-PABPN1 fusion proteins (doxycycline-inducible) were constructed based on the pLVX-Puro backbone. The TurboID tag was inserted at the C terminus or N terminus of (N-)EGFP-PABPN1(-C) to construct EGFP-PABPN1-TurboID or TurboID-EGFP-PABPN1 fusion proteins. Cells expressing TurboID fused PABPN1 were screened by a lentiviral packaging system. Monoclonal cells were picked, cultured, and tested by Western blotting and immunofluorescence. Monoclonal cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes and proliferated until 85% confluence with doxycycline induction. Biotin solution was added into freshly supplied medium to 500 μM working concentration and the cells were cultured for 30 mins or 120 mins for labeling. The labeled cells were scraped, and the nucleus fraction was separated and reserved. The MNase was added to degrade DNA and RNA to release all labeled proteins. The MNase-treated nucleus suspension was lysed with RIPA buffer, and the supernatant was acquired for immunoprecipitation.

### Data Protocol
We used PD software to search uniprot database, and then compared altals area between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Ap-ms, Pabpn1

### Affiliations
Wuhan University, College of Life Sciences
Wuhan university

### Submitter
Chen Du

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Zhou
Wuhan University, College of Life Sciences


