### Accession
PXD011742

### Title
Mechanism of 17-β Estradiol Stimulated Integration of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Heart Tissue

### Description
Scarcity of gender specific donor hearts highlights the importance of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as a therapeutic tool for heart repair. However, inefficient incorporation, retention, and activity of MSCs in cardiac tissue remains an obstacle. Since surge in follicular estradiol (μmolar-range) triggers tissue remodeling (e.g. ovulation) and estradiol exerts beneficial actions on the cardiovascular system, we hypothesized that estradiol may promote/improve MSC-mediated cardiac repair processes. Methods: Wharton’s jelly-derived MSCs were used, to assess the effects of estradiol on their proliferation, directed-migration and engraftment in murine heart slices, ex vivo. Results: MSCs expressed estrogen receptors (ERs) α and β, and estradiol promoted MSC proliferation (measured using xCELLigence real-time cell-impedance system and DNA-quantification). Estradiol up-regulated mRNA (qRT-PCR) and protein expression (western blotting) of ERα, ERβ, EMMPRIN, and MMP-9, yet down-regulated MMP-2 expression. In MSCs estradiol, up-regulated mRNA expression of VEGF-A, VCAM-1, and angiogenin, and stimulated NO production via ER. Proteomic analysis revealed that in MSCs estradiol up-regulated 47 proteins, down-regulated 7 proteins, and increased the expression of key biochemical components/pathways involved in tissue repair. In MSCs co-cultured with murine heart-slices, estradiol significantly induced MSC migration in an ER-dependent fashion (and preferentially via ERα) and significantly increased the secretion of MMP-2, MMP-9, angiogenin and VEGF. Conclusion: Estradiol facilitates the integration/engraftment of MSCs into heart slices by promoting MSC proliferation and migration and these beneficial effects are mediated via increases in molecules/pathways involved in tissue remodeling and angiogenesis. Priming of MSCs with estradiol may enhance their ability to repair/regenerate cardiac tissue in women.

### Sample Protocol
Human mesenchymal stem cells were washed twice with PBS, centrifuged and the resulting cell pellet was solubilized in a strong denaturant buffer (8M urea, 1% DOC, 0.1% Tris-HCl, pH 8.8 and protease inhibitors)with the use of an ultrasonication system (pulses of 30 sec, on ice generated by the UP50H Ultrasonic Processor from Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). The debris following centrifugation (18000xg) was discarded, and the protein quantity measured using a colorimetric assay. The samples were acetone-precipitated and the proteins were carbamydomethylated, proteolysed and purified by solid phase extraction. The chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed using the EASY n-LC II system (Thermo Scientific, California, USA), while mass spectra were acquired by the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a Top12 data-dependent analysis, with 60k resolution.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used for protein inference in UniProtKB/SwissProt fasta database using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The dynamic modifications comprised oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. The peptide target false discovery rate (FDR) was < 0.05. Sieve 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) was employed for label-free relative quantification analysis, in which a spectral abundance alteration of at least 1.5 fold was considered significant if p-value <0.05. Protein Center 3.41 (Thermo Scientific) bioinformatic analysis was performed to reveal gene ontology (GO) over-represented categories, while WebGestalt (WEB-based Gene SeT AnaLysis Toolkit) functional analysis web tool was used to obtain GO categorized maps.

### Publication Abstract
Scarcity of gender specific donor hearts highlights the importance of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as a therapeutic tool for heart repair. However, inefficient incorporation, retention, and activity of MSCs in cardiac tissue remain an obstacle. Since surges in follicular estradiol (E2; &#x3bc;molar-range) trigger tissue remodeling (e.g. ovulation) and E2 exerts beneficial actions on the cardiovascular system, we hypothesized that E2 may promote/improve MSC-mediated cardiac repair processes. Using Wharton's jelly (WJ)-derived MSCs we assessed the effects of E2 on MSC proliferation, directed migration, and engraftment in murine heart slices (using xCELLigence real-time cell-impedance system, DNA quantification, and microscopy) and on MSC-induced angiogenesis in vivo (matrigel plug assay). Protein expression was assessed by Western blotting, ELISA/Luminex, and proteomic analysis; whereas mRNA expression was assessed by qRT-PCR. MSCs expressed estrogen receptors (ERs) -alpha and -beta. E2 promoted MSC proliferation and up-regulated mRNA and protein expression of ER-alpha, ER-beta, extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN), and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) -9, yet down-regulated MMP-2 expression. Moreover, E2 up-regulated expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, VEGFR-2, vascular cell adhesion protein-1 (VCAM-1), and angiogenin (ANG) and stimulated nitric oxide (NO) production via ER. Proteomic analysis of MSCs showed that E2 up-regulated 47 proteins, down-regulated 7 proteins, and increased the expression of key biochemical components/pathways involved in tissue repair. In MSCs co-cultured with murine heart-slices, E2 significantly induced MSC migration in an ER-alpha-dependent fashion and significantly increased the secretion of MMP-2, MMP-9, ANG, and VEGF. In an in vivo matrigel assay, E2-treated MSCs increased angiogenesis and hemoglobin content. In conclusion, E2-treatment increases the incorporation of MSCs in heart slices and promotes MSC-induced angiogenesis. These beneficial effects are mediated via increases in molecules/pathways involved in tissue remodeling and angiogenesis. We speculate that E2 may enhance MSC ability to repair/regenerate cardiac tissue.

### Keywords
Women, Heart disease, Estrogen, Stem cells, Tissue remodeling, Gender, Heart repair

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu", Bucharest, Romania

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu", Bucharest, Romania


