### Accession
PXD022048

### Title
Systematic reanalysis of co-fractionation mass spectrometry data

### Description
A total of 206 co-fractionation mass spectrometry (CF-MS) experiments were downloaded from public proteomics repositories such as PRIDE and MASSIVE, then re-analyzed with MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing is described in the original studies.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) was used to re-analyze all experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Co-fractionation mass spectrometry (CF-MS) has emerged as a powerful technique for interactome mapping. However, there is little consensus on optimal strategies for the design of CF-MS experiments or their computational analysis. Here, we reanalyzed a total of 206 CF-MS experiments to generate a uniformly processed resource containing over 11 million measurements of protein abundance. We used this resource to benchmark experimental designs for CF-MS studies and systematically optimize computational approaches to network inference. We then applied this optimized methodology to reconstruct a draft-quality human interactome by CF-MS and predict over 700,000 protein-protein interactions across 27 eukaryotic species or clades. Our work defines new resources to illuminate proteome organization over evolutionary timescales and establishes best practices for the design and analysis of CF-MS studies.

### Keywords
Cf-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Michael Skinnider

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard Foster
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia


