### Accession
PXD017941

### Title
Impact of glycan positioning on HIV-1 Env glycan shield density, function, and antibody recognition

### Description
N-glycans, which represent >50% mass of the HIV-1 envelope (Env) trimer, play important roles for virus-cell entry and immune evasion.  How each glycan unit interacts to shape the Env protein-sugar complex and affects Env function is not well understood.  Here, high-resolution glycomics analysis of two Env variants from the same donor, with differing functional characteristics and N-glycosylation-site composition, revealed that changes to key N-glycosylation-site not only affected the Env structure at distant locations, but also had a ripple effect on Env-wide glycan processing, virus infectivity, and antibody recognition and virus neutralization.  Specifically, the N262 glycan, although not located in the CD4-binding site, controlled Env binding to the CD4 receptor, affected the recognition of Env by several glycan-dependent broadly neutralizing antibodies, and altered heterogeneity of glycosylation at several sites, with N156, N160, and N448 displaying limited glycan processing.  Molecular dynamic simulations visualized how specific oligosaccharide positions can move to compensate for loss of a glycan.  This study demonstrates how changes in individual glycan units can alter molecular dynamics and processing of the Env-glycan shield and, consequently, Env function.

### Sample Protocol
293F cells were transfected by plasmids pOptiVec/V5-His WEAU gp120-trimer using 293fectin according to the manufacturer’s (Invitrogen) instructions.  Briefly, plasmid DNA and 293fectins were mixed at the ratio of 1:2 (1 ug of plasmid DNA to 2 ul of 293fectin) and after 20-min incubation at room temperature, DNA-293fectin complexes were added to the cells at a final density of 1 x 106 viable cells per ml.  After 4 days, cell culture supernatants were collected, fresh serum-free FreeStyle 293 expression medium was added to the cells, and supernatants were collected again on day 7 post-transfection.  The presence of recombinant gp120 (rgp120) was detected in the supernatants by SDS-PAGE and western blotting using horseradish-peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-V5 antibody (see section of SDS-PAGE and western blotting for details). Then, the protein was isolated on nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA)-agarose under native conditions, according to the manufacturer’s (Qiagen) instructions. The elution buffer with rgp120 was exchanged for phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) using Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Unit (Millipore, Billerica, MA).  The concentration of rgp120 protein was calculated by dividing optical density at 280 nm (NanoDrop 2000/2000c) by 1.21, the molar extinction coefficient determined for WEAU gp120.  For normalization of rgp120 preparations, we used ELISA (see rgp120 ELISA) and western blotting after removal of all N-glycans (see the section on treatment with glycosidases for details).  All rgp120 proteins were kept frozen at -80oC until use. Equal amounts of each rgp120 preparation (10 µg) were separated on a 4-15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast gel (Bio-Rad Laboratory Inc.) under denaturing and reducing conditions.  Protein bands (~130 kDa) were cut and digested with different proteases and glycosidases.  Approximately 250 ng of peptides were loaded onto a 11-cm, 100 μm-diameter pulled tip packed with Jupiter 5 μm C18 reversed phase beads (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA).  Samples were separated at a flow rate of 650 nL/min over 90 min on an Eksigent MicroAS autosampler and 2D LC nanopump (Eksigent, Dublin, CA).  Mobile phases consisted of solvent A: 2.5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B: 97.5% ACN and 0.1% FA.  The following multistep gradient was used: 5 min, 2-5% B; 50 min, 5-35% B; 10 min, 35-40% B; 10 min, 40-60% B; 5 min, 60-98% B and held at 98% B for 10 min before re-equilibration.  The eluted peptides were electrosprayed at 2 kV into a dual linear quadrupole ion trap Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA).  The MS was set to switch between a full scan (400 < m/z > 2000) followed by successive CID MS/MS (200 < m/z > 2000) scans of the most abundant precursor ions.  A dynamic exclusion setting was set to exclude ions for 2 min after a repeat count of three within a 45-s duration.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS data was processed using the Byonic (Protein Metrics) and Pinnacle (Optys) software for N-glycopeptide site confirmation and to obtain extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) for every glycopeptide.  The resultant XIC for N-glycopeptides >1E4 were used to calculate area under the curve for each glycopeptide ion.  For each NGS the observed N-glycoforms were expressed as a percent relative abundance of the total sum of all glycoforms.  Each NGS was classified as having predominantly high mannose, predominantly processed or mixed N-glycan heterogeneity profiles (Hargett et al, 2019).  To determine the extent of processed glycans, a ratio of the area under the curve of the XIC for Man9 to Man5 was compared for predominantly high-mannose glycans, and a ratio of the XIC of HexNAc4Hex3Fuc1 to HexNAc4Hex5Fuc1 was compared for predominantly processed glycans.

### Publication Abstract
HIV-1 envelope (Env) N-glycosylation impact virus-cell entry and immune evasion. How each glycan interacts to shape the Env-protein-sugar complex and affects Env function is not well understood. Here, analysis of two Env variants from the same donor, with differing functional characteristics and N-glycosylation-site composition, revealed that changes to key N-glycosylation sites affected the Env structure at distant locations and had a ripple effect on Env-wide glycan processing, virus infectivity, antibody recognition, and virus neutralization. Specifically, the N262 glycan, although not in the CD4-binding site, modulated Env binding to the CD4 receptor, affected Env recognition by several glycan-dependent neutralizing antibodies, and altered site-specific glycosylation heterogeneity, with, for example, N448 displaying limited glycan processing. Molecular-dynamic simulations visualized differences in glycan density and how specific oligosaccharide positions can move to compensate for a glycan loss. This study demonstrates how changes in individual glycans can alter molecular dynamics, processing, and function of the Env-glycan shield.

### Keywords
Hiv, N262, Glycosylation, Gp120, Env

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
Matthew Renfrow

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Renfrow
University of Alabama at Birmingham


