### Accession
PXD018159

### Title
Synergistic on auxin and cytokinin 1 positively regulates growth and attenuates soil pathogen resistance

### Description
Plants as non-mobile organisms constantly integrate varying environmental signals to flexibly adapt their growth and development. Local fluctuations in water and nutrient availability, sudden changes in temperature or other abiotic and biotic stresses can trigger changes in the growth of plant organs. Multiple mutually interconnected hormonal signaling cascades act as essential endogenous translators of these exogenous signals in the adaptive responses of plants. Although the molecular backbones of hormone transduction pathways have been identified, the mechanisms underlying their interactions are largely unknown. Here, using genome wide transcriptome profiling we identify an unknown auxin and cytokinin cross-talk component; SYNERGISTIC ON AUXIN AND CYTOKININ1 (SYAC1), whose expression in roots is strictly dependent on both of these hormonal pathways. We show that SYAC1 is a component of secretory pathway, whose enhanced activity interferes with deposition of cell wall components and can fine-tune organ growth and sensitivity to soil pathogens

### Sample Protocol
The syac1-3 (GABI-KAT 760F05, Col-0, SULR) T-DNA insertion line was obtained from the GABI KAT seed collection. Genotyping primers are listed in Supplementary Table 1. The syac1-5 CRISPR line was prepared in collaboration with the VBCF Protein Technologies Facility (www.vbcf.ac.at) (see below). The transgenic fluorescent-protein marker lines in Col-0 background have been described elsewhere: mCherry tagged wave line 6, 9, 13, 18, 25, 29, 34, 127, 129, 131, 138 33, SYP61:SYP61-CFP 34. The echidna mutant has been described in 74 and yip4a-2 yip4b-1 in 35. cre1-12; ahk2-2; ahk3-3; cre1-12ahk2-2; cre1-12ahk3-3; ahk2-2,ahk3-3 75 tir1-1; tir1-1,afb2-3; tir1-1, afb3-4  54,76,77. Seeds of Arabidopsis were plated and grown on square plates with solid half strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium (Duchefa) supplemented with 0.5 g L-1 MES, 10 g L-1 Sucrose, 1% agar and pH adjusted to 5.9. The plates were incubated at 4 °C for 48 h to synchronize seed germination and then vertically grown under a 16:8 h day/night cycle photoperiod at 21 °C. Cytokinin and auxin treatments were performed with the N6-benzyladenine cytokinin derivative (Sigma, B3408) and 1-naphthaleneacetic acid (Sigma, N0640), respectively. Short treatments (6 hours) for GUS/GFP expression were performed with 10 µM cytokinin and 1 µM auxin (unless indicated differently). For root growth transient assay 0.1 µM cytokinin and 0.05 µM auxin was used. Gibberellin treatment was performed with 10 µM Gibberellic acid (GA3) (Sigma, G7645), Methyl jasmonate treatment with 10m mM MeJA (Sigma, 392707), Abscisic acid treatment with 10 µM ABA (Sigma, A1049) and brassinosteroid treatment with 1 µM Epibrassinolide (Sigma, E1641). 10 µM Paclobutrazol (Sigma,46046) was used as gibberellin biosynthesis inhibitor. Estradiol treatment was performed with β-Estradiol (Sigma, E8875). All experiments were performed 2-3 times. Design of the gRNA for SYAC1 gene, molecular cloning and plant transformation was done in collaboration with VBCF Protein Technologies Facility (www.vbcf.ac.at). Design, specificity and activity of gRNA: GATGGTCAGCAACCACACGA was performed using online available tools: http://cbi.hzau.edu.cn/cgi-bin/CRISPR and http://www.broadinstitute.org/rnai/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design. gRNA was cloned into pGGZ003 CRISPR/Cas9 destination vector. Transformants resistant to BASTA antibiotic were selected, genomic sequence of SYAC1 amplified with CRISPR Fw and Rv primers (see Supplementary Table 1 below) and sequenced. Individual mutant lines with single base pair insertion in coding sequence (90 bps after the ATG -at the place of gRNA binding) were selected. These plants were then propagated to next generation to obtain homozygote lines. Lines outcrossed of CRISPR/Cas9 cassette were confirmed by PCR for loss of BASTA coding sequence with specific primers (see Supplementary Table 1 below). Only plants without BASTA gene (part of CRISPR/Cas9 vector) were propagated to next generation. Sensitivity of selected plants to BASTA was confirmed and plants were re-sequenced to confirm the point mutation.  Tandem affinity purification (TAP) Tandem affinity purification assay was performed in Arabidopsis cell suspension culture as described (Van Leene et al., 2014) with minor modifications. Briefly, SYAC1 was produced as N-terminally tagged GSTEV fusion in PSB-D cell culture. Proteins were extracted for 1h in TAP extraction buffer in which 0.1% NP40 was replaced by 1% digitonin. After 30 minutes of extraction, 0.1% benzonase was added to the mixture. After a two-step centrifugation, protein complexes were bound to IgG resin for 1h and non-specific proteins were washed away. IgG elution was done with TEV protease, and the eluted fraction was bound to Streptavidin resin. All wash steps and TEV elution was done in TEV elution buffer in which 0.1% NP40 was replaced by 0.2% digitonin. After the final Streptavidin wash step, one additional wash step was performed with TEV buffer without detergent. Finally, proteins were eluted from the Streptavidin resin with NuPAGE sample buffer containing 20mM Desthiobiotin. Eluted proteins were subjected to a short NuPAGE run and in-gel digested with Trypsin. Protein interactors were identified by mass spectrometry using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R) was used for co-localization analyses: the analysis is based on the pixel intensity correlation over space and was performed using Image J software. After splitting the two channels, region of interest (ROI) was identified. For our analysis, 1 cell was considered as 1 ROI; in every root approximately 5 cells (5 ROIs) were measured and a minimum of 10 roots were used. Co-localization plug-in using an automatic threshold was used to obtain Rcoloc value, which represent Pearson’s correlation coefficient. Sequences from the Arabidopsis thaliana SYAC1 protein family (AT1G15590, AT1G15600, AT1G15610, AT1G15620, AT1G15625, AT1G15630, AT1G15640, AT1G44010) were aligned using ClustalW 92. Phylogenetic tree was generated with MEGA7 (www.megasoftware.net) using Neighbour-joining methods with a complete deletion mode. Bootstrap tests were performed with 1000 replications. Poisson correction distance was adopted and rates among sites were set as uniform. Zeiss LSM 700 confocal scanning microscope using either 20x or 40x (water immersion) objectives were employed to monitor expression of fluorescent reporters. GFP (YFP) and Cy3 signals were detected either at 488 nm excitation/507 nm emission or 550 nm excitation/570 nm emission wavelength, respectively. Quantification of immunodetected PIN1 and PIN2 expression in root meristems was performed by measurement of membrane signal in cortex and epidermal cells, respectively. Signal in approximately 10 cells in a minimum of 10 roots was measured using ImageJ software. For cell size measurement, roots of 5-day-old wild-type and SYAC1ox plants were stained with for 5 min with FM4-64 dye (Thermofisher, T13320) followed by image acquisition. Cell size was measured by ImageJ software. Significant differences were evaluated using t test;  n = 15-20 roots, two biological replicates. The AFM data were collected and analyzed as described elsewhere with minor changes 66. To examine extracellular matrix properties the turgor pressure was suppressed by seedlings immersion in a hypertonic solution (0.55 M mannitol) for at least 30 min before examination. 4 day-old seedlings grown in darkness were placed on petri dishes filled with 1% Agarose and 10% Mannitol and immobilized by low melting agarose (0.7% with 10% Mannitol). The focus was set on the anticlinal (perpendicular to the organ surface) cell walls and its extracellular matrix. To ensure proper indentations (especially in the bottom of the doom shape between two adjacent cells regions), cantilevers with long pyramidal tip (14-16 μm of pyramidal height, AppNano  ACST-10), with a spring constant of 7.8 N/m were used. The instrument used was a JPK Nano-Wizard 3.0 and indentations were kept to <10% of cell height (typically indentations of 500nN force). Three scan-maps per sample were taken over an intermediate region of the hypocotyls, using a square area of 25 x 25 μm, with 16 x 16 measurements, resulting in 1792 force-indentation experiments per sample. The lateral deflection of the cantilever was monitored and in case of any abnormal increase the entire data set was discarded. The apparent Young's modulus (EA) for each force-indentation experiment was calculated using the approach curve (to avoid any adhesion interference) with the JPK Data Processing software (JPK Instruments AG, Germany). To calculate the average EA for each anticlinal wall, the total length of the extracellular region was measured using masks with Gwyddion 2.45 software (at least 20 points were taken in account). The pixels corresponding to the extracellular matrix were chosen based on the topography map. For topographical reconstructions, the height of each point was determined by the point-of-contact from the force-indentation curve. A total of 12-14 samples were analyzed. A standard t-test was applied to test for differences between genotypes. Fourteen-day-old pSYAC1:GUS transgenic Arabidopsis seedlings were inoculated with the spore concentration 106 as described above and GUS expression detected in roots at 20 and 28 days after inoculation. As a positive control 34 day-old plants were treated with 1µM auxin (1-Naphthaleneacetic acid) and 10µM cytokinin (N6-benzyladenine) for 6 hours. GUS staining performed as described above (Histochemical and histological analysis). Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R) was used for co-localization analyses: the analysis is based on the pixel intensity correlation over space and was performed using Image J software. After splitting the two channels, region of interest (ROI) was identified. For our analysis, 1 cell was considered as 1 ROI; in every root approximately 5 cells (5 ROIs) were measured and a minimum of 10 roots were used. Co-localization plug-in using an automatic threshold was used to obtain Rcoloc value, which represent Pearson’s correlation coefficient.

### Publication Abstract
Plants as non-mobile organisms constantly integrate varying environmental signals to flexibly adapt their growth and development. Local fluctuations in water and nutrient availability, sudden changes in temperature or other abiotic and biotic stresses can trigger changes in the growth of plant organs. Multiple mutually interconnected hormonal signaling cascades act as essential endogenous translators of these exogenous signals in the adaptive responses of plants. Although the molecular backbones of hormone transduction pathways have been identified, the mechanisms underlying their interactions are largely unknown. Here, using genome wide transcriptome profiling we identify an auxin and cytokinin cross-talk component; SYNERGISTIC ON AUXIN AND CYTOKININ&#xa0;1 (SYAC1), whose expression in roots is strictly dependent on both of these hormonal pathways. We show that SYAC1 is a regulator of secretory pathway, whose enhanced activity interferes with deposition of cell wall components and can fine-tune organ growth and sensitivity to soil pathogens.

### Keywords
Tap, Auxin, Transcriptomics, Lc-ms/ms, Plants, Cytokinin

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria, Klosterneuburg.

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Benkova
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria, Klosterneuburg.


