### Accession
PXD036192

### Title
MORF and MOZ acetyltransferases target unmethylated CpG islands through the winged helix domain

### Description
Human acetyltransferases MOZ and MORF are implicated in chromosomal translocations associated with aggressive leukemias. Oncogenic translocations involve the far amino terminus of MOZ/MORF, the function of which remains unclear. Here, we identified and characterized two structured winged helix domains, WH1 and WH2, in MORF and MOZ. WHs bind DNA in a cooperative manner, with WH1 specifically recognizing unmethylated CpG sequences. Structural and genomic analyses show that the DNA binding function of WHs targets MORF/MOZ to gene promoters, stimulating transcription and H3K23 acetylation, and WH1 recruits oncogenic fusions to HOXA genes that trigger leukemogenesis. Cryo-EM, NMR, mass spectrometry and mutagenesis studies provide mechanistic insight into the DNA-binding mechanism, which includes the association of WH1 with the linker DNA and binding of WH2 to the dyad of the nucleosome, with the latter being further modulated by the neighboring domain DPF and autoacetylation of MORF. The discovery of WHs in MORF and MOZ and their DNA binding functions could open a new avenue in developing therapeutics to treat diseases associated with aberrant MOZ/MORF acetyltransferase activities.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion of MORF 6 µl of 31 µM MORFWH2-DPF-MYST (aa 100-703 with additional 3 lysine residues at the C-terminus) co-expressed and purified with BRPF1 (aa 89-139) was treated with or without SIRT2 at 4 °C overnight in 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 5 mM DTT, 0.5-1 mM NAD, 5 mM MgCl2, and 50 µM ZnCl2. Samples were denatured, reduced, and alkylated in 5% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 and boiled at 95 °C for 10 minutes. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analyses using the SP3 method. Carboxylate-functionalized speedbeads (GE Life Sciences) were added to protein samples. Acetonitrile was added to 80% (v/v) to precipitate protein and bind it to the beads. The protein-bound beads were washed twice with 80% (v/v) ethanol and twice with 100% acetonitrile. Lys-C/Trypsin mix (Promega) was added for 1:50 protease to protein ratio in 50mM Tris pH 8.5 and incubated rotating at 37°C overnight. To clean up tryptic peptides, acetonitrile was added to 95% (v/v) to precipitate and bind peptides to the beads. One wash with 100% acetonitrile was performed and tryptic peptides were eluted twice with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 3% (v/v) acetonitrile in water. Eluate were dried using a speed-vac rotatory evaporator.

### Data Protocol
MS data raw files were searched against the single Uniprot sequence for MORF (Uniprot accession number Q8WYB5-3) using Maxquant 1.6.14.0 with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal and lysine side chain acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances for the database search were 4.5 ppm for the precursors and 20 ppm for the MS2 fragment ions, the minimum peptide length was 7 residues with no additional applied score cutoffs. Peptide and protein level FDR were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Human acetyltransferases MOZ and MORF are implicated in chromosomal translocations associated with aggressive leukemias. Oncogenic translocations involve the far amino terminus of MOZ/MORF, the function of which remains unclear. Here, we identified and characterized two structured winged helix (WH) domains, WH1 and WH2, in MORF and MOZ. WHs bind DNA in a cooperative manner, with WH1 specifically recognizing unmethylated CpG sequences. Structural and genomic analyses show that the DNA binding function of WHs targets MORF/MOZ to gene promoters, stimulating transcription and H3K23 acetylation, and WH1 recruits oncogenic fusions to HOXA genes that trigger leukemogenesis. Cryo-EM, NMR, mass spectrometry and mutagenesis studies provide mechanistic insight into the DNA-binding mechanism, which includes the association of WH1 with the CpG-containing linker DNA and binding of WH2 to the dyad of the nucleosome. The discovery of WHs in MORF and MOZ and their DNA binding functions could open an avenue in developing therapeutics to treat diseases associated with aberrant MOZ/MORF acetyltransferase activities.

### Keywords
Morf moz cpg islands

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Boulder
1Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA

### Submitter
Christopher Ebmeier

### Lab Head
Dr Tatiana G. Kutateladze
1Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA


