### Accession
PXD012846

### Title
Citrobacter rodentium triggers exaggerated mucosal responses in mice developing severe intestinal disease

### Description
Citrobacter rodentium is commonly used to elucidate mucosal responses to infection in mice developing mild disease (e.g. C57BL/6), while little is known about host responses to infection in mice developing severe disease (e.g. C3H/HeN). We report that the phyla Bacteroidetes is a minor component of the tissue-associated microbiome in uninfected C3H/HeN mice. Following infection, C. rodentium rapidly and uniformly colonises the C3H/HeN colonic mucosa, which coincides with downregulation of proteins involved in the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). In contrast, we observed upregulation of DNA replication and DNA damage repair processes, as well as cholesterol biogenesis, import and export, nutritional immunity, IL-22 and INFg responses, and expression of NLRP3, in IECs. Moreover, C. rodentium triggers a staggered cell proliferation response from 3 days post infection, which correlated with a higher abundance of SLC5A9 and reduced abundance of the IEC differentiation markers SLC26A3 and CA4. Uniquely, C. rodentium triggers differential secretion of gel-forming mucins, with the number of goblet cells filled with acidic and neutral mucins dramatically increasing and decreasing, respectively. Together, these results show that despite vigorous responses, C3H/HeN mice succumb to C. rodentium infection, possibly as a result of excessive and disordered mucosal responses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for TMT labelling Both IEC pellets isolated from mice and CMT-93 cell pellets were dissolved in 150 μL 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 0.1% SDS, 10% isopropanol on ice, assisted with pulsed probe sonication. Samples were subsequently boiled at 90°C for 5 min on a shaking device at 300 rpm. Protein concentration was measured with Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots containing 100 μg of total protein, with an equal contribution from each individual mouse within the group, were prepared for trypsin digestion. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA). Proteins were then digested by adding 75 ng/μL trypsin to each sample and incubating overnight. The resultant peptides were diluted up to 100 μL with 0.1M TEAB buffer and labelled with TMT multiplex reagent vial (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Hydroxylamine was used to quench the reaction and then all 11 samples were combined in equal amounts to a single tube. The sample was then dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  Basic reverse-phase peptide fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis Offline high pH Reverse Phase (RP) peptide fractionation was performed using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 mm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was of 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was f 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was reconstituted in 100 mL mobile phase A and was fractionated using a multi-step gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min as follows: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 30 sec and vacuum dried. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and 7 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap  RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 100% H2O, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 90 min gradient from 10%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 10% B. Precursors between 375-1,500 m/z were selected with mass resolution of 120 k, AGC  4×105 and IT 50 ms with the top speed mode in 3 sec and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy was set at 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 50 ms. MS3 quantification was obtained with HCD fragmentation of the top 7 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65% and the AGC setting was at 1×105 with 105 ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100-500 with 50k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification Sequest HT search engine was used to analyze the acquired mass spectra in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. All spectra were searched against UniProt Reference Proteomes of Mus musculus and C. rodentium protein entries. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT 11plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reported signal-to-noise >3 were used for protein quantification. The enterocytes obtained from mock-infected mice were used as controls for log2 ratio calculations.

### Publication Abstract
We used the mouse attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogen <i>Citrobacter rodentium</i>, which models the human A/E pathogens enteropathogenic <i>Escherichia coli</i> and enterohemorrhagic <i>E. coli</i> (EPEC and EHEC), to temporally resolve intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) responses and changes to the microbiome during <i>in vivo</i> infection. We found the host to be unresponsive during the first 3&#x2009;days postinfection (DPI), when <i>C. rodentium</i> resides in the caecum. In contrast, at 4 DPI, the day of colonic colonization, despite only sporadic adhesion to the apex of the crypt, we observed robust upregulation of cell cycle and DNA repair processes, which were associated with expansion of the crypt Ki67-positive replicative zone, and downregulation of multiple metabolic processes (including the tricarboxylic acid [TCA] cycle and oxidative phosphorylation). Moreover, we observed dramatic depletion of goblet and deep crypt secretory cells and an atypical regulation of cholesterol homeostasis in IECs during early infection, with simultaneous upregulation of cholesterol biogenesis (e.g., 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase [Hmgcr]), import (e.g., low-density lipoprotein receptor [Ldlr]), and efflux (e.g., AbcA1). We also detected interleukin 22 (IL-22) responses in IECs (e.g., Reg3&#x3b3;) on the day of colonic colonization, which occurred concomitantly with a bloom of commensal Enterobacteriaceae on the mucosal surface. These results unravel a new paradigm in host-pathogen-microbiome interactions, showing for the first time that sensing a small number of pathogenic bacteria triggers swift intrinsic changes to the IEC composition and function, in tandem with significant changes to the mucosa-associated microbiome, which parallel innate immune responses.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The mouse pathogen <i>C. rodentium</i> is a widely used model for colonic infection and has been a major tool in fundamental discoveries in the fields of bacterial pathogenesis and mucosal immunology. Despite extensive studies probing acute <i>C. rodentium</i> infection, our understanding of the early stages preceding the infection climax remains relatively undetailed. To this end, we apply a multiomics approach to resolve temporal changes to the host and microbiome during early infection. Unexpectedly, we found immediate and dramatic responses occurring on the day of colonic infection, both in the host intestinal epithelial cells and in the microbiome. Our study suggests changes in cholesterol and carbon metabolism in epithelial cells are instantly induced upon pathogen detection in the colon, corresponding with a shift to primarily facultative anaerobes constituting the microbiome. This study contributes to our knowledge of disease pathogenesis and mechanisms of barrier regulation, which is required for development of novel therapeutics targeting the intestinal epithelium.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Colon, Citrobacter

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


