### Accession
PXD013421

### Title
Combinatorial peptide library based on oncogenic KRAS peptide (400 peptides)

### Description
The KRAS peptide library is a part of our larger effort to understand peptide variants in shotgun proteomics. Herein, the interest is in discrimination of homologous peptides---a problem related to detection of peptide variants. The dataset contains MS/MS spectra of 400 synthetic peptides of form LVVVGA-XX-VGK. Each peptide is measured in separate LC-MS/MS run, thus the actual peptide for each dataset is known. In summary, the dataset contains annotated spectra of homologous peptides and can be used for development and optimization of peptide detection methods.

### Sample Protocol
400 unpurified peptides of sequence LVVVGA-XX-VGK (XX being any combination of two coded amino acids) were ordered from JPT Peptide Technologies (Berlin, Germany). Peptides were analyzed individually on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Olten, Switzerland) via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For each LC-MS/MS run, 1 ul of peptide (2 pmol) was injected. Peptides were loaded in a buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and eluted from a 2 cm column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 5 um, 100 angstrom; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a linear 7.5 minute gradient of 2%--40% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 1 ul per minute. In each measurement cycle, full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (m/z range of 300--1700, 120K resolution). 12 most abundant ions of intensity at least 10^3 were isolated, fragmented using CID (normalized collision energy: 35%) and measured in the ion trap (AGC target ion count of 10^4, 100 ms accumulation time). Already selected ions were excluded from repeated measurements for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Vendor-specific LC-MS/MS RAW files (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) were converted to mzML format using msconvert utility within ProteoWizard suite (v. 3.0.4468). MS/MS spectra were searched using in-house search engine i3-tms against database of 400 peptides within the KRAS peptide library (structure: LVVVGA-XX-VGK, carbamidomethylation of cysteines). Precursor ions matching mass of a peptide in a database (up to 5 ppm) were analyzed for match of fragments with m/z tolerance of 0.3. Number of matching fragments (b, y ions of charge 1) was used as a scoring metric. Finally, maximal probability of each peptide-spectrum match was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Peptide library, Kras, Optimization

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University, Olomouc
Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine

### Submitter
Miroslav Hruska

### Lab Head
Dr Dzubak Petr
Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University, Olomouc


