### Accession
PXD004115

### Title
In-depth proteomic mapping of skin mucus of gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). Surrogate markers of chronic stress in fish farming

### Description
The skin mucus of gilthead sea bream was mapped by 1-DE followed by liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer. More than 2000 proteins were identified with a protein score filter of 30. The identified proteins were represented in 418 canonical pathways of the Ingenuity Pathway software. After filtering by canonical pathway overlapping, the retained proteins were clustered in three groups. The mitochondrial cluster contained 59 proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial dysfunction. The second cluster contained 79 proteins related to antigen presentation and protein ubiquitination pathways. The third cluster contained 257 proteins where proteins related to protein synthesis, cellular assembly, and epithelial integrity were over-represented. The latter group also included acute phase response signaling. In parallel, 2-DE methodology identified six proteins spots of different protein abundance when comparing unstressed fish with chronically stressed fish in an experimental model that mimicked daily farming activities. The major changes were associated with a higher abundance of cytokeratin 8 in the skin mucus proteome of stressed fish, which was confirmed by immunoblotting. Overall, these results indicate that skin mucus is a reliable tissue for alternative or complementary stress phenotyping in fish farming.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and mucus collection Two-year old gilthead sea bream (average body weight of 320 g) coming from the study of Bermejo-Nogales et al. [34] comprised a control unstressed group (CTRL) and a group of fish exposed to a fast series of automated stressors (multiple sensorial stressed fish, M-ST): tank shaking, sounds, moving objects into water, water reverse flow and light flashes in random order for 30 min three times a day (9:30 hours, 14:30 hours and 18:30 hours) for a period of 21 days. At the end of experimental period, eight fish per 7 group were randomly sampled and anesthetized with 100 mg/L MS-222 (Sigma). Mucus was gently scraped off the normal skin surface with sterile microslides, avoiding collection of blood, urine, and feces along with mucus. Skin mucus was then transferred into Eppendorf tubes and immediately frozen at -80ºC until analysed. All procedures were performed according to the Norwegian National Ethics Board for experimentation with animals (ID No. 4007) and EU legislation (2010/63/EU) on the handling of experimental animals. 2.2 One-dimensional electrophoresis The protein composition of mucus was first analyzed by 1-DE. Initially, mucus samples from all animals (CTRL and M-ST fish) were pooled, and triplicate samples (54-56 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE using a TGX Any kD precast gel (Bio-Rad) run at 200V for 25 min and stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie (Bio-Rad). The gel was then divided into ten slices (0.65 cm) that were analyzed independently. Proteins in the gel were digested with protein-grade trypsin (Promega) and concentrated by speed vacuum at a final volume of 12 μL for mass spectrometry. 2.4 Mass spectrometry Samples from 1-DE and 2-DE (5 μL) were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer (qQTOF). Briefly, samples were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 350 μm x 0.5 mm, Nikkyo) desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 μL/min for 10 min. Peptide mixtures were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 75 μm x 12 cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic 9 acid. Separation was carried out with a linear gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed in a high resolution nanoESI (qQ)TOF mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The (qQ)TOF was operated in information‐dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25-seconds TOF MS scan from 350-1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.05 seconds product-ion scans from 100-1500 m/z on the 50 most intensely 2-5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTOF wiff files. Mascot was used to search the Expasy protein database or the IATS-CSIC gilthead sea bream database (www.nutrigroup-iats.org/seabreamdb) according to the following parameters: trypsin specificity, carbamidomethyl C to fix modification, deamidated (NQ), Gln‐>pyro‐Glu (N‐term Q), Glu‐>pyro‐Glu (N‐term E), oxidation (M) to variable modification, 75 ppm as peptide mass tolerance and 0.6 Da as fragment mass tolerance. Proteins with a ProteinPilot score higher than 1.3 were identified with a confidence interval ≥ 95%. Functional analysis of identified proteins was performed by means of the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (www.ingenuity.com). For each protein in the analysis, the Uniprot accession equivalent for one of the three higher vertebrates model species in IPA (human, rat, or mouse) was searched as previously reported for the transcriptome-encoding proteins of gilthead sea bream [49].

### Publication Abstract
The skin mucus of gilthead sea bream was mapped by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass analyzer. More than 2,000 proteins were identified with a protein score filter of 30. The identified proteins were represented in 418 canonical pathways of the Ingenuity Pathway software. After filtering by canonical pathway overlapping, the retained proteins were clustered in three groups. The mitochondrial cluster contained 59 proteins related to oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial dysfunction. The second cluster contained 79 proteins related to antigen presentation and protein ubiquitination pathways. The third cluster contained 257 proteins where proteins related to protein synthesis, cellular assembly, and epithelial integrity were over-represented. The latter group also included acute phase response signaling. In parallel, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis methodology identified six proteins spots of different protein abundance when comparing unstressed fish with chronically stressed fish in an experimental model that mimicked daily farming activities. The major changes were associated with a higher abundance of cytokeratin 8 in the skin mucus proteome of stressed fish, which was confirmed by immunoblotting. Thus, the increased abundance of markers of skin epithelial turnover results in a promising indicator of chronic stress in fish.

### Keywords
Chronic stress, Skin mucus, Cytokeratins, Gilthead sea bream, Proteome

### Affiliations
Nutrigenomics and Fish Growth Endocrinology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal, IATS-CSIC, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jaume Pérez-Sánchez
Nutrigenomics and Fish Growth Endocrinology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal, IATS-CSIC, Spain


