### Accession
PXD031845

### Title
Cell Surface Engineering Enables Surfaceome Profiling

### Description
Understanding which proteins are presented at the cell surface is essential for ongoing therapeutic development, and to expand our basic understanding of biology. We envisioned the integration of cell surface engineering with radical-mediated protein biotinylation to profile cell surface proteins (CSPs). This method relies on the pre-functionalization of cells with cholesterol lipid groups, followed by their conjugation with an APEX2 ascorbate peroxidase enzyme. The APEX2 enzyme allows for the covalent conjugation of biotin moieties to nearby residues for subsequent enrichment, and serves as a tool for the enrichment and subsequent MS analysis of CSPs.

### Sample Protocol
Post cell surface labeling with both the APEX2- and SiA-based method, adherent cells were scraped off plates and washed twice with PBS, before being pelleted at (500 xg, 2 min). 3D spheroids were harvested by centrifugation (500 xg, 2 min). Cells were resuspended in 400 μL PBS and lysed by sonication, before being normalized to 2 mg/mL at 500 μL. Protein was precipitated in 2 mL of cold LCMS grade MeOH overnight at -20 ˚C. The precipitate was pelleted (3,260 xg, 15 minutes, 4 ˚C) and washed once with cold MeOH. The pellet was allowed to dry (RT, 10 min) then dissolved in proteomics grade Urea (6 M) in PBS. 10 μL of 10% (w/v) SDS was added to each sample and mixture was sonicated until clarified. Proteins were reduced with 50 μL of freshly prepared 1:1 solution of 20 mM TCEP (PBS) and 600 mM K2CO3 (PBS) and incubated shaking (30 mins, 37 ˚C). Free thiols were alkylated with 70 μL of freshly prepared 400 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark (RT, 30 mins). 130 μL of 10% SDS (w/v) was added to the samples and they were diluted with 5.5 mL PBS and incubated with 100 μL of washed streptavidin agarose beads. Samples were incubated while rotating (RT, 1.5 hr). Proteins bound to beads were pelleted by centrifugation (500 xg, 2 min, 4 ˚C) and washed with 5 mL of 0.2% SDS (w/v) in PBS, PBS, and 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Beads were transferred to LoBind microcentrifuge tubes (Fisher #13-698-794) and incubated in freshly prepared trypsin solution, consisting of one vial of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, 20 μg) dissolved in 100 mM TEAB and supplemented with 20 μL CaCl2. Samples were allowed to digest overnight shaking (37 ˚C). Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (500 xg, 2 min, 4 ˚C) and supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Samples were labelled with tandem mass tags (Thermo Scientific cat# A34808) by adding 8 μL of a 20 μg/μL stock of TMT reagent to each sample along with MS-grade acetonitrile to a final concentration of 30% (v/v) followed by incubation (RT, 1 hr). The reaction was quenched with 6 μL hydroxylamine (15 mins, RT). Samples were then acidified with 5 μL of formic acid, before being dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dry samples were combined by redissolving samples in 5% MeCN in H2O, 0.1% formic acid and transferring solutions into each samples tube until completely combined. The combined sample was desalted by reversed phase column (Phenomenex, 8B-S100-TAL) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The desalted sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80 ˚C until injection.  Tryptic peptide samples were on-line eluted into a Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) from EASY PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (2 mm, 100 Å, 75 mm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific), by a hold of 3% B (80/20 acetonitrile/water, 0.1% formic acid) for 10 min, followed by a gradient of 3 - 38% B in 192 min, a 38 – 75% B increase in 5 min, a 75 – 100% B in 1 min, a hold of 100% B for 5 min, a decrease to 3% B within 1 min, and finally a 6 min hold of 3% B. Flow rates were set at 250 nL/min using a nEasy LC1000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Ions were generated at 1.9 kV using and EASY spray source (Thermo Scientific) held at 50 ˚C.   A synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 mass spectrometry method was used based on Ting et. al.26, scanning between 345-1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 for MS1 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at an AGC target of 1E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 msec, and performing CID in the ion trap of peptide monoisotopic ions with charge 2–8 above an intensity threshold of 5E3, using a quadrupole isolation of 1.6 m/z, and at a CID energy of 30%. The ion trap AGC target was set to 1.8E4 with a maximum injection time of 120 msec. Dynamic exclusion duration was set at 20 sec and ions were excluded after 1 time within +/- 10 ppm mass tolerance window. The top 10 MS2 ions in the ion trap between 400–1200 m/z were then chosen for HCD at 65% energy and detection occurred in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000, an AGC target of 1E5, and an injection time of 120 msec (MS3). All scan events occurred within a 3 sec specified cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Peptide sequences were determined by matching databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. A single missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. Carbamidomethyl and TMT-10 plex were assigned as a static modification. Oxidation was used as a variable modification. Spectra for C2C12 proteomics runs were searched against the proteome database of mus musculus (17,068 sequences) and spectra for the HPAF-II and JEG-3 runs were searched against the proteome database of homo sapiens (42,358 sequences) using a target false discovery rate of 1%. Proteins identified were filtered by at least 2 unique peptides prior to statistical analysis using Prism 9.0 (GraphPad Software Inc.). TMT values obtained from Proteome Discoverer were transformed by log2(x) and p-values were obtained by t-test function across two biological replicates with 3x technical replicates of experimental conditions, and 2x technical replicates for negative controls.

### Publication Abstract
Cell surface proteins (CSPs) are vital molecular mediators for cells and their extracellular environment. Thus, understanding which CSPs are displayed on cells, especially in different cell states, remains an important endeavor in cell biology. Here, we describe the integration of cell surface engineering with radical-mediated protein biotinylation to profile CSPs. This method relies on the prefunctionalization of cells with cholesterol lipid groups, followed by sortase-catalyzed conjugation with an APEX2 ascorbate peroxidase enzyme. In the presence of biotin-phenol and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, APEX2 catalyzes the formation of highly reactive biotinyl radicals that covalently tag electron-rich residues within CSPs for subsequent streptavidin-based enrichment and analysis by quantitative mass spectrometry. While APEX2 is traditionally used to capture proximity-based interactomes, we envisioned using it in a "baitless" manner on cell surfaces to capture CSPs. We evaluate this strategy in light of another CSP labeling method that relies on the presence of cell surface sialic acid. Using the APEX2 strategy, we describe the CSPs found in three mammalian cell lines and compare CSPs in adherent versus three-dimensional pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells.

### Keywords
Pdac, Surfaceome, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Molecular Medicine, Huang Lab, Scripps Research, United States
Scripps Research

### Submitter
Zak Vilen

### Lab Head
Dr Mia Lace Huang
Molecular Medicine, Huang Lab, Scripps Research, United States


