### Accession
PXD007944

### Title
Hydroxyapatite-binding plasma proteins in Age-related macular degenaration

### Description
This project identifies and quantitates Hydroxyapatite binding proteins (HAP) in plasma genotyped for complement factor H (CFH) polymorphism in late stage age-related macular degeneration (AMD) patients by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH). This study provides insights into factors contributing to the formation of sub-retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) deposits and explores the effect of AMD-associated CFH polymorphism on deposit composition.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were taken from 23 individuals aged 65-90 with late stage AMD, grouped based on CFH genotype. Depleted Plasma was bound to CHT hydroxyapatite type I beads and eluted in sodium phosphate. Samples were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using a C18 SepPak cartridge. Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis on a TripleToF 5600 (Sciex) in DDA or DIA (SWATH) mode.

### Data Protocol
The reference spectral library was generated using Protein Pilot v5.0.1 (Sciex). PeakView (2.2) was used to extract quantitative information from SWATH files which were imported into Markerview (1.2.1) for data processing. Data was normalized according to total area sums and retention time corrected using iRT peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is associated with the formation of sub-retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) deposits that block circulatory exchange with the retina. The factors that contribute to deposit formation are not well understood. Recently, we identified the presence of spherular hydroxyapatite (HAP) structures within sub-RPE deposits to which several AMD-associated proteins were bound. This suggested that protein binding to HAP represents a potential mechanism for the retention of proteins in the sub-RPE space. Here we performed quantitative proteomics using Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment-ion spectra-Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) on plasma samples from 23 patients with late-stage neovascular AMD following HAP-binding. Individuals were genotyped for the high risk CFH variant (T1277C) and binding to HAP was compared between wild type and risk variants. From a library of 242 HAP binding plasma proteins (1% false discovery rate), SWATH-MS revealed significant quantitative differences in the abundance of 32 HAP-binding proteins (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05) between the two homozygous groups. The concentrations of six proteins (FHR1, FHR3, APOC4, C4A, C4B and PZP) in the HAP eluted fractions and whole plasma were further analysed using ELISA and their presence in sections from human cadaver eyes was examined using immunofluorescence. All six proteins were found to be present in the RPE/choroid interface, and four of these (FHR1, FHR3, APOC4 and PZP) were associated with spherules in sub-RPE space. This study provides qualitative and quantitative information relating to the degree by which plasma proteins may contribute to sub-RPE deposit formation through binding to HAP spherules and how genetic differences might contribute to deposit formation.

### Keywords
Sub-retinal pigment epithelial deposits, Human plasma, Hydroxyapatite-binding, Amd

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, UK

### Submitter
Silvia Synowsky

### Lab Head
Dr Alan J. Stewart
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, UK


