### Accession
PXD010114

### Title
Mouse femur LC-MSMS upon weightlessness

### Description
Bone loss and immune dysregulation are among the main adverse outcomes of spaceflight challenging astronaut’s health and safety. However, consequences on B cell development and responses are still under-investigated. Up to now, most studies addressing these questions were performed using an amphibian species. Consequently, we used advanced proteomics analysis of femur bone and marrow of mice flown for one month on board the BION-M1 biosatellite, to determine whether extreme conditions encountered during a real spaceflight affect B cell development in mice and to examine reversibility of the effects upon return to Earth. Our data revealed that adverse effects on B lymphopoiesis were more marked one week after landing and that this phenomenon was associated with a 41% reduction of B cells in the spleen. Thus, the effects of spaceflight persisted during at least one week after landing. These reductions may contribute to explain increased susceptibility to infection even if we confirmed that animals were able to mount a humoral immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Eight C57/BL6 male mice were exposed to weightlessness during a 30-day space flight on board the Bion-M1 biosatellite. Four of them were euthanized 13-16 h after landing (Flight group). Four others were put to death after a one-week recovery period (Recovery group). Flown and recovery mice were compared to control animals (n = 5) reared on Earth under space housing and feeding conditions (Ground Control group). Frozen mid distal part of right femurs were weighed and grinded using a ball mill (2 × 30 s @ 25 Hz; MM400, Retsch) under liquid nitrogen and proteins were extracted using 10 volumes (i.e. 10 μL/mg of tissue) of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 2% DTT, 50 mM Tris pH 8.8, protease inhibitors). After solubilisation for 30 min at 37 °C, samples were centrifuged (5 min, 4°C, 15000 x g) to remove possible cell/tissue debris. After TCA-precipitation of proteins overnight at 4°C and a centrifugation (10 min, 4°C, 15000 x g), pelleted proteins were washed using cold acetone and re-solubilised in the extraction buffer. Protein concentration was determined by a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). At this stage, a sample pool comprising equal amounts of all protein extracts was made, to be repeatedly analysed during the whole duration of nanoLC-MS/MS experiments to allow QC-related measurements. Reproducibility of protein electrophoretic profiles was checked for all protein extracts after dilution of 30 µg of proteins in Laemmli buffer (10mM Tris pH 6.8, 1mM EDTA, 5% β-mercapto-ethanol, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol, bromophenol blue), denaturation at 95°C, and SDS-Page electrophoresis on 12% acrylamide gels. 30 µg of each protein extract were mixed with 4x SDS sample buffer (1x: 50 mM Tris pH 6.8, 1 mM EDTA, 5 % β-mercapto-ethanol, 2.5 % SDS and 10 % glycerol), incubated at 37 °C for 10 minutes and run for 15 minutes at 35 V into a 4 % polyacrylamide stacking gel in order to let proteins enter approximately 12 mm into the gel. Electrophoresis was stopped and gels were stained by Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Both the “stacked” protein band and the part of the gel (separated into 3 slices) above this band were excised, with the stacked band being afterwards divided into 4 pieces and the 3 slices into 8 pieces each before in-gel digestion using an automatic pipetting device (MassPrep, Waters, Milford, MA). Following de-staining, reduction (DTT) and alkylation (iodoacetamide), proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using 300 ng of trypsin for the stacked band and 100 ng for slices coming from the upper part of the gel. Peptides were extracted in 60 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid in water for one hour then in 100 % acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 minutes at 450 rpm on an orbital shaker, and the three peptide extracts coming from the upper part of the gel were pooled. At this stage, a set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to each sample to enable following the stability of instrument performances (QC-related measurements). Just before LC-MS/MS analysis, volume of peptide extracts was reduced in a speed-vac and sample volumes were adjusted to 60 µl with 1% ACN, 0.1 % formic acid in water.  Samples were analysed on a nanoUPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Two µl of each sample were concentrated/desalted on a trap column (Symmetry C18, 180 μm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) using 99 % of solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water)/1 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of five µl/min for 3 minutes. Afterwards, peptides were transferred and eluted from the separation column (BEH130 C18, 250 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm; Waters) maintained at 60 °C using a 150 minutes gradient from 1-40 % of B. All samples were injected using a randomized and blocked injection sequence (one biological replicate of each group plus pool in each block). To minimize carry-over, a column wash (50% ACN during 20 min.) was included in between each block, in addition to a solvent blank injection, which was performed after each sample. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage to 1.8 kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 140,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges with the lock-mass option being enabled (445.12002  m/z). Up to 10 most intense precursors per full scan were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalised collision energy of 27eV) and dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors was set to 60 sec. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. The system was fully controlled by the XCalibur software (v3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Peak lists were created using default parameters and searched using the Andromeda search engine (revert mode) implemented in MaxQuant against a protein database created using the MSDA software suite. The database contained mice protein sequences (Swissprot; Taxonomy ID: 10090; 16873 entries), which were downloaded in May 2017. Sequences of common contaminants like keratins and trypsin (247 entries) were finally added to the database (contaminants.fasta included in MaxQuant). The first search was performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and 4.5 ppm for the main search after recalibration. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as fixed and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications during the search. A maximum number of two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins was accepted during identification. Regarding quantification, data normalisation and protein abundance estimation was performed using the MaxLFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a 3-minute time window after retention time alignment. Both unmodified and modified (acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine residues) peptides were considered for quantification while shared peptides were excluded. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Proteins identified with a single peptide and those exhibiting a single unique peptide were not considered for quantification. Only proteins with at least three of four or five valid values per group as well as the ones “absent” (i.e. 0 valid values) in samples from a given group were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Bone loss and immune dysregulation are among the main adverse outcomes of spaceflight challenging astronauts' health and safety. However, consequences on B-cell development and responses are still under-investigated. To fill this gap, we used advanced proteomics analysis of femur bone and marrow to compare mice flown for 1 mo on board the BION-M1 biosatellite, followed or not by 1 wk of recovery on Earth, to control mice kept on Earth. Our data revealed an adverse effect on B lymphopoiesis 1 wk after landing. This phenomenon was associated with a 41% reduction of B cells in the spleen. These reductions may contribute to explain increased susceptibility to infection even if our data suggest that flown animals can mount a humoral immune response. Future studies should investigate the quality/efficiency of produced antibodies and whether longer missions worsen these immune alterations.-Tascher, G., Gerbaix, M., Maes, P., Chazarin, B., Ghislin, S., Antropova, E., Vassilieva, G., Ouzren-Zarhloul, N., Gauquelin-Koch, G., Vico, L., Frippiat, J.-P., Bertile, F. Analysis of femurs from mice embarked on board BION-M1 biosatellite reveals a decrease in immune cell development, including B cells, after 1 wk of recovery on Earth.

### Keywords
Lymphopoeisis, Lc-msms, Mouse, Spaceflight, Bone marrow, Bone, Immunity

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Stasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Stasbourg, France


