### Accession
PXD029233

### Title
MDR1 Drug Efflux Pump Promotes Acquired and Intrinsic Resistance to Protein Degraders in Cancer Cells

### Description
PROTACs (Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras) represent a revolutionary new class of drugs that selectively degrade proteins of interest from cells.  PROTACs targeting oncogenes are avidly being explored for cancer therapies, with several currently in clinical trials.  Drug resistance represents a significant challenge in cancer therapies, and the mechanism by which cancer cells acquire resistance to protein degraders remains poorly understood.  Here, we applied proteomics approaches to elucidate resistance mechanisms to protein degrader therapies in cancer cells.  Our studies revealed acquired resistance to degrader therapies in cancer cells can be mediated by upregulation of the ATP-dependent drug efflux pump MDR1.  Degrader-resistant cells could be re-sensitized to PROTACs through co-administering MDR1 inhibitors. Notably, MDR1 is frequently overexpressed in cancer, and cancer cell lines overexpressing MDR1 exhibited intrinsic resistance to protein degraders, requiring co-treatment with MDR1 inhibitors to achieve protein degradation and therapeutic response. Notably, co-treatment of MDR1-overexpressing K-ras mutant colorectal cancer cells with MEK1/2 or K-ras degraders and the dual ErbB receptor/MDR1 inhibitor lapatinib exhibited potent drug synergy due to simultaneous blockade of MDR1 activity and ErbB receptor-driven resistance.  Together, our findings showed overexpression of MDR1 can promote both intrinsic and acquired resistance to protein degraders in cancer cells and that concurrent blockade of MDR1 will likely be required to achieve durable protein degradation and therapeutic response.

### Sample Protocol
WT or PROTAC-R cells were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 + 4% SDS, and 100 μg of protein was digested using LysC  for 3 hours and trypsin overnight. Digested peptides were isolated using C-18 and PGC columns, then dried and cleaned with ethyl acetate. Three μg of proteolytic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and separated with a Thermo Scientific RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 LC on a Thermo Scientific Easy-Spray C-18 PepMap 75µm x 50cm C-18 2 μm column. A 305 min gradient of 2-20% (180 min) 20%-28% (45 min) 28%-48% (20 min) acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was run at 300 nL/min at 50C.  Eluted peptides were analyzed by Thermo Scientific Q Exactive or Q Exactive plus mass spectrometers utilizing a top 15 methodology in which the 15 most intense peptide precursor ions were subjected to fragmentation.  The AGC for MS1 was set to 3x106 with a max injection time of 120 ms, the AGC for MS2 ions was set to 1x105 with a max injection time of 150 ms, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis of LFQ experiments was performed using MaxQuant software 1.6.1.0 and searched using Andromeda 1.5.6.0 against the Swiss-Prot human protein database (downloaded on April 24, 2019, 20402 entries). The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. All settings were default and searched using acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm and maximum fragment mass error was 0.02 Da. LFQ quantitation was performed using MaxQuant with the following parameters; LFQ minimum ratio count: Global parameters for protein quantitation were as follows: label minimum ratio count: 1, peptides used for quantitation: unique, only use modified proteins selected and with normalized average ratio estimation selected.  Match between runs was employed for LFQ quantitation and the significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate of < 1%. Parameters were default unless specified. MaxQuant normalized LFQ values were imported into Perseus software (1.6.2.3) and filtered in the following manner:  kinases identified by site only were removed, reverse, or potential contaminant were removed then filtered for kinases identified by >1 unique peptide. Protein LFQ values were log2 transformed, filtered for a minimum valid number of 3, annotated, and subjected to a Student's t-test comparing control to treatment or parent to resistant. Parameters for the Student's t-test were the following: S0=2, side both using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <0.05.  Volcano plots depicting differences in protein abundance were generated using R studio software.

### Publication Abstract
Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are a promising new class of drugs that selectively degrade cellular proteins of interest. PROTACs that target oncogene products are avidly being explored for cancer therapies, and several are currently in clinical trials. Drug resistance is a substantial challenge in clinical oncology, and resistance to PROTACs has been reported in several cancer cell models. Here, using proteomic analysis, we found intrinsic and acquired resistance mechanisms to PROTACs in cancer cell lines mediated by greater abundance or production of the drug efflux pump MDR1. PROTAC-resistant cells were resensitized to PROTACs by genetic ablation of <i>ABCB1</i> (which encodes MDR1) or by coadministration of MDR1 inhibitors. In MDR1-overexpressing colorectal cancer cells, degraders targeting either the kinases MEK1/2 or the oncogenic mutant GTPase KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> synergized with the dual epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR/ErbB)/MDR1 inhibitor lapatinib. Moreover, compared with single-agent therapies, combining MEK1/2 degraders with lapatinib improved growth inhibition of MDR1-overexpressing KRAS-mutant colorectal cancer xenografts in mice. Together, our findings suggest that concurrent blockade of MDR1 will likely be required with PROTACs to achieve durable protein degradation and therapeutic response in cancer.

### Keywords
Degrader, Mdr1, Abcb1, Protac, Drug resistance, Cancer

### Affiliations
Cancer Biology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
Fox Chase Cancer Center

### Submitter
James Duncan

### Lab Head
Dr James Duncan
Cancer Biology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States


