### Accession
PXD002756

### Title
Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analyses Reveal Extensive Phosphorylation of Regulatory Proteins in Developing Rice Anthers

### Description
Anther development, particularly around the time of meiosis, is extremely crucial for plant sexual reproduction. Meanwhile, cell-to-cell communication between somatic (especial tapetum) cells and meiocytes are important for both somatic anther development and meiosis. To investigate possible molecular mechanisms involved in protein activities during anther development, we applied high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses for developing rice (Oryza sativa) anthers around the time of meiosis (RAM). In total, we identified 4,984 proteins and 3,203 phosphoproteins with 8,973 unique phosphorylation sites (p-sites). Among those detected here, 1,544 phosphoproteins are currently absent in the Plant Protein Phosphorylation DataBase (P3DB), substantially enriching plant phosphorylation information. Mapman enrichment analysis showed that “DNA repair”, “transcription regulation” and “signalling” related proteins were over-represented in the phosphorylated proteins. Ten genetically identified rice meiotic proteins were detected to be phosphorylated at a total of 25 p-sites; moreover more than 400 meiotically expressed proteins were revealed to be phosphorylated and their phosphorylation sites were precisely assigned. 163 putative secretory proteins, possibly functioning in cell-to-cell communication, are also phosphorylated. Furthermore, we showed that DNA synthesis, RNA splicing and RNA-directed DNA methylation pathways are extensively affected by phosphorylation. In addition, our data support forty-six kinase-substrate pairs predicted by the rice Kinase-Protein Interaction Map, with SnRK1 substrates highly enriched. Taken together, our data revealed extensive protein phosphorylation during anther development, suggesting an important post-translational modification mechanism for protein activity.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and meiotic stage anther collection Rice plants (Oryza sativa subsp. indica cv. 9311) were grown in plastic planting bins in a controlled environment chamber (12-h light/12-h dark, 28 °C, and 70% relative humidity). Panicle initiation and development was determined by microscopic examination of the appearance of panicle primordial. Florets with 3-5 mm length were collected and stage 5-8 anthers were isolated on a glass slide under a stereoscopic microscope, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until use. Total protein extraction and trypsin digestion Rice anthers were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen, and suspended with 6 M Urea and 2 M Thiourea 100 mM NH4HCO3 (final concentration). The suspension was sonicated for 35 min (2 sec sonication with 5 sec intervals) and the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 20 min. The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. Subsequently, the proteins were submitted to reduction by 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 hr and alkylation by 15 mM iodoactamide in dark at room temperature for 1hr. The excess iodoactamide was quenched by the addition of 5 mM DTT. Finally, the protein digestion was accomplished by Lys-C digestion (1 g endoproteinase Lys-C for 100 g protein) for 4 hours at room temperature and followed trypsin digestion (1 g trypsin for 50 g protein) overnight at 37°C after 6 volumes dilution with water.  Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 microcolumn Peptide mixture from 400 g protein (around 1/5 of total protein) was used for phosphoproteomic analysis. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 micro-column as described by Thingholm et al. (Thingholm et al., 2006). The digests were vacuum dried and resuspended with TiO2 loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN, 1% TFA) and applied onto the TiO2 micro-column. After washing four times with 20 l loading buffer and twice with 20 l washing buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA), the bound peptides were eluted twice with 20 l elution buffer 1 (2 M NH3•H2O), and with 2 l elution buffer 2 (1 M NH3•H2O in 40% ACN).  Desalting  Protein digests or the eluates from TiO2 enrichment was acidified with formic acid (FA) and loaded onto a pre-equilibrated home-made Poros R3 micro-column (Gobom et al., 1999). To minimize sample loss, the length of the column was varied depending on the sample amount (approximately 1 l bed volume of R3 material per 10 g of sample). After washing the R3 resin twice with 5% FA, the bound peptides were eluted by 15 l of 30% ACN, followed by 15 l of 60% ACN.  Nano UHPLC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher) coupled with an Easy nLC 1000. The LC solvents are 0.1% FA in H2O (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in 95% ACN (solvent B). The peptide separation was accomplished by three-step elution: 2-35% solvent B in 200 min, 35-90% solvent B in 10 min, 90% solvent B for 5 min, 90- 2% solvent B in 2 min, and 2% for 13 min. The peptide ions were detected in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer and up to 15 of the most intense peptide ions (>5000 counts) were selected and fragmented by MS/MS using multistage activation (MSA) in the linear ion trap (Palumbo and Reid 2008).

### Data Protocol
Database search and data analysis Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher, Germany) and searched against the TIGR Rice (Oryza Sativa Japonica) protein sequence database (FASTA data downloaded from ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_projects/O_Sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/version 7.0/all.dir/all.pep; 2010; 66,495 sequences) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were specified in the protein database searches: only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerances for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethylcysteine as a fixed modification; and protein N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, and phospho_STY (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) permitted as variable modifications (Ye et al., 2010). Peptide identification was achieved by using the following requirements: the expectation value (p) was lower than 0.05 and the peptides were ranked as No. 1 by the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science). Decoy database searches in Mascot revealed a false positive rate lower than 1% at peptide level. Identified peptides were further validated with Target Decoy PSM validator and phosphorylation sites were evaluated with phosphoRS3.0. The best matched Arabidopsis homologs of identified rice proteins were retrieved through PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/). Functional classification of identified rice proteins were facilitated by using the best matched Arabidopsis homolog accessions through online Mapman analysis (http://mapman.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/general/ora/ora.shtml). Pathway analysis of identified rice proteins were performed by online software KEGG (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway.html) using the best matched Arabidopsis homolog accessions.

### Publication Abstract
Anther development, particularly around the time of meiosis, is extremely crucial for plant sexual reproduction. Meanwhile, cell-to-cell communication between somatic (especial tapetum) cells and meiocytes are important for both somatic anther development and meiosis. To investigate possible molecular mechanisms modulating protein activities during anther development, we applied high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses for developing rice (Oryza sativa) anthers around the time of meiosis (RAM). In total, we identified 4984 proteins and 3203 phosphoproteins with 8973 unique phosphorylation sites (p-sites). Among those detected here, 1544 phosphoproteins are currently absent in the Plant Protein Phosphorylation DataBase (P3 DB), substantially enriching plant phosphorylation information. Mapman enrichment analysis showed that 'DNA repair','transcription regulation' and 'signaling' related proteins were overrepresented in the phosphorylated proteins. Ten genetically identified rice meiotic proteins were detected to be phosphorylated at a total of 25 p-sites; moreover more than 400 meiotically expressed proteins were revealed to be phosphorylated and their phosphorylation sites were precisely assigned. 163 putative secretory proteins, possibly functioning in cell-to-cell communication, are also phosphorylated. Furthermore, we showed that DNA synthesis, RNA splicing and RNA-directed DNA methylation pathways are extensively affected by phosphorylation. In addition, our data support 46 kinase-substrate pairs predicted by the rice Kinase-Protein Interaction Map, with SnRK1 substrates highly enriched. Taken together, our data revealed extensive protein phosphorylation during anther development, suggesting an important post-translational modification affecting protein activity.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Anther development, Phosphoproteomics, Meiosis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Fudan university
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
Juanying Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Ma
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University


