### Accession
PXD019590

### Title
Wobble tRNA modification dependent protein aggregates modification

### Description
We want to assess the features of proteins whose aggregation depends on defects in traslation by the loss of the mcm5s2 modification on the urifdine in position 34 of some tRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were pelleted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and resuspended in lysis buffer (20mM Na-phosphate, pH 6.8, 10mM DTT, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% Tween, 1mM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche] and DNAse I). Lysates were kept 20 minutes at room temperature and sonicated. After centrifugation at 200g for 20 minutes at 4°C, supernatants were collected and protein dosage performed. Protein extracts were then centrifuged for 20 minutes 16,000g at 4°C. Pellets were washed (20mM Na-phosphate, pH 6.8, 1mM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail, 2% NP-40) and sonicated. Final pellets were washed with buffer with no NP-40 and sonicated again. For protein detection by western blot, pellets were resuspended in 1% SDS. For proteomics analysis, aggregates were purified after from the cytoplasmic fraction after cyto nuclear extraction. Briefly, cells were lysate with cytoplasmic lysis buffer (1M Tris HCl ph 7.9, 444 0.2 CaCl2, 0.25M EDTA, 2M MgCl2, protease inhibitors) and supernatant was collected after centrifugation (4 ºC for 10 min at 13500 rpm). After aggregates isolation, pellets were washed twice in 1x PBS then diluted with a buffer containing 8M urea, reduced, alkylated and digested using Lys-C/Trypsin mix (Promega) for 4 hours at 37°C. The samples were further diluted to lower the urea concentration to 1M and digested overnight using Lys-C/Trypsin mix. After stop of the digestion, the peptides were purified using Pierce C18 Tip 10µL bed (Thermo Scientific). Half of the protein digests were independently analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS. The analyses were performed on an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters) hyphenated to a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific), in nanoelectrospray positive ion mode. The trap column is a Symmetry C18 5µm (180µmx20mm) and analytical column is a HSS T3 C18 1.8µm (75µmx250mm) (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA). The samples were loaded at 20µL/min on the trap column in 100% solvent A (water 0.1% formic acid) during 3 minutes and subsequently separated on the analytical column; flow rate 600 nL/min, solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), linear gradient 0 min, 98% A; 5 min, 93% A;135 min, 70% A; 150 min, 60% A. The total run time was 180 min. The mass spectrometer method is a TopN-MSMS method where N was set to 12 (singly charged and unassigned charge precursors excluded). The parameters for MS spectrum acquisition are: Mass range from 400 to 1750 m/z, Resolution of 70000, AGC target of 1e6 or Maximum injection time of 200 ms. The parameters for MS2 spectrum acquisition are: Isolation Window of 2.0 m/z, Collision energy (NCE) of 25, Resolution of 17500, AGC target of 1e5 or Maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Databases searches were performed using the SEQUEST HT server and Proteome Discoverer vs. 2.1 (Thermo Scientific), on SwissProt database restricted to human taxonomy. Tolerances were 5ppm on precursors and 0.02 Da on fragments. Trypsin (Specific at both ends) was set as enzyme and maximum 2 miss-cleaveages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl of Cysteines (C) was set as fixed modification. Deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine (N, Q) and Oxidation of Methionine (M) were set as variable modifications. Identified proteins underwent pathway enrichment analysis and codon enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of mRNA translation elongation impacts nascent protein synthesis and integrity and plays a critical role in disease establishment. Here, we investigate features linking regulation of codon-dependent translation elongation to protein expression and homeostasis. Using knockdown models of enzymes that catalyze the mcm<sup>5</sup>s<sup>2</sup> wobble uridine tRNA modification (U<sub>34</sub>-enzymes), we show that gene codon content is necessary but not sufficient to predict protein fate. While translation defects upon perturbation of U<sub>34</sub>-enzymes are strictly dependent on codon content, the consequences on protein output are determined by other features. Specific hydrophilic motifs cause protein aggregation and degradation upon codon-dependent translation elongation defects. Accordingly, the combination of codon content and the presence of hydrophilic motifs define the proteome whose maintenance relies on U<sub>34</sub>-tRNA modification. Together, these results uncover the mechanism linking wobble tRNA modification to mRNA translation and aggregation to maintain proteome homeostasis.

### Keywords
Aggregates, Elongator, Trna modification, Cancer

### Affiliations
Lab of Cancer Signaling; GIGA-Stem Cell; University of Liege, Belgium
University of Liege

### Submitter
Dominique Baiwir

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre CLOSE
Lab of Cancer Signaling; GIGA-Stem Cell; University of Liege, Belgium


