### Accession
PXD010960

### Title
Porcine breast extracellular matrix hydrogel for spatial tissue culture

### Description
Porcine mammary fatty tissues represent an abundant source of biomaterial for generation of breast-specific extracellular matrix (ECM). Here we report the extraction of total ECM proteins from pig breast fatty tissues, the fabrication of hydrogel scaffolds from the extracted ECM proteins, the structural properties of the scaffolds, and the applications of the hydrogel in human mammary epithelial cell spatial cultures for cell surface receptor expression, metabolomics characterization, acini formation, proliferation, migration between different scaffolding compartments, and in vivo tumor formation. This model system provides an additional option for studying human breast diseases such as breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of porous scaffold using the ECM hydrogel: The porcine breast ECM hydrogel at the concentration of 40 mg/ml was mixed with sodium bicarbonate (final concentration 1 mg/ml), filled in desired culture vessels (for example 96-well plates), flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored in -80 ºC overnight. The frozen hydrogel blocks were then immersed into precooled (-80 ºC) ethanol bath containing 0.1 M acetic acid until there was no bubbles arising from the solidified gel (the processing time depends on the size of the frozen gel). The ethanol was replenished, and the scaffolds remained immersed for at least 24 hours. Before cell culture, the scaffolds should be washed three times with 1× PBS or tissue culture medium.

### Data Protocol
The hydrogel samples collected from the tissue cultures were flash frozen, cross sectioned (10 m) and mounted onto the cold indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated microscope slides (Figure 3c, left panel). Three experimental replicates were prepared, and three consecutive sections from an individual replicate were collected. A matrix solution of 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHBA, 20 mg/mL) dissolved in water and methanol mixture (50:50 in volume) was applied to the tissue sections on the different slides using a TM-Sprayer. The DHBA-coated slides were analyzed using a Bruker SolariX 9.4T MALDI FTICR mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) to scan ions within a mass range of 150 – 3000 Da. Imaging acquisition was carried out using FlexImaging (Bruker Daltonics). The spectral analyses were performed using DataAnalysis (Bruker Daltonics) and SciLS Lab (SciLS).

### Publication Abstract
Porcine mammary fatty tissues represent an abundant source of natural biomaterial for generation of breast-specific extracellular matrix (ECM). Here we report the extraction of total ECM proteins from pig breast fatty tissues, the fabrication of hydrogel and porous scaffolds from the extracted ECM proteins, the structural properties of the scaffolds (tissue matrix scaffold, TMS), and the applications of the hydrogel in human mammary epithelial cell spatial cultures for cell surface receptor expression, metabolomics characterization, acini formation, proliferation, migration between different scaffolding compartments, and in vivo tumor formation. This model system provides an additional option for studying human breast diseases such as breast cancer.

### Keywords
Porcine, 3d culture, Breast cancer, Hydrogel, Scaffold, Ecm

### Affiliations
WSU
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine, Washington State University, WA 99210

### Submitter
Jing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Weimin Li
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine, Washington State University, WA 99210


