### Accession
PXD024562

### Title
Digging deeper into the HLA peptidome – Characterization of the post-translationally modified peptides

### Description
Peptides displayed by MHC molecules on a cell’s surface, referred to as its immunopeptidome, play an important role in the adaptive the immune response. Antigen processing for MHC class I presentation is a ubiquitous pathway present in all nucleated cells which generate and present peptides of both self and non-self origin. Peptides with post-translational modifications (PTMs) are one of the classes of peptides presented by MHC class I molecules. However, due to the high background of self-peptides presented by the cells, the diversity of peptides with post-translational modifications is not well reported. In this study, we have carried out MHC Class I immunopeptidomics analysis on Jurkat and A375 cell lines to characterize the diversity of post-translational modifications among MHC class I peptides. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified 25,761 MHC-bound peptides across both the cell lines using Bolt and Sequest search engines. High specificity of the enrichment method is demonstrated by identifying ~90% of the peptides with typical length distribution of 8-12 aa and enriched motifs within those peptides similar to the binding motifs of MHC alleles. Among the MHC-bound peptides, we identified phosphorylation as a major post-translational modification followed by deamidation. We observed site-specific localization of these post-translational modifications, at position P4 for phosphorylated peptides and position P3 for deamidated peptides. We identified a smaller number of peptides with acetylated and methylated lysine, possibly due to very low stoichiometric levels of these post-translational modifications compared to phosphorylation and deamidation. Using PEAKS de novo sequencing algorithm, we identified spliced peptides that account for ~5-7% of MHC-bound peptides across the two cell lines. These peptides share similar features with respect to normal MHC-bound peptides such as peptide length distribution and binding motifs. We validated the identification of several post-translationally modified peptides and spliced peptides using synthetic peptide sequences. In conclusion, our study demonstrates unbiased identification of these low stoichiometric PTMs and unusual spliced peptides using high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Pan-specific MHC Class I antibody (W6/32 clone) was ordered from BioXCell. 5mg of antibody was loaded on 1 mL of Protein A-Sepharose 4B beads (Invitrogen) packed in a polypropylene column (BioRad) and incubated for 30min. Antibody-bound beads was washed with borate buffer (pH 9) and incubated with 20mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) linker for 45 min. Crosslinking reaction was stopped by incubating the column with ethanolamine for 2 hours. Then the column was washed with phosphate buffer saline and stored in PBS with 0.02% sodium azide at 4 °C. The column was washed with 0.1 N acetic acid and equilibrated with 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. MHC-peptide complexes were enriched using previously described protocol. Loucy and A375 cell lines were lysed in buffer containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM IAA, 1mM EDTA, 1mM PMSF, 1% Octyl-B-glucopyranoside, 1:200 protease inhibitor cocktail for 1 h on ice. Cell debris was separated by centrifugation of the lysate at 25,000 xg, 4 °C for 50 min. Supernatant was loaded on to the MHC class I crosslinked affinity column and incubated for 1 hour with gentle rotation. The column was washed with 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 followed by 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 and 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0. MHC-peptide complexes were eluted using 1% TFA and the eluate was subjected to C18 cleanup to purify MHC-bound peptides. Peptides were dried using speed vac concentrator prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Sequest in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software and Bolt in Pinnacle software (v99.0) platforms. Database searching was performed using Uniprot human canonical protein sequences with no enzyme specificity. Peptide length of 7–25 amino acids was considered for database searching with precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da. Oxidation (methionine), phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine), deamidation (asparagine) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set as dynamic modifications in Sequest search engine. In addition to these modifications, acetylation (lysine) and methylation (lysine) were included for Bolt search algorithm. False discovery rate of identifications was maintained at 1% peptide level for both the search engines. De novo sequencing was performed using PEAKS Studio software using the default search settings. De novo search results (up to 5 sequence candidates for each spectrum) were filtered for an ALC score for ≥80%. The resulting scans were further filtered for the scans without a peptide spectral match in the traditional database search. Scans were then filtered out if any of the de novo candidate sequences matched to the canonical human protein sequences. Only scans which passed all the above described criteria were considered for the identification of spliced sequences. De novo candidate sequences from these scans were mapped against all human protein sequences by partial sequence match. Candidate peptide sequences that completely map to a protein by splicing (cis-splicing) were identified using an in house Python script. Finally, peptides which contained at least two amino acids in both the spliced fragments were considered as confident spliced peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Mhc class i, Mhc binding motifs, Spliced peptides, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA  Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA  Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


