### Accession
PXD022449

### Title
Interaction with ribosomal proteins accompanies ER stress-induction of the anticancer metallodrug BOLD-100/KP1339

### Description
The ruthenium-based anticancer agent BOLD-100/KP1339 has shown promising results in several in vitro and in vivo tumour models, as well as in early clinical trials. However, its mode of action remains to be fully elucidated. Recent evidence identified ER stress-induction and concomitant down-modulation of HSPA5 (GRP78) as key drug effects. By exploiting the naturally formed adduct between BOLD-100 and human serum albumin as an immobilization strategy, we were able to perform target profiling experiments that revealed the ribosomal proteins RPL10, RPL24 and the transcription factor GTF2I as potential interactors of this ruthenium(III) anticancer agent. Integrating these findings with proteomic profiling and transcriptomic experiments supported ribosomal disturbance and concomitant induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The formation of poly-ribosomes and ER swelling of treated cancer cells by electron microscopy validated this finding. Thus, the direct interaction of BOLD-100 with ribosomal proteins seems to accompany ER stress-induction and modulation of GRP78 in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Target profiling. HCT116 cells were grown in T75 polystyrene cell culture flasks with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Sarstedt, Austria) in three biological replicates per condition to approximately 95% confluence. The cells were washed, lysed and homogenised by passing through a gauge syringe 20-times as described elsewhere. In brief, a non-denaturing lysis buffer was used for pull-down experiments consisting of NaCl (100 mM), Tris HCl (50 mM), MgCl2 (1.5 mM), NaF (25 mM), NP-40 (0.2%), glycerol (5%), TLCK (10 μg mL-1), DTT (1 mM), Na3VO4 (1 mM), PMSF (1 mM) and pepstatin/leupeptin/aprotinin (each 1 μg mL-1), at pH 7.4. The samples were centrifuged (3500 rpm, 5 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was used for further processing. For the competitive pull-down experiments the cell lysates were incubated with BOLD100 (50 µM) for 1 h at 4 °C prior to exposure to the immobilised drug. To immobilise BOLD-100 a complex with human serum albumin (HSA) was formed. Therefore, anti-HSA beads (1 mL) used for depletion of human serum (PureProteome™ Albumin Magnetic Beads, Millipore, Germany) were incubated with HSA (2 mg, 30,3 nmol, Albumin from human serum, Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS, BOLD-100 (95 µg, 189 nmol) was added and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. The formed BOLD-100–HSA adduct consisting of magnetic beads, HSA, and BOLD-100 was then washed and split into six aliquots used for the pulldown experiment. The cell lysates (with and without pre-incubated drug) were added to the magnetic beads and shaken for 4 h at 4 °C. Afterwards, the supernatant was removed and the beads were extensively washed with lysis buffer and HEPES buffer (HEPES-NaOH (50 mM), EDTA (0.5 mM), PMSF (1 mM), TLCK (10 μg mL-1) and pepstatin/leupeptin/aprotinin (each 1 μg mL-1)] at pH 8. The proteins were eluted with a citrate buffer and proteolytically digested using trypsin/Lys-C for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Response profiling. HCT116 cells (5·10^6 cells) were seeded in T25 polystyrene cell culture flasks with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Sarstedt, Austria) in three biological replicates per condition and allowed to grow for 24 h. Cells of three T25 flasks were treated with BOLD-100 (80 µM) for 24 hours, while the others served as controls (including solvent control). The cells were lysed and separated into cytoplasmic and nuclear fraction as previously described. In short, the cells were washed with PBS and 1 ml of isotonic lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors was added. The cells were scraped and homogenised using a gauge syringe. After centrifugation the supernatant was precipitated in ethanol overnight and the remaining nuclear pellet was swelled in hypertonic buffer and ultimately lysed with NP-40 containing buffer. The samples were again centrifuged and the supernatant precipitated in ethanol. Protein sample preparation. The proteins were proteolytically digested in-solution using a filter-assisted protein digestion (FASP) protocol as described previously. In short, the precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 4536 g for 30 min, the supernatant was decanted and the protein pellet dried under vacuum. After dissolving in sample buffer the protein concentration was determined and 20 µg total protein per samples was used for further processing. After reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodacetamide (both Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) the proteins were digested with typsin/Lys-C (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) and dried. Proteome analysis by LC-MS/MS. For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis the peptides were resolved in 5 µL formic acid (aq. 30%) and diluted with 40 µL mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The injection volumes were 5 µL for the pull-down samples and 10 µL for samples from cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. Chromatographic separation was carried out with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system, which was coupled to the QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). Peptides were trapped on a C18 2 cm × 100 μm pre-column and LC separation was performed on a 50 cm × 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). The total run time of the HPLC method for analyzing pull-down samples was 85 min and included a 43 min gradient from 7% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid). For samples of the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were separated using a HPLC method of 135 min total run time, including a 95  min gradient from 8% to 40% mobile phase B. The flow rate was always 300 nL min-1. Mass spectrometric settings were the same for all fractions. The resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z=200) with a scan range from m/z 400–1,400. The top eight abundant peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and resulting fragments analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z=200).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were subjected to the freely available software MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) utilizing the Andromeda search engine, followed by statistical evaluation with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.2). For the MaxQuant search, a minimum of two peptide identifications, at least one of them being a unique peptide, was required for valid protein identification. Digestion mode was set to “Specific” choosing Trypsin/P. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 50  ppm for the first search and to 25 ppm for the main search. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 both on peptide and protein level, based on the q-value. The database applied for the search was the human Uniprot database (version 03/2018, reviewed entries only) with 20,316 protein entries. Further settings for the search included carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein C terminus as variable modifications. Each peptide was allowed to have a maximum of two missed cleavages and two modifications, “Match between runs” was enabled and the alignment window set to 10 min, with the match time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
The ruthenium-based anticancer agent BOLD-100/KP1339 has shown promising results in several in vitro and in vivo tumour models as well as in early clinical trials. However, its mode of action remains to be fully elucidated. Recent evidence identified stress induction in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and concomitant down-modulation of HSPA5 (GRP78) as key drug effects. By exploiting the naturally formed adduct between BOLD-100 and human serum albumin as an immobilization strategy, we were able to perform target-profiling experiments that revealed the ribosomal proteins RPL10, RPL24, and the transcription factor GTF2I as potential interactors of this ruthenium(III) anticancer agent. Integrating these findings with proteomic profiling and transcriptomic experiments supported ribosomal disturbance and concomitant induction of ER stress. The formation of polyribosomes and ER swelling of treated cancer cells revealed by TEM validated this finding. Thus, the direct interaction of BOLD-100 with ribosomal proteins seems to accompany ER stress-induction and modulation of GRP78 in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Kp1339, Target identification, Proteomics, Bold-100, Anticancer agents

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Waehringer Str. 38, 1090 Vienna (Austria)

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Waehringer Str. 38, 1090 Vienna (Austria)


