### Accession
PXD023295

### Title
Drosophila yellow-h, dopaminechrome tautomerase

### Description
We report the identification of dopaminechrome tautomerase (DPT) that biosynthesizes 5,6-dihydroxyindole from dopaminechrome in Drosophila. We show that this enzyme is encoded by the yellow-h gene.

### Sample Protocol
Partial purification of DPT:   For the initial characterization of DPT, 15 g of Drosophila melanogaster embryos collected between 16-19 hr was used. All subsequent operations were carried out at 0-5 °C. All centrifugations were carried out for 25 min at 15,000 x g. The embryos were homogenized in a glass homogenizer with 30% ammonium sulfate in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.0. The precipitated proteins and cell debris were discarded, and the supernatant was subjected to 30-45% ammonium sulfate fractionation. The proteins precipitated were collected after centrifugation and the supernatant was subjected to 45-50% ammonium sulfate fractionation followed by centrifugation. Both 30-45% and 45-50% ammonium sulfate precipitated fractions were either used immediately or stored at -80 °C for later use.  An estimated 26 mg of 45-50% ammonium sulfate fraction was subjected to size exclusion chromatography on a Sephacryl S-200 column (42.5 x 2.5 cm) equilibrated with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 at a flow rate of 2.5 ml/min. Fractions of 2 ml were collected and assayed for both protein content and dopaminechrome isomerase activity.  Protein fractions containing DPT activity were pooled, concentrated by lyophilization and used for further work.  Further purification of DPT: An estimated 68 mg of protein from 45-50% ammonium sulfate fraction was subjected to Phenyl Sepharose column chromatography (5 x 2.0 cm) using 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 containing 1 M ammonium sulfate. After washing the column with six column volumes of buffer, bound proteins were eluted with a linear gradient of 1 M ammonium sulfate to 0 M ammonium sulfate at a flow rate of 0.7 ml/min. Fractions of 3 ml were collected and assayed for DPT activity. The tubes containing active fractions (2.74 mg) were pooled and concentrated using a centricon tube with a molecular weight cutoff of 10 kDa. The pH of the concentrated solution was adjusted to 8 by adding a few drops of 1 N NaOH and loaded on a DEAE-column (5 x 2.0 cm) equilibrated with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 50 mM sodium chloride. The column was washed with four column volumes of the same buffer. Bound proteins were eluted with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 containing 1 M sodium chloride.  Protein possessing DPT activity (1.02 mg protein) were pooled, lyophilized and subjected to size exclusion chromatography on a Sephacryl S-200 column (12. x 2.5 cm) equilibrated with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 containing 0.05 M sodium chloride at a flow rate of 1.5 ml/min. Fractions of 3 ml were collected. The active fractions were pooled, dialyzed against water and concentrated by lyophilization. This purified sample was used for all biochemical studies. It was also subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The band containing DPT activity was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS following trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
SEQUEST (ver. 28, rev. 13) was used to search a library of annotated Drosophila proteins downloaded from FlyBase (30620 entries). Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 50 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions was 1 Da. Data were filtered based on the peptide FDR of 0.26%.

### Publication Abstract
Melanin is a widely distributed phenolic pigment that is biosynthesized from tyrosine and its hydroxylated product, dopa, in all animals. However, recent studies reveal a significant deviation from this paradigm, as insects appear to use dopamine rather than dopa as the major precursor of melanin. This observation calls for a reconsideration of the insect melanogenic pathway. While phenoloxidases and laccases can oxidize dopamine for dopaminechrome production, the fate of dopaminechrome remains undetermined. Dopachrome decarboxylase/tautomerase, encoded by yellow-f/f2 of Drosophila melanogaster, can convert dopaminechrome into 5,6-dihydroxyindole, but the same enzyme from other organisms does not act on dopaminechrome, suggesting the existence of a specific dopaminechrome tautomerase (DPT). We now report the identification of this novel enzyme that biosynthesizes 5,6-dihydroxyindole from dopaminechrome in Drosophila. Dopaminechrome tautomerase acted on both dopaminechrome and N-methyl dopaminechrome but not on dopachrome or other aminochromes tested. Our biochemical and molecular studies reveal that this enzyme is encoded by the yellow-h gene, a member of the yellow gene family, and advance our understanding of the physiological functions of this gene family. Identification and characterization of DPT clarifies the precursor for melanin biosynthetic pathways and proves the existence of an independent melanogenic pathway in insects that utilizes dopamine as the primary precursor.

### Keywords
Yellow-h, Dopamine, Drosophila, Tautomerase, Melanogenesis, Dopaminechrome, Eumelanin

### Affiliations
Biology Department, UMass Boston, USA
University of Massachusetts Boston

### Submitter
Alexey Veraksa

### Lab Head
Dr Manickam Sugumaran
Biology Department, UMass Boston, USA


