### Accession
PXD003574

### Title
SILAC proteomics of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and cancer cells

### Description
To study bi-directional signaling between cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and cancer cells, we used stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to determine changes in tyrosine phosphorylation upon direct contact of the two cell types.

### Sample Protocol
SKOV3ip1 cells were grown for 8 passages in SILAC DMEM (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with ‘heavy’ arginine and lysine (C13N15) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Tewksbury, MA) and 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco). Primary CAFs isolated from an omental metastasis were immortalized using hTERT as previously described. AFs were seeded in regular growth media with ‘light’ arginine and lysine (C12N14) at 2.5e6/15cm dish x2 dishes/replicate. After 24hr, ‘heavy’ labeled SKOV3ip1 cells were collected by trypsinization and resuspended in SILAC DMEM lacking Arg/Lys with 0.1% BSA. CAFs were washed one time with SILAC DMEM lacking Arg/Lys. SKOV3ip1 (7.5e6/dish x2 dishes/replicate) cells were then plated with CAFs or on plastic and cultured for 4hr. CAFs alone were left in SILAC DMEM lacking Arg/Lys for 4hr.

### Data Protocol
Cell lysis, protein reduction, alkylation, digestion, and peptide immunoprecipitation were conduced according to established protocols. ryptic peptides were acidified to pH 2.0 with 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), cleared at 1,800×g for 5 minutes at room temperature, and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Eluents containing peptides were lyophilized for 48 hours to dryness. Peptide immunoprecipitation was performed using p-Tyr-100 phosphotyrosine antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technology) as previously described. Phosphopeptides were eluted into a Linear Trap Quadropole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a PicoFrit analytical column (360 μm outer diameter 75 μm inner diameter-fused silica with 12 cm of 3-μm Monitor C18 particles; New Objective, Woburn, MA) with a reversed-phase gradient (0–70% 0.1M acetic acid in acetonitrile in 90 minutes). Spectra were collected in positive ion mode and in cycles of one full MS scan in the Orbitrap (m/z 400–1800) followed by data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans in the LTQ Velos, sequentially of the ten most abundant ions in each MS scan with charge state screening for +1, +2, +3 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The automatic gain control was 1,000,000 for the Orbitrap scan and 10,000 for the LTQ scans. The maximum ion time was 100 milliseconds for the LTQ scan and 500 milliseconds for the Orbitrap full scan. Orbitrap resolution was set at 60,000. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human UNIPROT non-redundant "complete proteome set" protein database using Mascot (Matrix Science)(25). Peak lists were generated using extract_msn.exe (1/10/11) using a mass range of 600–4500. The UNIPROT human database contained 88,832 forward and an equal number of reverse protein sequence entries. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 7 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, and 0.5 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters specified a differential modification of phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as well as a static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. Search parameters also included a differential modification for arginine (+10.00827 Da) and lysine (+8.01420 Da) amino acids. To provide high confidence phosphopeptide sequence assignments, Mascot results were first filtered by Mowse score (>20) and precursor mass error (< 2 ppm) and the resulting peptide assignments were filtered down to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) by a logistic spectral score.

### Publication Abstract
Successful metastasis requires the co-evolution of stromal and cancer cells. We used stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture coupled with quantitative, label-free phosphoproteomics to study the bidirectional signaling in ovarian cancer cells and&#xa0;human-derived, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) after co-culture. In cancer cells, the interaction with CAFs supported glycogenolysis under normoxic conditions and induced phosphorylation and activation of phosphoglucomutase 1, an enzyme involved in glycogen metabolism. Glycogen was funneled into glycolysis, leading to increased proliferation, invasion, and metastasis of cancer cells co-cultured with human CAFs. Glycogen mobilization in cancer cells was dependent on p38&#x3b1; MAPK activation in CAFs. In&#xa0;vivo, deletion of p38&#x3b1; in CAFs and glycogen phosphorylase inhibition in cancer cells reduced metastasis, suggesting that glycogen is an energy source used by cancer cells to facilitate metastatic tumor growth.

### Keywords
Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Cancer cells, Silac

### Affiliations
Brown University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry/Center of Genomics and Proteomics, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry/Center of Genomics and Proteomics, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA


