### Accession
PXD032003

### Title
CT26 Proteome and Immunopeptidome treated with Ionizing Radiation

### Description
This project explored the relationship between ionizing radiation and antigen presentation using both proteomic and immunopeptidomics methodologies. We investigated the radiation-specific changes which occur in the colorectal tumor cell proteome associated with changes in dose and time after irradiation. We used this data to observe the changes in key regulators and effector proteins of the antigen processing and presentation machinery. Furthermore, a parallel immunopeptidomics analysis enabled a peptide-level assessment of antigen presentation to correlate changes observed in the proteome thereby defining a radiation-specific peptide repertoire. A nuanced relationship between protein expression and antigen presentation was observed where radiation-induced changes in proteins do not always correlate with increased presentation of associated peptides. Furthermore, a neoantigen which increases in the context of radiation was characterised. This study provides new insights into how radiation enhances antigen processing and presentation that could be suitable for the development of combinatorial therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics:  Cell pellets were lysed using a non-denaturing lysis buffer preferential for cytosolic and membrane proteins. 15µg of cleared lysate was reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide before undergoing tryptic digestion following the S-Trap midi protocol according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluents were pooled and dried before loading 1µg onto the column for LC/MS acquisition. Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (0.1% (v/v) Trifluoracetic acid, 1% (v/v) Acetonitrile) and analyzed by a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped in loading solvent by an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 5 µM 0.1 X 20 mm column before analytical separation by a 60 min linear acetonitrile gradient of 2-35% in water containing 1% (v/v) DMSO and 0.1% (v/v) Formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on a 75 µm × 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 EasySpray column at 40 °C (Thermo Scientific). DDA was adapted from a standard 15Hz proteomics duty cycle 320 to 1600 m/z full-MS scan (60,000 resolution, 45 ms accumulation time, target AGC 3X106) and 12 dependent MS2 scans (30,000 resolution, 54 ms accumulation time, AGC  2X105).  Immunopeptidomics:  Cell pellets were lysed using a non-denaturing lysis buffer preferential for cytosolic and membrane proteins. MHC Class I antibody immunoresin for each biological replicate was prepared by crosslinking 5 mg of antibody clone 34.1.2s (recognizing H-2 Kd, Dd and Ld, purified from hybridoma cells, ATCC HB79) to Sepharose protein A bead slurry in dimethyl pimelimidate in borate buffer. Cleared lysates were incubated with the immunoresin overnight at 4°C under mild agitation. Following several washes and elution in 10% acetic acid, eluted peptides were desalted and purified from antigen presentation using reversed phase chromatography separated into concatenated odd and even fractions for LC/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (0.1% (v/v) Trifluoracetic acid, 1% (v/v) Acetonitrile) and analyzed by a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped in loading solvent by an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 5 µM 0.1 X 20 mm column before analytical separation by a 60 min linear acetonitrile gradient of either 2-25% for immunopeptidomic, or 2-35% for proteomic samples in water containing 1% (v/v) DMSO and 0.1% (v/v) Formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on a 75 µm × 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 EasySpray column at 40 °C (Thermo Scientific). For immunopeptidomic samples data-dependent acquisition (DDA) consisted of a 320-1600 m/z full-MS scan (120,000 resolution, 100 ms accumulation time, target automatic gain control (AGC) 3X106) and 20 dependent MS2 scans (60,000 resolution, 120 ms accumulation time, target AGC  5X105).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics:  For quantitative proteomics analysis, the data was analyzed by Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters) for chromatographic alignment, normalization, and determination of individual peptide ion abundances. Aligned chromatograms were analyzed with Peaks v10.0 for the identification of proteins matching to a database containing all reviewed mouse SwissProt protein entries (20191223). Label free quantification was based on the top 3 unique peptides per protein. Normalized protein quantification data for 4150 quantifiable proteins was exported from progenesis and differential expression analysis was performed using the DEP package (R version 3.6.3). Data imputation was performed using the MLE method (maximum likelihood-based imputation).  Immunopeptidomics:   MS data were analyzed with Peaks v10.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions) for the identification of peptide sequences matching to databases generated by integration of exome identified protein variants and all reviewed mouse SwissProt protein entries (20191223). Irrelevant MHC I alleles were removed from the SwissProt database to retain only H-2-Kd, H-2-Dd and H-2-Ld which are known to be present in BALB/c mice. Searches were performed with the following parameters: no enzyme specificity, no peptide modifications, peptide tolerance: ± 5 ppm and fragment tolerance: ± 0.03 Da. The results were filtered using a false discovery rate of 1% established through parallel decoy database searches.

### Publication Abstract
Little is known about the pathways regulating MHC antigen presentation and the identity of treatment-specific T cell antigens induced by ionizing radiation. For this reason, we investigated the radiation-specific changes in the colorectal tumor cell proteome. We found an increase in DDX58 and ZBP1 protein expression, two nucleic acid sensing molecules likely involved in induction of the dominant interferon response signature observed after genotoxic insult. We further observed treatment-induced changes in key regulators and effector proteins of the antigen processing and presentation machinery. Differential regulation of MHC allele expression was further driving the presentation of a significantly broader MHC-associated peptidome postirradiation, defining a radiation-specific peptide repertoire. Interestingly, treatment-induced peptides originated predominantly from proteins involved in catecholamine synthesis and metabolic pathways. A nuanced relationship between protein expression and antigen presentation was observed where radiation-induced changes in proteins do not correlate with increased presentation of associated peptides. Finally, we detected an increase in the presentation of a tumor-specific neoantigen derived from Mtch1. This study provides new insights into how radiation enhances antigen processing and presentation that could be suitable for the development of combinatorial therapies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032003.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Ionizing radiation, Interferon signaling, Mhc, Ligandomics

### Affiliations
Jenner Institute Antigen Discovery Group University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Arun Tailor

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
Jenner Institute Antigen Discovery Group University of Oxford


