### Accession
PXD009724

### Title
Small-molecule inhibitors reveal an indispensable scaffolding role of RIPK2 in NOD2 signaling

### Description
RIPK2 mediates inflammatory signaling by the bacteria-sensing receptors NOD1 and NOD2, and inhibition of RIPK2 by kinase inhibitors is an emerging strategy to ameliorate NOD-mediated pathologies. However, the role for RIPK2’s kinase activity remains unclear. Here, we reveal that RIPK2 kinase activity is dispensable for NOD2 inflammatory signaling and show that RIPK2 inhibitors function instead by antagonizing XIAP-binding and XIAP-mediated ubiquitination of RIPK2. We map the XIAP binding site on RIPK2 to the loop between 2 and 3 of the N-lobe of the kinase, which is in close proximity to the ATP-binding pocket. Through characterization of a new series of ATP-competitive RIPK2 inhibitors, we identify the molecular features that determine their inhibition of both the RIPK2-XIAP interaction, and of cellular and in vivo NOD2 signaling. Our study exemplifies how targeting of the ATP-binding pocket in RIPK2 can be exploited to interfere with the RIPK2-XIAP interaction for modulation of NOD signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldowns with c-ponatininb in WT U2OS cells Lysate preparation U2OS cells were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere in McCoy’s Medium containing 10% FBS and DMEM Medium containing 10% FBS, respectively.  Cells were grown until approximately 80% confluent and then stimulated with 1 µM L18-MDP for 1h before being washed with PBS. Cell were subsequently lysed in buffer A (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.8% v/v NP-40, 5% v/v glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4, 1mM PMSF, 1mM DTT, 10 µg/mL TLCK, 1 µg/mL Leupeptin, 1 µg/mL Aprotinin, 1 µg/mL soy bean trypsin) and cleared by ultracentrifugation. Protein concentration was determined and the lysates stored at -80 °C until use. Drug affinity chromatography The synthesis of c-ponatinib has been reported elsewhere (Fauster et al., 2015). C-ponatinib was coupled to NHS-activated Sepharose 4 fast flow beads (GE Healthcare) as described previously (Fauster et al., 2015). Briefly, 100 μL of bead slurry (50% in isopropanol) was used for each pulldown experiment, which were run in duplicate. Beads were washed with DMSO (3 × 500 μL), and resuspended in DMSO (50 μL), to which the amine (0.025 μmol) and triethylamine (0.75 μL) were added. The beads were incubated at room temperature for 16 hours, and depletion of free amine from the supernatant determined by LC-MS analysis. Ethanolamine (2.5 μL) was then added to block any unreacted NHS sites, and the beads incubated for a further 16 hours. Derivatised beads were then washed with DMSO (3 × 500 μL), buffer A (3 × 1 mL), and incubated with cell lysates (2 mg of protein per pulldown, at 7 mg/mL) for 2 hours at 4 °C, before being washed with buffer A (5 mL), Buffer B (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 500 μM EDTA, 2.5 mL), and eluted with formic acid (100 mM, 250 μl). Samples were neutralised with triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB, 1M, 62.5 μl) and stored at -20°C until preparation for proteomic analysis. MS sample preparation  Samples were reduced with DTT (10 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with iodoacetamide (55 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, diluted to 300 μl with TEAB, and incubated with trypsin (6 uL, 0.2 mg/mL) overnight at 37 °C. The digests were then desalted using SEPAC lite columns (Waters), eluted with 69% v/v MeCN , 0.1% v/v FA in H2O (1 mL) and dried in vacuo. Dried peptides were stored at -20°C before resuspension in 2% V/V MeCN, 0.1% v/v FA in H2O (20 μL) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS data acquisition Mass spectrometry data was acquired at the Discovery Proteomics Facility (University of Oxford). Digested samples were analysed by nano-UPLC–MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC with EASY spray column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) with a 60 min gradient of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) DMSO to 0.1% (v/v) formic acid with 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 5% (v/v) DMSO at a flow rate of approximately 250 nl min−1 (600 bar per 40 °C column temperature). Mass spectrometry data were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive High Field (HF) instrument (survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for CID fragmentation.)

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.253 and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file (Uniprot). Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and Match Between Runs was selected. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Default settings for identification and quantification were used. Specifically, a minimum peptide length of 7, a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide were employed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate, with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected for both identification and quantification of proteins (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). At least 2 razor + unique peptides were required for valid quantification. Processed data was further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.0.9 and Microsoft Excel 2010. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the LFQ intensities transformed by Log2. The replicates were grouped, and proteins with two valid LFQ values retained for further analysis. The LFQ values were then averaged and ranked from highest (#1) to lowest LFQ intensity. CRAPome (http://www.crapome.org/) was used to filter out background proteins, with a detected ratio < 0.2 selected as a cut-off. Remaining proteins were further annotated to indicate i) NOD signalling pathway proteins and ii) kinases. Thirdly, STRING (http://string-db.org) was used to generate an interaction network of these proteins, and evidenced protein-protein interaction of high confidence (score >0.9) have been indicated.

### Publication Abstract
RIPK2 mediates inflammatory signaling by the bacteria-sensing receptors NOD1 and NOD2. Kinase inhibitors targeting RIPK2 are a proposed strategy to ameliorate NOD-mediated pathologies. Here, we reveal that RIPK2 kinase activity is dispensable for NOD2 inflammatory signaling and show that RIPK2 inhibitors function instead by antagonizing XIAP-binding and XIAP-mediated ubiquitination of RIPK2. We map the XIAP binding site on RIPK2 to the loop between &#x3b2;2 and &#x3b2;3 of the N-lobe of the kinase, which is in close proximity to the ATP-binding pocket. Through characterization of a new series of ATP pocket-binding RIPK2 inhibitors, we identify the molecular features that determine their inhibition of both the RIPK2-XIAP interaction, and of cellular and <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i>NOD2 signaling. Our study exemplifies how targeting of the ATP-binding pocket in RIPK2 can be exploited to interfere with the RIPK2-XIAP interaction for modulation of NOD signaling.

### Keywords
Ripk2, Ponatinib, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Structural Genomics Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK  Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Jenny Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Kilian Huber
Structural Genomics Consortium, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK  Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK


