### Accession
PXD030123

### Title
Manganese availability alters the expression of its corresponding transporters and redox-dependent proteins but not superoxide dismutase in Lactococcus cremoris.

### Description
Growth of L. cremoris NCDO712 was not altered when manganese is omitted from its defined medium. This study was conducted in order to compare protein requirements of Lactococcus cremoris NCDO712 to grow in the presence or absence of manganese in defined medium (1% lactose). The majority of protein adaptation involves upregulation of Mn transporters and to a lesser extent various NADH-dependent proteins. Such adaptation is highly relevant for starter culture in dairy fermentation where manganese is limited and NADH homeostasis determines the formation of volatiles during long-term incubation e.g. cheese ripening.

### Sample Protocol
L. cremoris NCDO712 was grown in chemically defined medium for prolonged cultivation (CDMPC) at 30°C with or without Mn omission for roughly 20 generations. Each condition was performed in 4 biological replicates. At midexponential growth stage, cells were centrifuged, washed and resuspended in 100mM TRIS pH8 to an approximate concentration of 7.5E8 cells/ml, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. Following defrosting on ice, 100µl of cell suspension was lysed by sonication for 5 minutes with periodical cooling on ice. The lysate (40µl) was transferred into StageTips with a double Empore C18 membrane. The proteins were washed (100µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate), reduced (20µl 20mM dithiothreitol, 45 minutes, 60°C) and alkylated (20µl 20mM acrylamide, 30 minutes, room temperature) on the stage tip. Washing of the alkylated sample (100µl ABC and 100µl 95% ABC/5% acetonitrile) was done and followed by protein digestion (20µl 5ng/µl trypsin (Roche), overnight, room temperature). Peptides were eluted and the membrane was washed (70µl 1ml/L formic acid in water and 5µl 50% acetonitrile/50% 1ml/L formic acid in water). The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redox homeostasis, Dairy fermentation, Starter culture, Lactococcus cremoris, Cofactor, Manganese

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


