### Accession
PXD004145

### Title
Adaptation to pH and pH signaling in the phytopathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea

### Description
The grey mould fungus Botrytis cinerea is capable of developing on a wide variety of host plants and different organs that differ greatly in their pH values. The strategy developed by this necrotrophic fungus is partly based on the acidification of the plant tissues via the secretion of several organic acids including oxalic acid. That’s why B.cinerea is considered as an “acidic” fungus. However, we have previously shown that it is also capable of alkalinizing its ambient environment during sunflower cotyledons or bean leaves infection and that the alkalinization is achieved by amino acids catabolism and ammonia secretion ( Billon-grand et al, 2012).  This capacity to modulate the surrounding pH reveals also an ability to regulate the expression and the secretion of an arsenal of enzymes in order to produce virulence factors in accordance with the ambient pH and enzymes requirement for optimal activity.  Expression of pH-regulated genes is controlled by the highly conserved signaling pathway Pal/Pac that leads to activation of the zinc finger transcription factor PACC under neutral or alkaline conditions. Investigations of the role of this pH regulator in the infectious process of B.cinerea are presented.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining . Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature and shrunken in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunken in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µL of trypsin (T6567, Sigma-Aldrich) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5 % ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 25 μL of 0.1% formic acid before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.5 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-2000) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 120 ms and a resolution of R = 35000. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 25% and an isolation width of 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mascot and Sequest algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification against the Ensembl Botrytis cinerea database (12 060 entries, release 31 ), Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm (1) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS QI (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to one hundred landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with p<0.01, see above) were imported into Progenesis. For quantification, all unique peptides of an identified protein were included and the total cumulative abundance was calculated by summing the abundances of all peptides allocated to the respective protein. ANOVA test at protein level was performed and filtering for features p <0.05. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The phytopathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea is able to infect a wide variety of plants and plant tissues with differing chemical compositions. During its interaction with the host, this pathogen modulates its ambient pH by secreting acids or ammonia. In this work, we examined the Pal/Pac pathway, the fungal ambient pH-responsive signalling circuit, and investigated the role of the PacC transcription factor. Characterization of the BcpacC deletion mutant revealed an alteration of both fungal growth and virulence depending on the pH of the culture medium or of the host tissue. The pathogenicity of the mutant was altered on plants exhibiting a neutral pH and not on plants with acidic tissues. The capacity of the mutant to acidify its environment and, more particularly, to produce oxalic acid was affected, as was production of reactive oxygen species. Finally, proteomic profiling of the mutant secretome revealed significant changes in plant cell wall polysaccharides proteins and lipid degradation and oxidoreduction, highlighting the importance of BcPacC in the necrotrophic lifestyle of B. cinerea.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Quantitative proteomics, Botrytis cinerea, Ph-regulated genes

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux
Laboratoire Mixte UMR 5240 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique /INSA/UCBL/Bayer CropScience, Plateforme de protéomique, Lyon, France.

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Girard
Laboratoire Mixte UMR 5240 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique /INSA/UCBL/Bayer CropScience, Plateforme de protéomique, Lyon, France.


