### Accession
PXD033542

### Title
Bcl11b depleted and IL-15 stimulated αβ CD8+ T cells acquire a unique innate-like phenotype and are highly functional

### Description
Loss of BCL11B in human peripheral blood CD8+ T cells led to acquisition of an innate-like phenotype and the ability to efficiently lyse tumor cells either spontaneously via the NKp30/B7H6 axis or mediated by a GD2 antibody. The phenotype of BCL11B knock-out cells was investigated by characterization of surface marker profile, transcriptome, and proteome compared to control cells.

### Sample Protocol
Human peripheral blood CD8+ T cells were isolated from buffy coats obtained from healthy individuals. Purified CD8+ T cells were either not treated (nt control), electroporated with a ribonucleoprotein not specific against any site in human genome (mock control), or specific for three loci at the beginning of exon 4 of BCL11B in combination (KO). After 48 hours of rest, cells were stimulated via CD3/CD28, supplemented with IL-7 and IL-15, and cultivated for further 3 weeks. Afterwards, 1 x 106 cells per sample were washed, pelleted, and stored at -80 °C until processing. After benzonase treatment, reduction and alkylation, and digestion with trypsin in an enzyme-to-sample mass ratio of 1:25 overnight at 37°C, peptides were desalted on SP3 beads as previously described (Blankenburg et al. 2019). Lyophilized peptide samples were reconstituted in mass spectrometry Buffer A (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid), and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode using an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system coupled to a QExactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated on a 25 cm Accucore column (75 µm inner diameter, 2.6 µm, 150 A, C18) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a binary buffer system of aqueous Buffer A (0.1% acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water) and organic Buffer B (0.1% acetic acid in 100% acetonitrile) by applying a non-linear gradient of buffer B from 2% up to 90 % within 145 min.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantitation were performed via the DirectDIA approach in the Spectronaut software (Biognosys, Germany) using a predicted synthetic library fasta-file with 20365 entries of human protein downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/) in April 2020.  Analysis settings: tryptic peptides; static modification: carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modifications: oxidation at Met and protein N-terminal acetylation; missed cleavages: ≤ 2; iRT peptide-based correlation of retention time ratios.  Quantitation: with Interference Correction; protein grouping by Protein Group ID; peptide grouping by Stripped Sequence; precursor Q-value < 0.001, without any imputation

### Publication Abstract
BCL11B, an essential transcription factor for thymopoiesis, regulates also vital processes in post-thymic lymphocytes. Increased expression of BCL11B was recently correlated with the maturation of NK cells, whereas reduced BCL11B levels were observed in native and induced T cell subsets displaying NK cell features. We show that BCL11B-depleted CD8+&#xa0;T cells stimulated with IL-15 acquired remarkable innate characteristics. These induced innate CD8+ (iiT8) cells expressed multiple innate receptors like NKp30, CD161, and CD16 as well as factors regulating migration and tissue homing while maintaining their T cell phenotype. The iiT8 cells effectively killed leukemic cells spontaneously and neuroblastoma spheroids in the presence of a tumor-specific monoclonal antibody mediated by CD16 receptor activation. These iiT8 cells integrate the innate natural killer cell activity with adaptive T cell longevity, promising an interesting therapeutic potential. Our study demonstrates that innate T cells, albeit of limited clinical applicability given their low frequency, can be efficiently generated from peripheral blood and applied for adoptive transfer, CAR therapy, or combined with therapeutic antibodies.

### Keywords
Cd8+ t cells, Bcl11b knock-out, Bcl11b, Il-15, Innateness

### Affiliations
Dept. of Functional Genomics
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung Abteilung für Funktionelle Genomforschung Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17487 Greifswald, Germany


