### Accession
PXD031549

### Title
Revealing Pentose Catabolism in Pseudomonas putida

### Description
Pseudomonas alloputida KT2440 (previously misclassified as P. putida KT2440 based on 16S rRNA gene homology) has emerged as an ideal host strain for plan t biomass valorization. However, P. alloputida KT2440 is unable to natively utilize abundant pentose sugars (e.g., xylose and arabinose) in hydrolysate streams, which may account for up to 25% of lignocellulosic biomass. In the last decades, microbes have been engineered to utilize the pentose sugars. However, most of the engineered strains were either slow-growing or displayed phenotypes that could not be replicated. In this work, we successfully isolated five Pseudomonas species with the native capability to utilize glucose, xylose and p-coumarate as a sole carbon source.  These isolates were in two clusters; one set of isolates (M2 and M5) and the second set of isolates (BP6 and BP7) showed 85.6% and 96.2% ANI, respectively, to P. alloputida KT24440. BP8 showed 84.6% ANI to P. putida KT2440 and does not belong to any neighboring type strains indicating a new species.  Notably, the isolates showed robust growth solely on xylose and higher growth rates (m, 0.36-0.49 h-1) when compared to only known xylose-utilizing Pseudomonas taiwanenesis VLB120 (m, 0.28 h-1) as a control. Unexpectedly, among five isolates, M2 and M5 grew solely on arabinose as well. Comprehensive analysis of genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics revealed the isolates utilize xylose and arabinose via Weimberg pathway (xylD-xylX-xylA) and oxidative pathway (araD-araX-araA), respectively. Furthermore, a preliminary result demonstrated the production of flaviolin solely on xylose and arabinose in the isolate, showing noteworthy potential to be an alternative host for lignocellulosic feedstocks into valuable products. This is the first report on isolating Pseudomonas strains natively capable of utilizing all of the major carbon sources in lignocellulosic biomass, and leading to higher consumption of available substrates and therefore maximizing the product yield.

### Sample Protocol
P. putida cell cultures were harvested and proteins were extracted by standard chloroform/methanol precipitation method. Protein concentration was determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad), and 50 ug protein of each sample were subjected to standard reduction, alkylation and  trypsin digestion at 1: 50 (trypsin: protein) ratio. Resulting peptides were stored at -20C until shotgun proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed by following standard shotgun proteomic protocol (dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.buthnwj6)

### Publication Abstract
The Pseudomonas putida group in the Gammaproteobacteria has been intensively studied for bioremediation and plant growth promotion. Members of this group have recently emerged as promising hosts to convert intermediates derived from plant biomass to biofuels and biochemicals. However, most strains of P. putida cannot metabolize pentose sugars derived from hemicellulose. Here, we describe three isolates that provide a broader view of the pentose sugar catabolism in the P. putida group. One of these isolates clusters with the well-characterized P. alloputida KT2440 (Strain BP6); the second isolate clustered with plant growth-promoting strain P. putida W619 (Strain M2), while the third isolate represents a new species in the group (Strain BP8). Each of these isolates possessed homologous genes for oxidative xylose catabolism (xylDXA) and a potential xylonate transporter. Strain M2 grew on arabinose and had genes for oxidative arabinose catabolism (araDXA). A CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) system was developed for strain M2 and identified conditionally essential genes for xylose growth. A glucose dehydrogenase was found to be responsible for initial oxidation of xylose and arabinose in strain M2. These isolates have illuminated inherent diversity in pentose catabolism in the P. putida group and may provide alternative hosts for biomass conversion.

### Keywords
Xylose, Soil isolates, And arabinose, Pentose, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


