### Accession
PXD022422

### Title
Low-dose Copper exposure exacerbates depression-like behavior in ApoE4 transgenic mice

### Description
Depression is one of the most common neuropsychiatric disorders. Although the pathogenesis of depression is still unknown, environmental risk factors and genetics are implicated. Copper (Cu), a cofactor of multiple enzymes, is involved in regulating depression-related processes. Depressed patients carrying the apolipoprotein ε4 allele display more severe depressive symptoms, indicating that ApoE4 is closely associated with an increased risk of depression. The study explored the effect of low-dose Cu  (0.13 ppm) exposure and ApoE4 on depression-like behavior of mice and further investigate the possible mechanisms. The 4-month-old ApoE4 mice and wild-type (WT) mice were treated with 0.13 ppm CuCl2 for 4 months. After the treatment, ApoE4 mice displayed obvious depression-like behavior compared with the WT mice, and Cu exposure further exacerbated the depression-like behavior of ApoE4 mice. There was no significant difference in anxiety behavior (Open field test) and memory behavior (Morris water maze). Proteomic analysis revealed that the differentially expressed proteins between Cu-exposed and non-exposed ApoE4 mice were mainly involved in Ras signaling pathway, protein export, axon guidance, serotonergic synapse, GABAergic synapse, dopaminergic synapse. Among these differentially expressed proteins, immune response and synaptic function are highly correlated. Representative protein expression changes are quantified by Western blot, showing consistent results as determined by proteomic analysis. Hippocampal astrocytes and microglia were increased in Cu-exposed ApoE4 mice, suggesting that neuroglial cells played an important role in the pathogenesis of depression. Taken together, our study demonstrated that Cu exposure exacerbates depression-like behavior of ApoE4 mice and the mechanisms may involve the dysregulation of synaptic function and immune response, and overactivation of neuroinflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Protein extraction and digestion Hippocampus tissues of mice in each group were taken and added with 8M urea lysate. After ultrasonic lysis, they were left standing at 4℃ for 30 minutes, centrifuged at 12000rpm in a high-speed centrifuge for 30 minutes, and the supernatant was taken for use. BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher, NJ, USA) was used to measure the concentration of extracted protein. In each group, five individual samples (at a ratio of 1:1:1:1:1) were pooled together with a total of 100 μg of proteins for enzymatic hydrolysis and labeling. Then, hippocampal protein samples were added to 10 mM DTT solution for reduction reaction for 1 h, followed by 25 mM IAA solution for 1 h at room temperature (dark environment). Each pooled protein sample was digested with trypsin for 1 h and then diluted to 1.0 M urea concentration with 1×PBS (pH 8.0), the mixture was treated at 37 ℃ for 15 h. After digestion, adjusted the pH to 1~2, the peptide was desalted by reversed-phase column (Oasis HLB, Waters, USA) and freeze-dried in a vacuum centrifuge for Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling. TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were desalinated and dried, and each sample was added with 200mM TEAB for dissolution. Then the peptides were labeled according to the instructions of the TMT kit. After incubated at room temperature for 1 h, the TMT-labeled peptides were mixed, desalted, and dried and re-dissolved in 100 µL 0.1% FA. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to separate TMT-labeled peptides based on specific components. Briefly, labeled peptides were loaded onto the Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (Waters, USA) for separation of peptide samples with UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and separated into 15 fractions. Lastly, the fractions were dried and then dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% FA followed by liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS analysis. The row data were searched against the database of UniProt mouse FASTA with Proteome Discoverer software. The up and down regulation of protein expression was set to at ratio ≥ 1.2 and ≤ 0.83.

### Data Protocol
The WebGestalt (www.webgestalt.org) was used to analyze gene ontology (GO) annotation enrichment and KEGG pathway analysis(www.kegg.jp) of differentially expressed proteins. To explore the pattern map of Cu treatment effect, we used R software package Mfuzz for protein cluster analysis. Heatmap analysis can show the DEPs abundance in different groups. The potential interaction between proteins was retrieved through STRING version 10.5 (https://string-db.org/). Lastly, Cytoscape version 3.7.2 was used for visualization the images.

### Publication Abstract
Depression is one of the most common neuropsychiatric disorders. Although the pathogenesis of depression is still unknown, environmental risk factors and genetics are implicated. Copper (Cu), a cofactor of multiple enzymes, is involved in regulating depression-related processes. Depressed patients carrying the apolipoprotein <i>&#x3b5;</i>4 allele display more severe depressive symptoms, indicating that ApoE4 is closely associated with an increased risk of depression. The study explored the effect of low-dose Cu exposure and ApoE4 on depression-like behavior of mice and further investigates the possible mechanisms. The ApoE4 mice and wild-type (WT) mice were treated with 0.13&#x2009;ppm CuCl<sub>2</sub> for 4 months. After the treatment, ApoE4 mice displayed obvious depression-like behavior compared with the WT mice, and Cu exposure further exacerbated the depression-like behavior of ApoE4 mice. There was no significant difference in anxiety behavior and memory behavior. Proteomic analysis revealed that the differentially expressed proteins between Cu-exposed and nonexposed ApoE4 mice were mainly involved in the Ras signaling pathway, protein export, axon guidance, serotonergic synapse, GABAergic synapse, and dopaminergic synapse. Among these differentially expressed proteins, immune response and synaptic function are highly correlated. Representative protein expression changes are quantified by western blot, showing consistent results as determined by proteomic analysis. Hippocampal astrocytes and microglia were increased in Cu-exposed ApoE4 mice, suggesting that neuroglial cells played an important role in the pathogenesis of depression. Taken together, our study demonstrated that Cu exposure exacerbates depression-like behavior of ApoE4 mice and the mechanisms may involve the dysregulation of synaptic function and immune response and overactivation of neuroinflammation.

### Keywords
Depression; proteomics; copper (cu); apoe4

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 8, Longyuan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, 518055, China. Tel: +86 75525601914, Fax: +86 75525508584

### Submitter
kaiwu he

### Lab Head
Dr Xifei Yang
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 8, Longyuan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, 518055, China. Tel: +86 75525601914, Fax: +86 75525508584


