### Accession
PXD018773

### Title
Identification of SLFN5 as an intrinsic inhibitor of viral transcription antagonized by the herpes simplex virus ubiquitin ligase ICP0

### Description
Intrinsic antiviral host factors are proteins that can confer cellular defense by limiting virus replication. Viruses hijack ubiquitin machinery to modify the cellular proteome to subvert these host defenses. The herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) expresses ICP0, which functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase required to promote infection. Cellular substrates of ICP0 have been discovered as host barriers to infection but the mechanisms for inhibition of viral gene expression are not fully understood. To identify new restriction factors antagonized by ICP0, we compared the proteomes associated with viral DNA (vDNA) during HSV-1 infection with wild-type (WT) virus and a mutant lacking functional ICP0 (ΔICP0). We identified the cellular protein Schlafen 5 (SLFN5) as a new ICP0 target that binds vDNA during HSV-1 ΔICP0 infection. We demonstrated that ICP0 mediates ubiquitination of SLFN5 which leads to its proteasomal degradation. In the absence of ICP0, we demonstrate SLFN5 binds vDNA to represses HSV-1 transcription by limiting accessibility of RNA polymerase II to viral promoters. These results identify SLFN5 as a new restriction factor that inhibits viral transcription and document the first viral countermeasure reported to overcome SLFN antiviral activity.

### Sample Protocol
Viruses and Titration.  Parental virus HSV-1 strain was 17syn+ and the matched ICP0 deletion mutant ΔICP0 was dl1403 [PMID: 3025339].  Viruses were kindly provided by Roger Everett (Glasgow, Scotland) propagated in Vero cells and titrated in U2OS cells.  iPOND-MS.  We followed the iPOND protocol in virus infection previously described [PMID: 28972080; PMID: 22383038]. Per condition, eight 15 cm cell culture dishes containing HFF (1.0 x 107 cells) were mock-infected or infected with HSV-1 17syn+ or dl1403 at an MOI 3.  Cells were pulsed with 10 μM EdU (Invitrogen) for 15 min at 8 hpi.  Cells were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min at room temperature, crosslinking was quenched with 125 mM glycine and cells were scraped and harvested.  All conditions were performed in triplicate.  Samples were processed for iPOND as described previously [PMID: 28972080; PMID: 22383038], with the following adaptations: after click chemistry reaction, cell pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml of lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and 1 mM PMSF and sonicated with a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 20 min in 30 sec on/off cycles at a high intensity.  Capture of DNA-protein complexes was carried out by incubating lysates with 120 μl streptavidin Dynabeads M-280 (Invitrogen) for 16 h at 4 °C in the dark. Beads were washed once in lysis buffer, once in 1 M NaCl, four times in wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 110 mM KOAc, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween 20, 0.1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl) and once in PBS.  Then, 60 μl of 1X LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) containing 10% DTT was used to elute proteins from the beads. Eluted proteins were boiled at 95 °C for 45 min to reverse crosslinks.  iPOND isolates were separated on ~0.8 cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MOPS buffer electrophoresis system.  The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and the band excised.  Gel segments were destained with 50% methanol/1.25% acetic acid, reduced with 5 mM DTT, and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma).  Gel pieces were then washed with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (Thermo Scientific).  Trypsin (Promega) (5 ng/μl in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the gel pieces and proteolysis was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C.  Peptides were extracted with 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (J.T.Baker), followed by 50% acetonitrile.  Extracts were combined and the volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation.  Tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent Technologies).  Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75µm id x 15 cm Reprosil-pur 3µM, 120 A (Dr. Maisch, HPLC GmbH) in a Nanoflex chip system (Eksigent). Mobile phase A consisted of 1% methanol (Fisher)/0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mobile phase B of 1% methanol/0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nl/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90-min gradient from 10 to 25% B in 65 min, 25–40% B in 25 min. The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1800 (r = 240,000 for LTQ-Orbitrap Elite) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, with a minimum signal of 1500, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 s, exclusion size of 500 and duration of 60 s, isolation width of 2.0, normalized collision energy of 33, and waveform injection and dynamic exclusion enabled. FTMS full scan AGC target value was 1x106, whereas MSn AGC was 1x104, respectively. FTMS full scan maximum fill time was 500 ms, whereas ion trap MSn fill time was50 ms; microscans were set at one. FT preview mode, charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor selection were all enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Processing and Database Searching.  MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Human UniProt FASTA database (9606; 136,251 entries) (version July 2014). The database included 247 common contaminants, discarded during data analysis.  The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme.  Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.  The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identifications. Protein grouping was enabled.  Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm.  Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group.  Label-free quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm.  The human proteome was searched using the match-between-runs functionality with the retention time alignment window set to 20 min and the match time window to 1 min.  Protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, only identified by site and common contaminants.   Data normalization and analysis.  MaxQuant output was filtered to remove identified common contaminants, proteins identified in the reverse protein database, and proteins that were quantified with 0 MS/MS counts.  Missing data were imputed using the BPCA method in the pcaMethods [PMID: 17344241] R package.  SLNF5 did not contain missing quantification data.  iBAQ intensities were transformed to log2 values, with unidentified values assigned as “NA”.  Data were normalized by subtracting the sample medians from log2 transformed iBAQ values within the respective samples.  The log2 fold changes of protein iBAQ quantification, used to compare protein abundance across samples, were calculated by comparing the averaged the log2 transformed and normalized iBAQ values for each replicate within the samples.  Hypothesis testing was performed using unpaired, two-tailed students t-tests comparing the log2 transformed, normalized iBAQ values within the compared samples.  Multiple testing correction was not performed [PMID: 27461997].  Z-scores based on log2, normalized average iBAQ values were used to measure relative abundance of a protein within a sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Slfn5, Ubiquitin, Dicp0, Hsv-1, Ipond, Icp0, Herpes simplex virus

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania Room 9-124 (office) 3400 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104 215-573-9423 (office)
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kulej

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania Room 9-124 (office) 3400 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104 215-573-9423 (office)


