### Accession
PXD024953

### Title
Proteomic analysis of exoproteomes of human cells upon bystander effects induced by irradiated chondrosarcoma cells

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of proteins from the medium of human cells in culture after incubation with the medium from irradiated chondrosarcoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the incubation medium were collected by acid precipitation and centrifugation. Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for a short electrophoretic migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by  Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were then compared.

### Publication Abstract
Besides the direct effects of radiations, indirect effects are observed within the surrounding non-irradiated area; irradiated cells relay stress signals in this close proximity, inducing the so-called radiation-induced bystander effect. These signals received by neighboring unirradiated cells induce specific responses similar with those of direct irradiated cells. To understand the cellular response of bystander cells, we performed a 2D gel-based proteomic study of the chondrocytes receiving the conditioned medium of low-dose irradiated chondrosarcoma cells. The conditioned medium was directly analyzed by mass spectrometry in order to identify candidate bystander factors involved in the signal transmission. The proteomic analysis of the bystander chondrocytes highlighted 20 proteins spots that were significantly modified at low dose, implicating several cellular mechanisms, such as oxidative stress responses, cellular motility, and exosomes pathways. In addition, the secretomic analysis revealed that the abundance of 40 proteins in the conditioned medium of 0.1 Gy irradiated chondrosarcoma cells was significantly modified, as compared with the conditioned medium of non-irradiated cells. A large cluster of proteins involved in stress granules and several proteins involved in the cellular response to DNA damage stimuli were increased in the 0.1 Gy condition. Several of these candidates and cellular mechanisms were confirmed by functional analysis, such as 8-oxodG quantification, western blot, and wound-healing migration tests. Taken together, these results shed new lights on the complexity of the radiation-induced bystander effects and the large variety of the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved, including the identification of a new potential actor, namely the stress granules.

### Keywords
Human cell line, Chondrocyte, Exoproteome, Proteomics, Secretome, By-stander effects, Cancer

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


