### Accession
PXD037346

### Title
A proteomic analysis shows stimulation of light reactions and inhibition of Calvin cycle in skin chloroplasts of ripe red grape berries

### Description
The role of photosynthesis in fruits still challenges scientists. This is especially true in the case of mature grape berries of red varieties lined by an anthocyanin-enriched exocarp (skin) almost impermeable to gases. Although chlorophylls are degraded and replaced by carotenoids in several fruits, available evidence suggests that they may persist in red grapes at maturity. In the present study, chloroplasts were isolated from the skin of red grape berries (cv. Vinhão) to measure chlorophyll levels and the organelle proteome. The results showed that chloroplasts (and chlorophylls) are maintained in ripe berries masked by anthocyanin accumulation and that the proteome of chloroplasts from green and mature berries is distinct. Several proteins of the light reactions significantly accumulated in chloroplasts at the mature stage, including those of light-harvesting complexes of photosystems I (PSI) and II (PSII), redox chain, and ATP synthase, while chloroplasts at the green stage accumulated more proteins involved in the Calvin cycle and the biosynthesis of amino acids, including precursors of secondary metabolism. Taken together, results suggest that although chloroplasts are more involved in biosynthetic reactions in green berries, at the mature stage, they may provide ATP for energy-demanding processes such as anthocyanin biosynthesis or even O2 to feed the respiratory demand of inner tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Exocarp tissues from 120 berries per replicate was homogenized in 200 mL of ice-cold extraction buffer (150 mM Tris-HC1, pH 8.2, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EDTA, 500 mM sorbitol, 2 mM DTT, 0.5% of bovine serum albumin, and 2 mM PMSF) in a Waring Blender (type 7012G), 2x 7s, maximum speed) (Figure 1). The homogenate was filtered through two layers of a 100-µm nylon mesh, transferred to 50-mL Falcon tubes and centrifuged at 1,620×g for 10 min at 4°C (Eppendorf 5804R). The resulting crude organelle fraction was resuspended in 20 mL of purification buffer (50 mM Tris-HC1, pH 8.0, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 330 mM sorbitol, 2 mM DTT, 0.1% BSA and 2 mM PMSF) and centrifuged at 150×g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was recovered and centrifuged at 3000×g for 10 min at 4°C, the pellet resuspended in 5 mL of purification buffer and layered to the top of 12 mL of discontinuous Percoll gradients (4 mL 50, 4 mL 25, 4 mL 10% Percoll, dissolved in purification buffer without BSA). The gradients were centrifuged at 4,500×g at 4°C for 10 min (A-4-44 rotor, Eppendorf 5804R centrifuge with medium acceleration and low deacceleration). The two middle bands (50-25% and 25-10% interfaces), containing intact plastids were collected and washed twice in purification buffer without BSA and centrifuged at 4,500×g at 4°C for 5 min to remove Percoll. The plastid pellet was finally resuspended in 1 mL of purification buffer lacking BSA, centrifuged at 4,500×g at 4°C for 10 min and the sediment was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomic analysis.   Proteins were extracted from purified plastid preparations according to the procedure described by Tamburino et al. (2017).  Samples (10 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (100 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (5 µmol, 25 ºC, 20 min). The resulting protein extract was washed with 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris-HCl and then with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541) and then for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113) following (Wiśniewski and Mann, 2009) FASP procedure. After digestion, the peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analysed using an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 min and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyser.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science; (Perkins et al., 1999). The data were sought against a Vitis vinifera database (Canaguier et al., 2017) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (Beer et al., 2017). For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.4) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Grape berry skin, Chloroplasts, Proteomics, Photosynthesis, Vitis vinifera

### Affiliations
Centre of Molecular and Environmental Biology (CBMA), Department of Biology, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal

### Submitter
António Teixeira

### Lab Head
Dr António teixeira
Centre of Molecular and Environmental Biology (CBMA), Department of Biology, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal


