### Accession
PXD007878

### Title
Large-Scale Characterization of Phosphorylation-Induced Conformational and Stability Changes in Breast Cancer

### Description
Large-scale studies of protein phosphorylation have generally focused on determining the sites and stoichiometry of phosphorylated proteins derived from different biological specimens such as cell lines and tissue samples. While such information is important for understanding the role of phosphorylation in biological systems, it fails to expose the relationship between protein phosphorylation and protein function. Because of the close link between protein function and protein folding stability, knowledge about phosphorylation-induced protein folding stability changes can lead to a better understanding of the functional effects of protein phosphorylation. As part of this work, the Stability of Proteins from Rate of OXidation (SPROX) and Limited Proteolysis (LiP) techniques were utilized to identify phosphorylation-induced conformational and stability changes in proteins derived from a human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. This was accomplished by comparing the conformation properties of proteins in two MCF-7 cell lysates including one that was and one that was not dephosphorylated with alkaline phosphatase. The SPROX technique, which probes the global unfolding/refolding properties of proteins, identified 168 proteins with phosphorylation-induced stability changes, and the LiPs technique, which probes the more local unfolding/refolding properties of proteins, identified 251 proteins with phosphorylation-induced stability changes. A total of 49 proteins identified here with phosphorylation-induced conformational changes, were previously identified in phosphoproteomic studies to be differentially phosphorlyated in different human breast cancer subtypes. A total of 98 proteins identified here overlapped with protein hits previously found to be differentially stabilized in four human breast cancer phenotypes, suggesting that the phosphorylated changes observed here may be disease related. The experimental approach and results reported here create a novel perspective in understanding large-scale molecular influence of phosphorylation and a shortcut in finding possible functionally significant PTMs in cellular proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The noninvasive human breast cancer cell line, MCF-7 from ATCC, was cultured in a humidified 37 oC incubator with 5% CO2. Light SILAC-labeled MCF-7 cells were cultured following the ATCC guidelines. Heavy SILAC-labeled cells were cultured using heavy labeled lysine and arginine. The heavy labeled lysine was enriched with six 13C and two 15N. The heavy labeled arginine was enriched with six 13C. MCF-7 cells were lysed by mechanical disruption using a disruptor genie (Scientific Industries) and 1 mM diameter zirconia/silica beads (Biospec) in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 9.0) containing 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2 and protease inhibitor cocktail (1 mM AEBSF, 500 μM Bestatin, 15 μM E-64, 20 μM Leupeptin, and 10 μM Pepstatin A (Thermo Pierce). The cell lysates were centrifuged at 14000 X g for 15 min at 4 oC, and the supernatant was used to generate (+) and (-) phosphatase samples. The light and heavy labeled lysates were normalized to same total protein concentration ( 4-5 mg/ml) using lysis buffer. Alkaline phosphatase from bovine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the heavy labelled lysate at a ratio of 0.5 unit/μg total protein and incubated at 37 oC for 16 h to generate the (+) phosphatase sample. The light labeled cell lysate was subjected to the same treatment except no alkaline phosphatase added. For SILAC-LiP, the (+) and (-) phosphatase lysates were adjusted to 2 mg/ml with 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 150 mM KCl and 10 mM MgCl2. The (+) and (-) phosphatase lysates were each divided into two equal aliquots (total four equal aliquots) to generate a double digestion (DD) group and single digestion (SD) group. Proteinase K from Tritirachium album (Sigma) was added to the two samples in the DD group, which included a (+) and a (-) phosphatase sample. The final Proteinase K concentration was 1:100 (w/w) enzyme to substrate ratio. The mixtures were incubated for 5 min at room temperature and quenched with guanidine hydrochloride at a final concentration of 7.4 M. The digestions were heated at 100 C for 3 min to ensure complete denaturation. The SD group was treated in same procedure except no proteinase K added. Both the DD and the SD group samples mixtures were then digested with trypsin. For SILAC-SPROX, 20 μL of the (+) and (-) phosphatase lysates were diluted into 75 μL buffer solutions containing of 20 mM phosphate (pH 7.4) and urea concentrations ranging from 0 to 10 M. The final concentration of urea in each set of denaturant-containing buffers ranged from 0 to 8 M. The (+) and (-) samples were equilibrated in each urea buffer for 2 h. The methionine oxidation reaction was initiated by adding 5 μL hydrogen peroxide (Sigma-Aldrich) into each buffer to achieve final concentration of 0.49 M. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 6 min,  before it was quenched with 653 μL of a 375 mM L-methionine (Sigma-Aldrich) solution. The (+) and (-) phosphatase samples at each concentration of urea were combined. TCA (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at final concentration of 16% to precipitate the protein. After incubation on ice for 16-18 h, the samples were centrifuged at 8000 X g and 4 oC for 30 min. Supernatants were discarded and the protein pellets were rinsed with 300 μL ice-cold ethanol three times. The pellets were dried under vacuum and re-dissolved in 60 μL of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 3 μL of a 2% stock solution of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The protein solutions were then submitted to a standard bottom-up proteomics analyses.  The protein samples from both SILAC-LiP and SILAC-SPROX experiments were treated with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (ThermoFisher) (5 mM) for 1 h at 60 oC. The proteins were then reacted with methylmethane thiosulfonate (MMTS) (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 10 mM at room temperature for 15 min to block cysteine side chains. Trypsin was added into each pellet at E/S ratio of 1:20 to 1:50. The digestions were allowed to proceed at 37 oC for 16- 18 h before quenching with adding 10 % TFA to pH 2-3.The digested samples were then desalted using C18 resin (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.The desalted samples were analyzed on liquid-chromatography-tandem MS (LC−MS/MS) using an EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive (quadrupole-orbitrap) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched by MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 against the 20265 human proteins in the 2014-04 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase and exported into excel spreadsheet. For SILAC-LiP, searches were performed with trypsin as the enzyme with semi-specificity. For SILAC-SPROX, searches were performed with trypsin as the enzyme with specific cleavage. All searches set SILAC labeling of lysine and arginine, MMTS as fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, glutamine and asparagine deamination, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were set as variable modification. The mass tolerances for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm and 10 ppm for first and main search respectively. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Match between runs and re-quantification were used during each search. The rest parameters were set as default. Peptides with false discovery rates <1% and positive heavy to light (H/L) ratios were used for subsequent data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Because of the close link between protein function and protein folding stability, knowledge about phosphorylation-induced protein folding stability changes can lead to a better understanding of the functional effects of protein phosphorylation. Here, the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX) and limited proteolysis (LiP) techniques are used to compare the conformational properties of proteins in two MCF-7 cell lysates including one that was and one that was not dephosphorylated with alkaline phosphatase. A total of 168 and 251 protein hits were identified with dephosphorylation-induced stability changes using the SPROX and LiP techniques, respectively. Many protein hits are previously known to be differentially phosphorylated or differentially stabilized in different human breast cancer subtypes, suggesting that the phosphorylation-induced stability changes detected in this work are disease related. The SPROX hits were enriched in proteins with aminoacyl-tRNA ligase activity. These enriched protein hits included many aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs), which are known from previous studies to have their catalytic activity modulated by phosphorylation. The SPROX results revealed that the magnitudes of the destabilizing effects of dephoshporylation on the different aaRSs were directly correlated with their previously reported aminoacylation activity change upon dephosphorylation. This substantiates the close link between protein folding and function.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Protein conformation, Protein stability, Human breast cancer

### Affiliations
Professor, Chemistry, Duke University
Duke University

### Submitter
He Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Professor, Chemistry, Duke University


