### Accession
PXD014142

### Title
EOMES interacts with RUNX3 and BRG1 to promote innate memory cell formation through epigenetic reprogramming

### Description
Memory CD8+ T cells have the ability to provide lifelong immunity against pathogens. Although memory features generally arise after challenge with a foreign antigen, naïve CD8 single positive (SP) thymocytes may acquire phenotypic and functional characteristics of memory cells in response to cytokines such as interleukin-4. This process is associated with the induction of the T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (EOMES). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms  remain ill-defined. Using epigenomic profiling, we show that these innate memory CD8SP cells acquire only a portion of the active enhancer repertoire of conventional memory cells. This reprograming is secondary to EOMES recruitment, mostly to RUNX3-bound enhancers. Furthermore, EOMES is found within chromatin-associated complexes containing BRG1 and promotes the recruitment of this chromatin remodelling factor. Also, the in vivo acquisition of EOMES-dependent program is BRG1-dependent. In conclusion, our results support a strong epigenetic basis for the EOMES-driven establishment of CD8+ T cell innate memory program.

### Sample Protocol
For Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins (RIME), CD8+ T cells were isolated from spleens of WT Balb/c mice and stimulated for 3 days by plate-bound anti-CD3 (BD, clone 145-2C11, 5 mg ml-1, catalog number 557306) and soluble anti-CD28 (BD, clone 37.51, 1 mg ml-1, catalog number 553294) in presence of recombinant human (r)IL-2 (10 ng ml-1, R&D). Cells were washed and further expanded with rIL-2 for 3 days. For RIME, 5x107 cells were fixed as described for ChIP-seq experiments and then quenched with 0.125M glycine for 5 min. After two washes with ice-cold PBS, cells were collected, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and submitted to Active Motif for RIME analysis using an anti-EOMES antibody or an IgG isotype control (same as ChIP experiments).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analysed using X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2013.02.01.1)). X! Tandem was set up to search the mouse_pr_20160108_Zf0QxA database (99854 entries) assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. X! Tandem was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, dioxidation of methionine and tryptophan and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein. Total spectral counts were determined using 95% probability.

### Publication Abstract
Memory CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells have the ability to provide lifelong immunity against pathogens. Although memory features generally arise after challenge with a foreign antigen, na&#xef;ve CD8 single positive (SP) thymocytes may acquire phenotypic and functional characteristics of memory cells in response to cytokines such as interleukin-4. This process is associated with the induction of the T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (EOMES). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain ill-defined. Using epigenomic profiling, we show that these innate memory CD8SP cells acquire only a portion of the active enhancer repertoire of conventional memory cells. This reprograming is secondary to EOMES recruitment, mostly to RUNX3-bound enhancers. Furthermore, EOMES is found within chromatin-associated complexes containing BRG1 and promotes the recruitment of this chromatin remodelling factor. Also, the in vivo acquisition of EOMES-dependent program is BRG1-dependent. In conclusion, our results support a strong epigenetic basis for the EOMES-driven establishment of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell innate memory program.

### Keywords
Eomes brg1 runx3

### Affiliations
Université Libre de Bruxelles
Université Libre de Bruxelles  Institute for Medical Immunology

### Submitter
Abdulkader AZOUZ

### Lab Head
Dr Stanislas GORIELY
Université Libre de Bruxelles  Institute for Medical Immunology


