### Accession
PXD038399

### Title
Alterations in SHH signal transduction introduce a state of hypometabolism in sporadic Parkinson's disease

### Description
Sporadic Parkinson’s Disease (sPD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors, however, the etiology remains largely elusive. Here, we used human iPSCs from late onset sPD patients, which were cultivated in vitro for up to 60 passages and screened for known PD associated alterations. Following long-term in vitro cultivation, exclusively neural cells derived from sPD patients developed a reduced mitochondrial respiration and glucose consumption reflecting a sPD specific state of hypometabolism. Integrated analysis of transcriptome, proteome and non-targeted metabolome data identified the citric acid cycle as being the bottleneck in sPD metabolism. A 13C metabolic flux analysis further unraveled the α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex as being central for a reduced flux through the citric acid cycle. This resulted in a substrate availability problem for the electron transport chain and thus a reduced mitochondrial ATP production. Notably, this alterations in basal cellular metabolism were introduced by altered SHH signal transduction due to dysfunctional primary cilia. Upon inhibiting the enhanced SHH signal transduction in sPD, glucose uptake and the activity of the α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex could be restored. Thus, inhibiting overactive SHH signaling maybe a potential neuroprotective therapy for sPD.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed in SDC Buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate (wt/vol) in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C. Lysates were then cooled on ice for 5 min and sonicated using the Bioruptor sonication device for 30 min. Reduction and alkylation was performed by adding Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 2-Chloracetamide (CAA) at the final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively, and incubating them for 5 min at 45 °C. Samples were digested overnight by the addition of 1:50 LysC (1:50 wt/wt: Wako) and Trypsin (1:50 wt/wt: Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 37 °C with agitation (1500 rpm) on an Eppendorf Thermomixer C. The next day, peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS (Empore) StageTips.  Briefly, samples were tenfold diluted using 1% TFA in isopropanol and then loaded onto the StageTips, which were subsequently washed with 200 µL of 1% TFA in isopropanol and then with 0.2% TFA/2% acetonitrile (ACN) twice. Peptides were eluted using 75 µL of 80% ACN/1.25% NH4OH and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf) for 1 h at 30 °C. Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% TFA/2% ACN and peptide concentration was determined using the Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific). 200 ng of peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were analyzed using directDIA in Spectronaut version 15 (Biognosys). The search was done against UniProt human proteome of canonical and isoform sequences with 20,383 entries for final protein identification and quantification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Maximum and minimum peptide length was set to 52 and 7, respectively. The search included carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation of proteins as variable modifications. A protein and precursor FDR of 1% were used for filtering and subsequent reporting in samples (q value mode with no imputation).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Proteomics, Neuronal precursor cell, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Professor Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


