### Accession
PXD012831

### Title
Mus musculus primary CD4+ T cell di-glycine remnant and whole cell proteomics

### Description
It is known that ubiquitination is important for T cell receptor (TCR) signaling during T cell activation but the breadth of ubiquitination events triggered during TCR signaling is not completely understood. This dataset utilizes di-glycine remnant profiling combined with mass spectrometry to identify a global landscape of ubiquitination events downstream of the TCR and to quantify changes ubiquitin abundance in response to TCR stimulation. Additionally, whole cell proteomics data were generated to measure protein abundances during TCR stimulation. Mouse primary T cells were isolated, proliferated and either remained resting or stimulated with CD3/CD28 to activate downstream signaling through the TCR and co-stimulatory pathways. Di-glycine remnant profiling and whole cell proteomics was performed on rested cells and cells that had undergone CD3/CD28 TCR stimulation for 4 hours. These data were analyzed to identify the ubiquitination events during TCR activation and to quantify the change in peptide-based ubiquitin abundance and total protein abundance over the course of the 4 hour TCR stimulation. Integration of di-glycine and whole cell proteomics was used to generate protein-specific predictions of whether ubiquitination events downstream of TCR signaling lead to a decrease in associated protein abundance. The analysis of these data suggests that T cell activation leads to an increase in ubiquitination that is not associated with proteasomal or lysosomal degradation.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were isolated from the spleens and lymph nodes of wildtype mice and sorted by positive selection using the Miltenyi Biotech mouse CD4+ T cell isolation kit. Cells were expanded in human IL-2, at 50U/mL for 3 days. Cells were then harvested as “resting” cells or “restimulated” with αCD3/αCD28 for 4 hours. Two separate di-glycine remnant profiling experiments were performed. One experiment utilized a super-SILAC protocol to compare ubiquitination in resting cells (0hr) compared to cells stimulated for 1hr or 4hrs. A sample was prepared for CD4+ T cells cultured in heavy carbon SILAC media for each time point (0hr, 1hr, 4hr). After cell harvest and lysis, the three samples were mixed at a 1:1:1 ratio of resting, 1 hour stimulated, and 4 hour stimulated CD4+ T cells. This heavy carbon sample was mixed 1:1 with light carbon SILAC labeled resting (0hr), 1 hour, and 4 hour stimulated CD4+ T cells. These mixed lysates were subjected to di-glycine remnant proteomic analysis. A second di-glycine remnant experiment was preformed using SILAC labeling and quantification to compare resting (0hr) and 4hr stimulated CD4+ T cells. In this experiment, a two label SILAC approach was utilized (heavy label = resting cells, light = restimulated). The cells were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, lysed, and subjected to di-glycine remnant proteomic analysis. Three whole cell proteomics experiments were performed. Portions of the 0hr, 1hr, and 4hr samples from the super-SILAC di-glycine remnant experiment were isolated for label-free quantification. Additionally, two SILAC whole cell proteomics quantification experiments were performed (including a sample associated with the above-described SILAC di-glycine remnant profiling). Cell pellets were lysed in urea buffer. Peptides were prepared and immunoprecipitated as described in the literature. Peptides were off-line basic reverse phase fractionated and recombined noncontiguously into 3-4 fractions of ~1mg peptide/fraction for immunoprecipitation. PTMscan ubiquitin remnant antibody, noncovalently conjugated to beads (Cell Signaling Technologies) was crosslinked as described by the manufacturer. 31μg crosslinked antibody was used for each 1mg peptide fraction. The following modifications were made to the published protocol: step 6: alkylation was done with 20mM IAM; step 10: peptides were acidified by 1% formic acid (final concentration); step 37: wash beads 2x with IAP, followed by 2X IAP plus 0.05% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters), followed 3X PBS; step 41: the eluted K-ε-GG peptides were desalted via Oasis HLB uElution plate 30μM (Waters). All mass spec samples were prepared in 0.1% TFA/water. Whole proteome samples lysed in urea buffer, either individually or as SILAC mixed lysates were run ~2cm past the stacking gel in 10% Criterion pre-cast Tris-HCL gels (Biorad). Gels were fixed overnight and stained briefly with Coomassie blue. Each lane of the Coomassie-stained gel was divided into ten 2mm x 9mm ‘pixels,’ each cut into 1 mm3 cubes. They were destained with 50% Methanol/1.25% Acetic Acid, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Thermo), and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Gel pieces were then washed with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (Fisher). Trypsin (5ng/L in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, Promega) was added to the gel pieces and proteolysis was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 ºC. Peptides were extracted with 0.3% triflouroacetic acid (J.T.Baker), followed by 50% acetonitrile. Extracts were combined and the volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation. Tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent). Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75μM ID × 15 cm Reprosil-pur 3μM (Dr. Maisch, Germany) in a Nanoflex chip system (Eksigent). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (ThermoFisher Scientific) and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90-minute gradient from 10 to 25% B in 65 min, 25-40%B in 25 min, followed by column reequillibration. The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1800 (R = 240,000 for LTQ-Orbitrap Elite) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, with a minimum signal of 1500, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30s, exclusion size of 500 and duration of 60s, isolation width of 2.0, normalized collision energy of 33, and waveform injection and dynamic exclusion enabled. FTMS full scan AGC target value was 1e6, while MSn AGC was 1e4, respectively. FTMS full scan maximum fill time was 500ms, while ion trap MSn fill time was 50ms; microscans were set at one. FT preview mode; charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor selection were all enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed by MaxQuant. The peptides were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus proteome containing both canonical and isoform proteins (UP000000589). Label free quantification was measured by iBAQ intensity values. SILAC quantification was measured by the “normalized L/H ratio” calculated for the corresponding heavy and light peptides. The whole cell proteome experiments (label free and SILAC) were combined to produce an n=3 and the log2 fold changes were averaged to measure the protein expression change for 4 hour TCR stimulation compared to baseline. Raw data were transformed to log2-based values and normalized across samples by using median-normalization. For whole cell proteomics fold changes, either the comparison of iBAC values (for label free quantification) or normalized L/H ratios (for SILCA quantification) were used to calculate changes in total protein abundance over the course of the 4hr stimulation compared to rest. The two di-glycine enrichment datasets represent both a super SILAC (resting, 1 hour stimulated, and 4 hour stimulated), and a traditional SILAC (resting and 4 hour stimulated) quantification. In the case of the super SILAC experiment, fold change for stimulation relative to rest is calculated as a “ratio of ratios” as the normalized L/H ratio in each of the three samples represents the light-labelled time point (rest, 1 hour, 4 hour) against the heavy labelled calibrator sample (equal parts cell lysate from resting, 1 hour, and 4 hour stimulated cells). Fold change for stimulation compared to rest for two-label (heavy and light) SILAC datasets were calculated as normalized L/H ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Despite gathering evidence that ubiquitylation can direct non-degradative outcomes, most investigations of ubiquitylation in T cells have focused on degradation. Here, we integrated proteomic and transcriptomic datasets from primary mouse CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to establish a framework for predicting degradative or non-degradative outcomes of ubiquitylation. Di-glycine remnant profiling was used to reveal ubiquitylated proteins, which in combination with whole-cell proteomic and transcriptomic data allowed prediction of protein degradation. Analysis of ubiquitylated proteins identified by di-glycine remnant profiling indicated that activation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells led to an increase in non-degradative ubiquitylation. This correlated with an increase in non-proteasome-targeted K29, K33 and K63 polyubiquitin chains. This study revealed over 1,200 proteins that were ubiquitylated in primary mouse CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells and highlighted the relevance of non-proteasomally targeted ubiquitin chains in T cell signaling.

### Keywords
Mus musculus primary cd4+ t cell di-glycine remnant and whole cell proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core facility. Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Seeholzer
Proteomics Core facility. Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.


