### Accession
PXD041862

### Title
Integrative analysis reveals a conserved role for the amyloid precursor protein in proteostasis during aging

### Description
Aβ peptides derived from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) have been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. However, the normal function of APP and the importance of that role in neurodegenerative disease is less clear. We recovered the Drosophila ortholog of APP, Appl, in an unbiased forward genetic screen for neurodegeneration mutants. We performed comprehensive single cell transcriptional and proteomic studies of Appl mutant flies to investigate Appl function in the aging brain.

### Sample Protocol
Flies were collected and aged for 10 days. An equal number of males and females were used in the study. Six replicates for control and five replicates for Appl null were performed. For each replicate, 550 flies were used. Initially, heads were isolated and lysed in a lysis buffer containing 8M urea. Protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Samples were reduced, and alkylated, followed by precipitation, resuspension, and trypsin digestion. 35 µg protein per channel was used for whole proteomics, and 2 mg per channel was used for ubiquitinomics. Samples were TMT labeled, fractionated, and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry was performed. Ubiquitinomics data was normalized with total TMT signal and nonredundant ubiquitinated sites were taken for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Pathway enrichment was assessed by the hypergeometric test used in gProfiler. Proteomics with an FDR<0.0001 and ubiquitinomics with an FDR<0.1 were integrated with OmicsIntegrator2. Clusters were separated using Louvain clustering. The reference interactome was the Drosophila STRING protein-protein interactome limited to experimentally validated edges. Node weights were calculated as the negative log10 FDR-adjusted p-value between mutant and control for the proteomics and ubiquitinomics. Results from single-cell RNA sequencing data were used to adjust edge confidence and node weights in the network to prioritize genes differentially expressed across many cell types. Weights for the input proteomics and ubiquitinomics were adjusted by multiplying the negative log10 FDR-adjusted p-value by the proportion of number of differentially expressed single-cell RNA-seq clusters to the average number of single cell RNA-seq clusters. To adjust the edge costs, we calculated the average ratio of number of differentially enriched clusters to the average number of clusters for the two nodes involved in the edge. We then calculated the rank order of these computed weights and divided the rank order by the number of edges. We multiplied this new weight by the edge cost. Lower cost in the network shows higher confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitinomics, Appl, Proteomics, Amyloid precursor protein like, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Mel Feany, M.D., Ph.D. Department of Pathology Harvard Medical School Brigham and Women's Hospital Harvard New Research Building, Room 630 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur Boston, MA 02115

### Submitter
Vanitha Nithianandam

### Lab Head
Dr Mel B. Feany
Mel Feany, M.D., Ph.D. Department of Pathology Harvard Medical School Brigham and Women's Hospital Harvard New Research Building, Room 630 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur Boston, MA 02115


