### Accession
PXD038395

### Title
CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screen leads to the discovery of L-Moses, a KAT2B inhibitor that attenuates Tunicamycin-mediated neurodegeneration

### Description
Accumulation of aggregated and misfolded proteins, leading to endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of the unfolded protein response, is a hallmark of several neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Genetic screens are powerful tools that are proving invaluable in identifying novel modulators of disease associated processes. Here, we performed a loss-of-function genetic screen using a human druggable genome library, followed by an arrayed-screen validation, in human iPSC-derived cortical neurons. We identified 13 genes, whose knockout was neuroprotective against Tunicamycin, a glycoprotein synthesis inhibitor widely used to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress. We also demonstrated that pharmacological inhibition of KAT2B, a lysine acetyltransferase identified by our genetic screens, by L-Moses, attenuates Tunicamycin-mediated neuronal cell death and activation of CHOP, a key pro-apoptotic member of the unfolded protein response in both cortical and dopaminergic neurons. Follow-up transcriptional analysis suggested that L-Moses provided neuroprotection by partly reversing the transcriptional changes caused by Tunicamycin. Finally, L-Moses treatment attenuated the total protein levels affected by Tunicamycin, without affecting their acetylation profile. In summary, using an unbiased approach, we identified KAT2B and its inhibitor, L-Moses, as potential therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were lysed with dissolution buffer composed of 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, #T4708), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt, #78441). A universal nuclease (Pierce, #88700) was added to each sample followed by 15 min incubation at room temperature and brief probe sonication. The protein concentration was measured with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Quick StartTM); 300 ug total protein per sample were reduced and alkylated simultaneously by adding tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (ΤCEP, Sigma) at a final concentration of 5 mM, and freshly prepared iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 10 mM followed by 1 h incubation at room temperature in the dark. Samples were digested overnight at 37℃ with trypsin (Pierce #90058) and peptides were labelled with the TMTpro-16plex reagents (1mg per sample) according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). After labelling, sample was acidified with 20 µl formic acid followed by centrifugation at 10,000rpm for 5 min to remove SDC. The TMT mixture was fractionated on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 system at high pH (Buffer A: 20mM ammonium hydroxide, Buffer B: 90% ACN, 20mM ammonium hydroxide) using the X-Bridge C18 column (3.5μm 2.1x150mm, Waters). Fifteen fractions were collected and 10% was transferred on different tubes for the TMT whole-proteome analysis. An orthogonal pooling was performed for the remaining amount to end-up with six fractions for the acetylome enrichment. The acetylome enrichment was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (PTMScan HS Acetyl-Lysine Motif kit #46784). 60 µl of beads were used for the enrichment; after beads-antibody washes, beads-antibody were resuspended in 120 µl 1x HS IAP Bind Buffer and 20 µl was added to each fraction, followed by 2h incubation at room temperature. Acetylated peptides were eluted twice with 50 µl of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid. The acetylome and whole proteome analyses were performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion-Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. For the whole proteome analysis, the MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with collision energy 32%. Peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7 Th. The 10 most intense fragments were selected for Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) HCD-MS3 analysis with MS2 isolation window 2.0 and HCD collision energy 50%.  For the acetylome analysis, the MS2 scans were performed in the orbitrap with collision energy 36%. Peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with isolation window 1.2 Th at 50,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software and searched against a Uniprot database containing reviewed human protein entries. The parameters for the SequestHT node were as follow: Precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da (or 0.02 Da for acetylome analysis), dynamic modifications were oxidation of M (+15.995Da), deamidation of N, Q (+0.984Da) and static modifications were TMTpro at any N-Terminus or K (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethyl at C (+57.021 Da). For the acetylome analysis dynamic modifications were oxidation of M (+15.995Da), deamidation of N, Q (+0.984Da), TMTpro at K (+304.207Da) and acetyl at K or protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da) and static modifications were TMTpro at any N-Terminus and carbamidomethyl at C (+57.021Da). IMP-ptmRS node was used for acetyl-site localisation. The consensus workflow included TMT signal-to-noise (S/N) calculation and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value<0.01.  Data processing, normalization, and statistical analysis of the peptide intensities were carried out using the qPLEXanalyzer (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-04619-5) package from Bioconductor. In the whole-proteome analysis, peptide intensities were normalized using median scaling, and protein level quantification was obtained by the summation of the normalized peptide intensities. The acetylome analysis was performed at the modification (Acetyl) site level. Firstly, acetylated peptide intensities were normalized using median scaling. Then, the normalized dataset was transformed to represent unique modified sites of each protein by merging (summing intensity of) duplicated sites coming from the same protein. Thereafter, a statistical analysis of differentially regulated proteins and sites respectively was carried out using the Limma method. Multiple testing correction of p-values was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control the FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of aggregated and misfolded proteins, leading to endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of the unfolded protein response, is a hallmark of several neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Genetic screens are powerful tools that are proving invaluable in identifying novel modulators of disease associated processes. Here, we performed a loss-of-function genetic screen using a human druggable genome library, followed by an arrayed-screen validation, in human iPSC-derived cortical neurons. We identified and genetically validated 13 genes, whose knockout was neuroprotective against Tunicamycin, a glycoprotein synthesis inhibitor widely used to induce endoplasmic reticulum stress. We also demonstrated that pharmacological inhibition of KAT2B, a lysine acetyltransferase identified by our genetic screens, by L-Moses, attenuates Tunicamycin-mediated neuronal cell death and activation of CHOP, a key pro-apoptotic member of the unfolded protein response in both cortical and dopaminergic neurons. Follow-up transcriptional analysis suggested that L-Moses provided neuroprotection by partly reversing the transcriptional changes caused by Tunicamycin. Finally, L-Moses treatment attenuated total protein levels affected by Tunicamycin, without affecting their acetylation profile. In summary, using an unbiased approach, we identified KAT2B and its inhibitor, L-Moses, as potential therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Kat2b, Acetylome, Cortical neurons, Endoplasmic reticulum (er) stress, L-moses

### Affiliations
UK Dementia Research Institute, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0AH, UK
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanouil Metzakopian
UK Dementia Research Institute, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0AH, UK


