### Accession
PXD040240

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Lymphoblastoid Cell lines from Patients with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) consists in the progressive degeneration of motor neurons, caused by mechanisms that are poorly understood and for which there is no cure. Some of the cellular perturbations associated with ALS can be detected in peripheral cells, including lym-phocytes from blood. A related cell system that is very suitable for research consists in human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), which are immortalized lymphocytes. LCLs that can be easily expanded in culture and can be maintained for long periods of time as stable cultures. We inves-tigated, on a small set of LCLs, if proteomics analysis by liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry reveals proteins that are differentially present in ALS versus healthy controls. We found that individual proteins and cellular and molecular pathways in which these proteins participate, are detected as differentially present in the ALS samples. Some of these proteins and pathways are already known to be perturbed in ALS, while others are new and present interest for further investigations. These observations suggest that more detailed pro-teomics analysis of LCLs, using a larger number of samples, represents a promising approach for investigating ALS mechanisms and to search for therapeutic agents.

### Sample Protocol
ALS and control lymphoblastoid cell lines (B-lymphocytes immortalized with the Epstein-Bar virus were obtained from NINDS Repository at Coriell Cell Bioreposito-ries, Camden, New Jersey.  Four cell lines originated from ALS donors (2 females and 2 males, 44 years old) and lines four from healthy donors. (2 females and 2 males, 41 to 47 years old). The cells were maintained in T25 flasks in vertical position in 10 ml RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), Penicil-lin/Streptomycin at 100U/ml and 100 μg/ml in an incubator in 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Each cell line was grown to 500,000 cells / ml in two T25 flasks with 10 ml medium. The proteins from FBS were removed by placing the cells from each flask in 50 ml conical tubes, centrifugation at 1410 rpm for 10 minutes at 4oC, followed by resuspension of the pellets in 40 ml of washing buffer (0.29 M mannitol, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4). The centrifugations were repeated 3 times. The last pellet was resuspended 1 ml of cold lysis buffer (1N NaOH) after adding to the pellet 10 ul of Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitors Cocktail (MSSAFE-1VL, SigmaAldrich). The pellet was resuspended by repeated pipetting and incubated on ice for 30 minutes, followed by microfugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4oC. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was measured using the BCA colorimetric assay kit (Pierce Cat. No. 23227). Samples of 250-300 ug protein were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and shipped for mass spectrome-try analysis.   The samples were subjected to desalting and buffer exchange using Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml 3 kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore, Bur-lington, MA), as previously described [25]. The total volume was brought to 200 ul using HPLC-grade water and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13,000 RPM. HPLC-grade water (100 l) was added to each filter and centrifuged for another 5 minutes at 13,000 RPM. The vol-ume left in the filter (70-100 ul) was pipetted repeatedly up and down. The filter was placed upside down in the 1.5 ml tube and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 3500 RPM. The proteins left in the filter were collected by placing 100 l HPLC water in the filter and re-peating the transfer to the 1.5 ml tube. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay. Volumes of solution containing 200 ug protein were dried down com-pletely in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 µl of 6 M urea, 100 mM Tris buffer pH and sonicated for 30-minutes. Each sample was reduced by adding 1µl of a solution contain-ing 200 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris buffer pH, gently vortexed and incubated at room temperature (RT) for one hour. Subsequently the samples were alkylated by gentle vortex-ing in 4µl of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and 100 mM Tris buffer and incubation in the dark for an hour at RT. Each sample was then reduced again by adding 4µl of the same reducing agent as before. HPLC water (155 ul) was added to each sample to reduce the urea concentration and then 20 ug trypsin in 100 µl 20 mM Tris, pH 8.0 was added and the samples were incubated for 16-18 hours at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adding a drop to glacial acetic acid to bring the pH <6, and the samples were dried completely in a SpeedVac. The dried samples are re-solubilized in 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid and soni-cated for 15 minutes. For each sample a volume of 50 µl of 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% for-mic acid was pushed-through 1 mg top-tips (Glygen.) 3 times into waste, followed by 3 washes using 0.1% formic acid. The samples were added to the top-tips, pushed into the same 1.5 ml tube, reapplied to the same top-tip and pushed into the same tube. 50 ul of 0.1% formic acid was then pushed through the tip into waste twice. Then 50 µl of elution buffer (50% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) was added to the tip and pushed into a new 0.6 ml tube. The same 50 µl volume was then pushed through the tip a second time. A new volume of 50 µl elution buffer was added to the tip and pushed into the same 0.6 ml tube, and then pushed again through the tip. There total volume in the new 0.6 ml tube was 100 ul. The samples were then dried down completely and re-solubilized in 50 µl 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed using a NanoAcquity UPLC coupled with a QTOF Xevo G2-XS mass spectrometer (both from Waters Corp, Milford, MA).  The peptides were loaded on a NanoAcquity BEH130 C18 1.7µm reversed phase chromatography UPLC column (Waters, Milford, MA), that was  coupled to a fused silica nano-ESI emitter (363µm OD x 20µm ID x 6.25cm length, New Objective, Littleton, MA).  The samples (3 l, 12µg protein) were injected onto the column followed by a linear gradient with a flow rate of 0.6 µl/min: 1-7% organic solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) from 1-9 minutes, 7% B (9-15 minutes), 7-40% B (15-350 minutes), 40% B (350-359 minutes) and back to the initial conditions of 1% B (359-360). Each sample was followed by three 20 minute washes, two 30 minute washes, one 130 min wash and one 35 minute external standard Glu-Fib. MS instrument parameters were: capillary voltage: 2.8kV, sampling cone: 40V, source temperature: 80°C, nano flow gas: 0.30 bar, purge gas: 50 L/h, gas source: nitrogen generator (Peak Scientific, UK). The acquisition mode is positive polarity in sensi-tivity mode. MS survey scans from m/z of 100-2,000 and automatic data dependent analy-sis (DDA) of the top 8 ions with high intensity with charges of 2+ to 6+. The MS/MS acqui-sition was then triggered when the MS signal rose above 1000 counts/ second. The top 8 ions selected for MS/MS from the MS survey were subjected to further fragmentation until the MS/MS ion count reached 10,000/sec or after 0.4 seconds have elapsed. Charge state recognition was used for collision energy with a collision gas being argon. The washing runs (20 minutes runs for short washing steps and 130 minutes runs for long, extensive washing steps) were acquired under MSe conditions scanning a range m/z of 50-2000. Each of the 4 ALS and 4 control samples were run in triplicates. The raw data was submitted ProteoWizard MS Convert to convert the input raw data to mzML readable data, and then the mzML data was further to Mascot Daemon server (Ma-trix Science, London, UK) for database search. The following parameters were used: NCBI database (Homo sapiens) with a peptide tolerance of 1.3 Da and zero 13C, a MS/MS toler-ance of 0.8 Da, trypsin enzyme, 3 maximum missed cleavages, a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on a cysteine and a variable modification of oxidation on methionine.  The output of the database search (.dat files) were further analyzed by the software package Scaffold v. 4.3.4 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) for protein identification, label-free quantitation and statistical analysis. The .dat files were then loaded and analyzed with the following options: protein threshold 90%, minimum number of peptides = 1; peptide threshold 80%; total spectrum count, no filter.  Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed in Scaffold, but also NormalizeR, ProDA, and ROTS. Pathway analysis were done using Ingenuity, PathfindR and GSEA.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) consists of the progressive degeneration of motor neurons, caused by poorly understood mechanisms for which there is no cure. Some of the cellular perturbations associated with ALS can be detected in peripheral cells, including lymphocytes from blood. A related cell system that is very suitable for research consists of human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), which are immortalized lymphocytes. LCLs that can be easily expanded in culture and can be maintained for long periods as stable cultures. We investigated, on a small set of LCLs, if a proteomics analysis using liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry reveals proteins that are differentially present in ALS versus healthy controls. We found that individual proteins, the cellular and molecular pathways in which these proteins participate, are detected as differentially present in the ALS samples. Some of these proteins and pathways are already known to be perturbed in ALS, while others are new and present interest for further investigations. These observations suggest that a more detailed proteomics analysis of LCLs, using a larger number of samples, represents a promising approach for investigating ALS mechanisms and to search for therapeutic agents. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD040240.

### Keywords
Amyotopphic lateral sclerosis; proteomics; mass spectrometry; biomarkers

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Proteomics Laboratories, Deparment of Chemistry and biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam NY, USA
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Danielle Whitham

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Biochemistry and Proteomics Laboratories, Deparment of Chemistry and biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam NY, USA


