### Accession
PXD010075

### Title
Protein interactome of small RNA fragments: identification and functional implications

### Description
Populations of small eukaryotic RNAs, in addition to relatively well recognized molecules (such as miRNAs or siRNAs), also contain fragments derived from all classes of constitutively expressed non-coding RNAs. It has been recently demonstrated that the formation and accumulation of RNA fragments (RFs) is cell-/tissue-specific and depends on internal and external stimuli. Unfortunately, the mechanisms underlying RF biogenesis and function remain unclear. To better understand them, we employed RNA pull-down and mass spectrometry methods to characterize the interaction networks of seven RFs originating from tRNA, snoRNA and snRNA. In addition, we performed an in silico screen of the selected RFs against publicly available cross-linking and immunoprecipitation datasets. We determined that the RF interactome comprises a large number of proteins, which were generally different from those that interact with their parental full length RNAs. Proteins that were differentially bound by the RFs were involved in mRNA splicing, tRNA processing, DNA recombination/replication, protein biosynthesis and carbocyclic acid metabolism. Our data suggest that RFs can be endogenous aptamer-like molecules and potential players in emerging RNA-protein regulatory networks.

### Sample Protocol
Cell extracts Human hepatoma cells Huh-7.5, were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and a 100 µM mixture of non-essential amino acids and maintained at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Proteins were extracted from cells with CytoBuster Protein Extraction Reagent (Novagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. Briefly, cells were trypsinized, counted, pelleted and washed with PBS. Subsequently, cells were resuspended in CytoBuster Protein Extraction Reagent (300 µl per 4.5 × 106 cells), gently agitated for 5 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 16,000 × g at 4°C. Supernatant containing cell extract was transferred to fresh tubes.  RNA pull-down assays RNA oligomers corresponding to the selected RFs and two controls (20-nt A homooligomer and 51-nt fragment of androgen receptor mRNA 3′ UTR, as depicted in Pierce Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (Thermo)) were purchased from IBA (PAGE-purified). In total, 50 pmol of RNA was desthiobiotin-labeled with Pierce RNA 3′ End Desthiobiotinylation Kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for 16 h. RNA pull-down was performed with Pierce Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (Thermo), as recommended by the manufacturer. Briefly, desthiobiotinylated RNA was immobilized on streptavidin magnetic beads. Protein extracts were precleared during 30 min of gentle agitation with streptavidin magnetic beads (50 µl of beads per 200 µg of protein) at 4°C. Subsequently, RNA immobilized on beads was incubated with precleared extracts with gentle agitation for 1 h at 4°C. No-RNA control samples were prepared in parallel by incubation of streptavidin magnetic beads with precleared protein extracts. The beads were washed five times, and finally, the proteins were eluted and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry The protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) (Pierce) assay. Then, 10 µg of protein mixtures were reduced with 4.5 mM TCEP for 1 h at 60°C and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark in the presence of 250 mM TEAB. The proteins were digested with 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37°C. For each run, 5 µl of the digested protein samples was introduced to the LC-MS/MS system composed of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC and a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 [32], which is available online at http://www.coxdocs.org. For protein identification, the Andromeda search engine was used to search MS/MS spectra against the UniProt Complete Human Proteome Set (123,619 sequences) database with 1% FDR. Quantitative analysis was based on label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.  The data were evaluated, and statistics were calculated using Perseus v. 1.5.3.2 software. For annotation and differential analysis, only proteins identified with a minimum of two peptides with >99% confidence were included. Proteins were annotated with Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) terms. LFQ values were Z-score normalized.

### Publication Abstract
Populations of small eukaryotic RNAs, in addition to relatively well recognized molecules such as miRNAs or siRNAs, also contain fragments derived from all classes of constitutively expressed non-coding RNAs. It has been recently demonstrated that the formation and accumulation of RNA fragments (RFs) is cell-/tissue-specific and depends on internal and external stimuli. Unfortunately, the mechanisms underlying RF biogenesis and function remain unclear. To better understand them, we employed RNA pull-down and mass spectrometry methods to characterize the interactions of seven RFs originating from tRNA, snoRNA and snRNA. By integrating our results with publicly available data on physical protein-protein interactions, we constructed an RF interactome network. We determined that the RF interactome comprises proteins generally different from those that interact with their parental full length RNAs. Proteins captured by the RFs were involved in mRNA splicing, tRNA processing, DNA recombination/replication, protein biosynthesis and carboxylic acid metabolism. Our data suggest that RFs can be endogenous aptamer-like molecules and potential players in recently revealed RNA-protein regulatory networks. SIGNIFICANCE: In the recent decade it has become evident that RNAs with well-known functions (for example tRNA, snoRNA or rRNA) can be cleaved to yield short fragments, whose role in cells remains only partially characterized. At the same time, unconventional interactions between mRNA and proteins without RNA-binding domains have been demonstrated, revealing novel layers of possible RNA-mediated regulation. Considering the above, we hypothesized that RNA fragments (RFs) can be endogenous aptamer-like molecules that unconventionally interact with proteins. In this study we identified protein partners of seven selected RFs. We found that RFs bind different set of proteins than their parental full length RNAs and identified proteins differentially bound by the particular RFs. These observations suggest biological relevance of the discovered interactions. Our data provide a novel perspective on the significance of RFs and point to this pool of molecules as to a rich collection of potential components of the recently discovered RNA-protein regulatory networks.

### Keywords
Rna fragments, Rna-protein interaction, Protein interactome

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Poznan, Poland
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry PAS

### Submitter
Ireneusz Stolarek

### Lab Head
Dr Marek Figlerowicz
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Poznan, Poland


