### Accession
PXD001083

### Title
Transitional Surfaceomics: Identification of Planococcus halocryophilus Surface-Associated Proteins During Optimal and Sub-Zero Growth

### Description
During sub-zero (cryophilic) growth, nodular features appear on the cell surface of Planococcus halocryophilus; however, the biochemical composition of these features as well as any cold-adaptive benefits they may offer are not understood. This study aimed to identify differences in the surfaceome of P. halocryophilus cells grown under optimal (24°C) and sub-zero (-5°C and -10°C) culture conditions, for the purpose of gaining insight into cold-adapted proteomic traits at the cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
Planococcus halocryophilus OR1 cells cultured at 24°C, -5°C, and -10°C were treated briefly with trypsin to digest protein fragments present on the cell surface, followed by peptide separation and protein identification by LC/MS/MS in data dependent analysis mode. Each sample was analysed in triplicate, where all peaks selected for MS/MS analysis during the first analysis of a particular sample were used to generate an exclusion list for the second analysis, and this was reiterated for the third analysis.

### Data Protocol
DDA Data was processed using  Mascot software (Matrix Science). The raw data were processed using Mascot Distiller (version 2.4.2.0) to create Mascot generic files (MGFs) which were merged and submitted for database searching using Mascot Daemon (version 2.4.0), and database searches were performed using Mascot (version 2.4), against the NCBI database (downloaded April 16, 2014) specifying taxonomy P. halocryophilus OR1. A search against a decoy database was performed to obtain an estimation of false discovery rates. Peptide and MS/MS mass tolerances were 100 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively, and tryptic peptides having charges from 2+ to 4+ and up to two missed cleavages were considered. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were specified as variable modifications. Mascot search result files (DATs) and PLGS results files were loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Science, version 4.3.2) for visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Planococcus halocryophilus OR1 is a bacterial isolate capable of growth at temperatures ranging from -15 to +37 &#xb0;C. During sub-zero (cryophilic) growth, nodular features appear on its cell surface; however, the biochemical compositions of these features as well as any cold-adaptive benefits they may offer are not understood. This study aimed to identify differences in the cell surface proteome (surfaceome) of P. halocryophilus cells grown under optimal (24 &#xb0;C, no added salt), low- and mid-salt (5 and 12 % NaCl, respectively) at 24 &#xb0;C, and low- and mid-salt sub-zero (5 % NaCl at -5 &#xb0;C and 12 % NaCl at -10 &#xb0;C) culture conditions, for the purpose of gaining insight into cold-adapted proteomic traits at the cell surface. Mid-log cells were harvested, treated briefly with trypsin and the resultant peptides were purified followed by identification by LC-MS/MS analysis. One hundred and forty-four proteins were subsequently identified in at least one culture condition. Statistically significant differences in amino acid usage, a known indicator of cold adaptation, were identified through in silico analysis. Two proteins with roles in peptidoglycan (PG) metabolism, an N-acetyl-L-alanine amidase and a multimodular transpeptidase-transglycosylase, were detected, though each was only detected under optimal conditions, indicating that high-salt and high-cold stress each affect PG metabolism. Two iron transport-binding proteins, associated with two different iron transport strategies, were identified, indicating that P. halocryophilus uses a different iron acquisition strategy at very low temperatures. Here we present the first set of data that describes bacterial adaptations at the cellular surface that occur as a cryophilic bacterium is transitioned from optimal to near-inhibitory sub-zero culture conditions.

### Keywords
Cryophile, Halophile, Surfaceome,  planococcus halocryophilus

### Affiliations
Health Canada
Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, Health Canada

### Submitter
Marybeth Creskey

### Lab Head
Dr Terry D. Cyr
Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, Health Canada


