### Accession
PXD014413

### Title
Proteomics survey of Streptomyces coelicolor strains with natural gross chromosome change

### Description
Streptomyces coelicolor normally produce spores with a relatively high heterogeneity, which will produce genetically heterogeneous sub-populations. These sub-populations often exert massive chromosome amplifications and deletions. Cells with gross chromosomal changes produce an increased diversity of secondary metabolites and secrete significantly more antibiotics; however, these changes come at the cost of dramatically reduced individual fitness, providing direct evidence for a trade-off between secondary metabolite production and fitness. We propose that antibiotic production in colonies of the multicellular bacterium Streptomyces coelicolor is coordinated by a division of labour. This proteomics survey will provide more detailed insights into how these chromosomal changed strains behave under normal growth condition.

### Sample Protocol
106 spores were spotted on SFM agar covered with cellophane and incubated for 5 days at 30 °C. Three to four colonies were then scraped off and snap frozen in liquid N2 in tubes, then lysed 3 times in a pre-cooled TissueLyser (QIAGEN). 500 ml lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 50 mM EDTA) was then added to each sample to dissolve proteins. Cell debris was pelleted and removed by centrifugation. Total protein was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method described by Wessel & Flugge, 1984 (doi: 10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6). Briefly, 0.4 mL of methanol and 0.2 mL of chloroform was added to 0.1 mL sample sequentially and mixed after each step. 0.3 mL of water was then added and vortexed to allow phase separation. After removing the water phase, 0.3 mL of methanol was added to the remaining protein disk and the organic phase and vortexed. Protein precipitation was then pelleted by centrifugation. The pellet was dried in a vacuum centrifuge before dissolving in 0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters) at 95 °C. The protein concentration was measured at this stage using BCA method. Protein samples were then reduced by adding 5 mM DTT and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by thiol group protection with 21.6 mM iodoacetamide incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Then 0.1 μg trypsin (recombinant, proteomics grade, Roche) per 10 μg protein was added, and samples were digested at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min followed by centrifugation to degrade and remove RapiGest SF. Peptide solution containing 8 μg peptides was then cleaned and desalted using STAGE-Tipping technique (doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.261). Briefly, 8 μg of peptide was loaded on a conditioned StageTip with 2 pieces of 1 mm diameter C18 plug (Empore), washed twice with 0.5% formic acid solution, and eluted with elution solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). Acetonitrile was then evaporated in a SpeedVac. Final peptide concentration was adjusted to 40 ng/μL using sample solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for analysis. 200 ng digested peptide was injected and analysed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) equipped with HSS-T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 µm X 250 mm column (Waters). A gradient from 1% to 40% acetonitrile in 110 min (ending with a brief regeneration step to 90% for 3 min) was applied. [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B was used as lock mass compound and sampled every 30 s. Online MS/MS analysis was done using Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) with an UDMSE method set up as described in (doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2767).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrum data were generated using the vender software ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, version 3.0.3), with MSE processing parameters with charge 2 lock mass 785.8426, and default energy thresholds. For protein identification, default workflow parameters with additional variable N-terminal acetylation were used. Reference protein database was downloaded from GenBank with the accession number NC_003888.3. The resulted dataset was imported to ISOQuant (doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2767, version 1.8) for label-free quantification. Default parameters for high confidence protein identification were used in the process

### Publication Abstract
One of the hallmark behaviors of social groups is division of labor, where different group members become specialized to carry out complementary tasks. By dividing labor, cooperative groups increase efficiency, thereby raising group fitness even if these behaviors reduce individual fitness. We find that antibiotic production in colonies of <i>Streptomyces coelicolor</i> is coordinated by a division of labor. We show that <i>S. coelicolor</i> colonies are genetically heterogeneous because of amplifications and deletions to the chromosome. Cells with chromosomal changes produce diversified secondary metabolites and secrete more antibiotics; however, these changes reduced individual fitness, providing evidence for a trade-off between antibiotic production and fitness. Last, we show that colonies containing mixtures of mutants and their parents produce significantly more antibiotics, while colony-wide spore production remains unchanged. By generating specialized mutants that hyper-produce antibiotics, streptomycetes reduce the fitness costs of secreted secondary metabolites while maximizing the yield and diversity of these products.

### Keywords
Antibiotics over-production, Streptomyces coelicolor, Bacteria social behavior, Chromosome change, Division of labour

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University

### Submitter
Chao DU

### Lab Head
Dr Gilles P. van Wezel
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University


