### Accession
PXD023445

### Title
Surfaceome and exoproteome analysis of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa mono- and co-culture biofilms

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are bacterial pathogens that have been shown to co-exist in biofilms related to numerous infections. Although the interaction between these two species is competitive, both partially benefit from the coexistence. In this study, we exhaustively characterized the interaction between Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa by utilizing a proteomics approach, individually targeting the surface-associated proteins (surfaceome), and proteins secreted or otherwise liberated to the extracellular space (exoproteome). To that end, the conditions to co-culture S. aureus and P. aeruginosa in vitro were optimized and a high-resolution proteomics approach was applied to compare surface-associated and extracellular protein profiles between mono- and co-cultured biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus biofilms were pre-grown ahead of the presence of P. aeruginosa, to facilitate their survival in the co-culture conditions. Mid-exponential S. aureus cultures were seeded onto 24-well plates (1×106 CFU/ml, 1.5 ml/well). In place of S. aureus, 1.5 ml/well of sterile LB broth was used to prime for P. aeruginosa monocultures. The S. aureus biofilms were allowed to mature for 24 hours, after which P. aeruginosa suspension (1×103 CFU/ml, 1.5 ml/well) was added both onto S. aureus biofilms and LB-conditioned wells (for obtaining the single-species biofilm of P. aeruginosa). For S. aureus monocultures, 1.5 ml of sterile LB was added per well in place of P. aeruginosa. The biofilms were further incubated for 18 hours, after which the planktonic solutions were collected, and the remaining biofilms were washed with 1.5 ml LB broth.  Single- and dual-species biofilms were harvested in 1 ml of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 on ice, pelleted, and resuspended in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 with . Sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at 55 ng/µl for partial digestion over 20 min at 37 °C. For the exoproteome extraction, planktonic cells were removed from biofilm supernatants by centrifugation and sterile filtration. Aliquots of the filtrates were precipitated with 4 % trichloroacetic acid for 45 min on ice and centrifuged, after which the pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone. The precipitates were solubilized in 0.1 % RapiGest™ SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB 8.5. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol for 45 min at 60 °C and blocked with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 60 minutes in room temperature. The iodoacetamide was quenched with additional 20 mM DTT. Aliquots corresponding to 15 µg of protein were taken and sequence-grade modified trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. The digestions were finalized during 20 h at 37 °C and stopped by acidification with 0.6 % trifluoroacetic acid. The peptide samples were purified and concentrated using the ZipTip C18 columns (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and dried. Equal volumes of the concentrated and purified tryptic peptides were loaded to an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), coupled with an Orbitrap QExactive PlusTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Easy-SprayTM, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The LC separation was performed using a C18 column (25-cm bed length 2-μm beads, 100 Å, 75-μm inner diameter) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted with a 2%–30 % solvent gradient (100 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid) over 60 min. The MS was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, with the 10 most abundant multiple-charged ions selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (MaxQuant v.1.6.1.0) for protein identification and label-free quantification using a database composed of S. aureus ATCC 25923 and P. aeruginosa PAO1 protein sequences in forward and reverse. Matching between runs was omitted. Mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm were applied for the first and main search, respectively. Trypsin digestion without proline restriction option was applied with two missed cleavages allowed. The minimal unique + razor peptide number was set to one, and false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for peptide and protein identification,

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial biofilms are an important underlying cause for chronic infections. By switching into the biofilm state, bacteria can evade host defenses and withstand antibiotic chemotherapy. Despite the fact that biofilms at clinical and environmental settings are mostly composed of multiple microbial species, biofilm research has largely been focused on single-species biofilms. In this study, we investigated the interaction between two clinically relevant bacterial pathogens (<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>) by label-free quantitative proteomics focusing on proteins associated with the bacterial cell surfaces (surfaceome) and proteins exported/released to the extracellular space (exoproteome). The changes observed in the surfaceome and exoproteome of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> pointed toward higher motility and lower pigment production when co-cultured with <i>S. aureus</i>. In <i>S. aureus</i>, lower abundances of proteins related to cell wall biosynthesis and cell division, suggesting increased persistence, were observed in the dual-species biofilm. Complementary phenotypic analyses confirmed the higher motility and the lower pigment production in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> when co-cultured with <i>S. aureus.</i> Higher antimicrobial tolerance associated with the co-culture setting was additionally observed in both species. To the best of our knowledge, this study is among the first systematic explorations providing insights into the dynamics of both the surfaceome and exoproteome of <i>S. aureus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> dual-species biofilms.

### Keywords
Maxquant, Exoproteome, Lc-ms/ms, Biofilm, Surfaceome, Pseudomonas, Co-culture, Staphylococcus

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


