### Accession
PXD005549

### Title
Proteomics of C. briggsae embryo and larvae

### Description
To gain mechanistic insights into the molecular changes of Caenorhabditis briggsae between the two developmental stages: embryo and larvae

### Sample Protocol
Samples from Wild type C. briggsae (AF16) animals and a GFP-expressing C. briggsae transgenic strain, RW20045 were used for this projects. Proteomics study was carried out on the embryo and larvae of both wild type and transgenic animinal.

### Data Protocol
The trypic peptides were analzed by TripleTOF 5600. and the data were analyzed using proteinpilot. the results were processed using scaffold for the get right format (mzid) for uploading in pride.

### Publication Abstract
Caenorhabditis briggsae has emerged as a model for comparative biology against model organism C. elegans. Most of its cell fate specifications are completed during embryogenesis whereas its cell growth is achieved mainly in larval stages. The molecular mechanism underlying the drastic developmental changes is poorly understood. To gain insights into the molecular changes between the two stages, we compared the proteomes between the two stages using iTRAQ. We identified a total of 2,791 proteins in the C. briggsae embryos and larvae, 247 of which undergo up- or down-regulation between the two stages. The proteins that are upregulated in the larval stages are enriched in the Gene Ontology categories of energy production, protein translation, and cytoskeleton; whereas those upregulated in the embryonic stage are enriched in the categories of chromatin dynamics and posttranslational modification, suggesting a more active chromatin modification in the embryos than in the larva. Perturbation of a subset of chromatin modifiers followed by cell lineage analysis suggests their roles in controlling cell division pace. Taken together, we demonstrate a general molecular switch from chromatin modification to metabolism during the transition from C. briggsae embryonic to its larval stages using iTRAQ approach. The switch might be conserved across metazoans.

### Keywords
Embryo, Chromatin dynamics, Itraq, C. briggsae

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Department of Biology State Key Laboratory of Environmental and Biological Analysis Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong

### Submitter
Huoming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhongying Zhao
Department of Biology State Key Laboratory of Environmental and Biological Analysis Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong


