### Accession
PXD006391

### Title
PALB2 interactome in asynchronous human cells

### Description
Identification of interacting partners of the Partner and Localizer of BRCA2 (PALB2), essential regulator of DNA repair by homologous recombination. Interacting partners of PALB2 were purified by GFP pull down from asynchronous HEK293 Flp-In T-REx cells, exogenously expressing Flag-EGFP tagged PALB2 at a similar level than the endogenous PALB2 level. Before GFP pull down, whole cell protein extracts were pre-cleared on IgG agarose beads to decrease binding of non-specific proteins during GFP pull down. GFP pull down were performed using GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) and washed at low salt concentration (150mM NaCl), to maintain interactions of low affinity binding protein partners. As a negative control, Flag-EGFP interacting proteins were purified, following the same protocol as described for the purification of Flag-EGFP PALB2 interacting proteins. Experiments were performed in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-pulled down proteins were denaturated in 4 M urea dissolved into 50 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB), reduced with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Roche) for 2 h at 37 °C, followed by trypsin digestion for 16 h at 37 °C. Before the trypsin digestion, the urea concentration was diluted down to 1M into 50 mM TEAB and calcium chloride was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. The digestion steps were performed in a Thermomixer compact (Eppendorf) shaking at 650rpms. Trypsin digestion was stopped by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Digest samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 4 °C to remove aggregates.  Peptide mixtures were further desalted using hand-made C18 tips, as follows: the C18 tip was first washed twice with 100 % acetonitrile after 5 min centrifugation at 2000 rpms at room temperature. Peptides were further loaded onto the C18 tip by centrifugation at 4000 rpms at room temperature. After two washing steps into 0.1 % TFA solution, desalted peptides were eluted into 50 % acetonitrile/0.1 % TFA solution and dried using a SpeedVac before LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were re-suspended in 10% formic acid. They were separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and electrosprayed directly into a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1 % Formic Acid in water) at a pressure of 500 bar. The peptides were separated on, an in- house packed analytical column (75 µm i.d. packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr.Maisch GmbH) using a linear gradient (length: 120 min , 7 % to 28 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile), flow rate: 200 nL/min). The raw data was acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-2000 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms). After the MS scans, the 20 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30 % of normalised collision energy. HCD spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288), against a non-redundant protein sequence database for Homo sapiens containing 20160 protein sequences entries (Uniprot, release 2015-09-25), in which the PALB2 protein sequence (uniprot accession: Q86YC2) was replaced by the PALB2 protein sequence fused to Flag-GFP tag in its terminal region (named as P0000_DEF USER). Additionally, contaminant protein sequences such as, endoproteinase LysC (uniprot accession: Q7M135, Lysyl endopeptidase, Lysobacter enyzmogenes) and trypsin (uniprot accession: P00761, Trypsin, Sus scrofa) were inserted in the database. During database searches, cysteine residues were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57 Da statically added), methionine considered to be oxidized (+16 Da dynamically added) and two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 50 ppm and 0.02 Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively. The protein identification list was filtered at a false discovery rate below 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
The partner and localiser of BRCA2 (PALB2) plays important roles in the maintenance of genome integrity and protection against cancer. Although PALB2 is commonly described as a repair factor recruited to sites of DNA breaks, recent studies provide evidence that PALB2 also associates with unperturbed chromatin. Here, we investigated the previously poorly described role of chromatin-associated PALB2 in undamaged cells. We found that PALB2 associates with active genes through its major binding partner, MRG15, which recognizes histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 36 (H3K36me3) by the SETD2 methyltransferase. Missense mutations that ablate PALB2 binding to MRG15 confer elevated sensitivity to the topoisomerase inhibitor camptothecin (CPT) and increased levels of aberrant metaphase chromosomes and DNA stress in gene bodies, which were suppressed by preventing DNA replication. Remarkably, the level of PALB2 at genic regions was frequently decreased, rather than increased, upon CPT treatment. We propose that the steady-state presence of PALB2 at active genes, mediated through the SETD2/H3K36me3/MRG15 axis, ensures an immediate response to DNA stress and therefore effective protection of these regions during DNA replication. This study provides a conceptual advance in demonstrating that the constitutive chromatin association of repair factors plays a key role in the maintenance of genome stability and furthers our understanding of why PALB2 defects lead to human genome instability syndromes.

### Keywords
Dna repair, Genomic stability

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
University of Oxford Sir William Dunn School of Pathology South Parks Road Oxford OX1 3RE United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marjorie Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Fumiko Esashi
University of Oxford Sir William Dunn School of Pathology South Parks Road Oxford OX1 3RE United Kingdom


