### Accession
PXD003804

### Title
Next Generation Protein Sequencing

### Description
NGPS is a method for de-novo, full-length protein sequencing in high throughput. The method is based on cleavage of the protein at semi-random sites by microwave-assisted acid hydrolysis (MAAH), enrichment of LC-MS/MS amenable peptides from the hydrolysate by solid-phase-extraction, LC-MS/MS analysis, de-novo long peptide tag sequencing of resulting peptides and assembly of peptide tags into consensus contigs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was dissolved in 8M Urea. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to final concentration of 5mM and incubated at 37°C for 50 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added at a final concentration of 10mM and incubated 30 minutes in the dark. Buffer was exchanged to water using Amicon 3KDa MWCO filter (Millipore UFC500396) by adding 300µl H2O and centrifuging at 14000g until remaining volume was about 40µl. Repeated twice. Collect remaining volume and transfer to a glass vial with a pre-slit cap (Waters 186000307C). Add 40 µl 6M HCl, place vial in ice and microwave for 4 minutes in a standard home microwave (LG Intellowave 1,200w) at highest settings. Hydrolysates were then subjected to solid phase extraction using Oasis HLB (Waters 186001828BA), eluting with 80% Acetonitrile. Peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus) to dryness and resuspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
De-novo peptide sequencing was performed using the commercial PEAKS 7.0 software. Identified de-novo peptides were used as input for pTA- (peptide tag assembler), an algorithm designed to assemble peptide tags extracted from the PEAKS output into concensus contigs.

### Publication Abstract
Traditional "bottom-up" proteomic approaches use proteolytic digestion, LC-MS/MS, and database searching to elucidate peptide identities and their parent proteins. Protein sequences absent from the database cannot be identified, and even if present in the database, complete sequence coverage is rarely achieved even for the most abundant proteins in the sample. Thus, sequencing of unknown proteins such as antibodies or constituents of metaproteomes remains a challenging problem. To date, there is no available method for full-length protein sequencing, independent of a reference database, in high throughput. Here, we present Database-independent Protein Sequencing, a method for unambiguous, rapid, database-independent, full-length protein sequencing. The method is a novel combination of non-enzymatic, semi-random cleavage of the protein, LC-MS/MS analysis, peptide <i>de novo</i> sequencing, extraction of peptide tags, and their assembly into a consensus sequence using an algorithm named "Peptide Tag Assembler." As proof-of-concept, the method was applied to samples of three known proteins representing three size classes and to a previously un-sequenced, clinically relevant monoclonal antibody. Excluding leucine/isoleucine and glutamic acid/deamidated glutamine ambiguities, end-to-end full-length <i>de novo</i> sequencing was achieved with 99-100% accuracy for all benchmarking proteins and the antibody light chain. Accuracy of the sequenced antibody heavy chain, including the entire variable region, was also 100%, but there was a 23-residue gap in the constant region sequence.

### Keywords
Microwave, De-novo, Ngps, Full length, Maah

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalized Medicine, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Yishai Levin
The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalized Medicine, Weizmann Institute of Science


