### Accession
PXD011772

### Title
The RNA-binding ubiquitin ligase MKRN1 acts as a sensor for ribosome-associated quality control of poly(A)-translation

### Description
Human cells have evolved multiple quality control mechanisms to ensure protein homeostasis by detecting aberrant mRNAs and protein products which are condemned for rapid decay. Translating ribosomes that run into poly(A) tails are terminally stalled, followed by ribosome recycling and rapid decay of the truncated nascent polypeptide via the ribosome-associated quality control (RQC). Here, we demonstrate that the conserved RNA-binding E3 ubiquitin ligase Makorin Ring Finger Protein 1 (MKRN1) acts as a novel sensor of poly(A) sequences to initiate ribosome stalling in RQC. Using individual-nucleotide resolution UV crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP), we show that MKRN1 is positioned upstream of A-rich stretches and poly(A) tails in mRNAs via interaction with the cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein (PABP). Ubiquitin remnant profiling uncovers PABP and ribosomal protein RPS10 as well as multiple translational regulators as main targets of MRKN1-mediated ubiquitylation. The modified lysine in RPS10 is distinct from the main target sites of ZNF598, the second E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in initial ribosome stalling, indicating that multiple modifications need to converge to prevent promiscuous ubiquitylation of lysine-translating ribosomes. We propose that MKRN1 serves as a first line of poly(A) recognition at the RNA level to prevent erroneous protein products and maintain proteome integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated in 4-fold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (Nielsen et al, 2008). Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For ubiquitin-remnant peptide enrichment, 20 mg of peptides were re-dissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM sodium chloride in 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2). Precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Modified peptides were enriched using 40 µl of di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology). Peptides were incubated with the antibodies for 4 hours at 4 °C on a rotation wheel. The beads were washed 3 times in ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water. The enriched peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O, fractionated in 6 fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) (Weinert et al, 2013) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007).  For proteome analysis, 25 µg of protein from each SILAC condition (50 µg in total) were pooled and separated by SDS-PAGE. NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol was added to the sample and samples were processed as described below for interactome analysis.  For interactome analysis, lysates from each SILAC condition were subjected to affinity purification with GFP-trap agarose beads (ChromoTek). Enriched proteins were washed three times with modified RIPA buffer (supplemented with protease inhibitors, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (all from Sigma)), before they were combined for a last wash. Proteins were eluted from the beads in NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol.  The sample was boiled at 70 ºC for 10 min, alkylated by addition of 5.5 mM chloroacetamide and loaded onto 4-12% gradient Bis-Tris gels. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (Michalski et al, 2011; Kelstrup et al, 2012). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al, 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 92,578 human protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB (release June 2018) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, n-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) and di-glycine-lysine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously (Cox & Mann, 2008; Olsen et al, 2006). The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007). Di-glycine lysine modified peptides with a minimum score of 40 and delta score of 6 are reported and used for the analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin remnant profiling, Poly(a), Ubiquitylation, Mkrn1, Rna binding, Iclip, Ribosome-associated quality control

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


