### Accession
PXD014753

### Title
Fascin Controls Metastatic Colonization and Mitochondrial Oxidative Phosphorylation by Remodeling Mitochondrial Actin Filaments/The mitochondrial deoxyguanosine kinase is required for the self-renewal of cancer stem-like cell in lung adenocarcinoma

### Description
Project 1: The deregulation of the actin cytoskeleton has been extensively studied in metastatic dissemination. However, the post-dissemination role of the actin cytoskeleton dysregulation is poorly understood. Here we report that fascin, an actin-bundling protein, promotes lung cancer metastatic colonization by augmenting metabolic stress resistance and mitochondrial OXPHOS. Fascin is directly recruited to mitochondria under metabolic stress to stabilize mitochondrial actin filaments (mtF-actin). Using unbiased metabolomics and proteomics approaches, we discovered that fascin-mediated mtF-actin remodeling promotes mitochondrial OXPHOS by increasing the biogenesis of respiratory Complex I. Mechanistically, fascin and mtF-actin controls the homeostasis of mtDNA to promote mitochondrial OXPHOS. The disruption of mtFactin abrogates fascin-mediated lung cancer metastasis. Conversely, restoration of mitochondrial respiration using yeast NDI1 in fascin depleted cancer cells is able to rescue lung metastasis. Our findings indicate that the dysregulated actin cytoskeleton in metastatic lung cancer could be targeted to rewire mitochondrial metabolism and to prevent metastatic recurrence. Project 2: There is a pool of mitochondrial dNTP in the cell maintained by the mitochondrial deoxynucleoside salvage pathway and dedicated for the mtDNA homeostasis in slow-cycling  and post-mitotic cells.  The role of the mitochondrial deoxynucleoside salvage pathway in tumor initiation and progression is poorly understood. Here, we investigated the role of the mitochondrial deoxyguanosine kinase (DGUOK), a rate-limiting enzyme in the mitochondrial deoxynucleoside salvage pathway, in the self-renewal of lung adenocarcinoma cancer stem-like cells (CSC). Our data support that DGUOK overexpression strongly correlates with cancer progression and patient survival. The depletion of DGUOK robustly inhibited lung adenocarcinoma tumor growth, metastasis and CSC self-renewal. Mechanistically, DGUOK is required for the biogenesis of respiratory Complex I and mitochondrial OXPHOS, which in turn regulates CSC self-renewal through AMPK-YAP1 signaling. The restoration of mitochondrial OXPHOS in DGUOK depleted lung cancer cells using NDI1, a single subunit yeast NADH : ubiquinone oxidoreductase, was able to rescue AMPK-YAP1 signaling and CSC stemness. Genetic targeting of DGUOK using doxycycline-inducible CRISPR/Cas9 was able to markedly induce tumor regression. Our findings reveal a novel role for mitochondrial dNTP metabolism in lung cancer tumor growth and progression, and implicate that the mitochondrial deoxynucleotide salvage pathway could be potentially targeted to prevent CSC-mediated therapy resistance and metastatic recurrence.

### Sample Protocol
To compare protein expression levels in control and Fascin KO cells, chemical labeling using tandem mass tags (TMT) was combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry discovery proteomics. Samples were prepared in biological duplicate. Protein lysates were made using aqueous denaturing buffer containing 20 mM HEPES and 8 M urea, prior to reduction of disulfides, alkylation of cysteines, and tryptic digestion (Worthington). The resulting peptides are extracted using C-18 Sep-Pak cartridges, dried, and resuspended in 100 mM aqueous triethylammonium bromide (TEAB) for TMT labeling. Each channel is analyzed with LC-MS/MS for quality control (i.e. tag incorporation and reporter ion verification). Then, samples are mixed using equal amounts of total protein and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography; each peptide fraction is analyzed in duplicate with LC-MS/MS (RSLCnano and QExactive Plus, Thermo). TMT experiments were designed in the following way: Experiment 1: 126:  Pool of Biological Replicate 1 Samples 127:  Control Replicate 1 128:  DGUOK Knockout Replicate 1 129:  Fascin Knockout Replicate 1 130:  Fascin Knockout and DGUOK Overexpression Replicate 1 131:  Pool of Biological Replicate 2 Samples Experiment 2: 126:  Pool of Biological Replicate 1 Samples 127:  Control Replicate 2 128:  DGUOK Knockout Replicate 2 129:  Fascin Knockout Replicate 2 130:  Fascin Knockout and DGUOK Overexpression Replicate 2 131:  Pool of Biological Replicate 2 Samples

### Data Protocol
For this submission, LC-MS/MS data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database using Mascot for tryptic peptides with mass measurement error settings appropriate for the QExactive and including oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT labeling of lysines and peptide N-termini. For the manuscript, data are analyzed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008), which identifies each peptide using sequence specific ions and quantifies relative expression level in each sample using the TMT Reporter ions. After iterative rank order normalization to correct for differences in loading, significant differences were determined as proteins that exceeded 2 times the standard deviation away from the mean log2 ratio between the two samples (Welsh et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Stem-like cells, Lung cancer, Metastasis, Actin cytoskeleton, Deoxyguanosine kinase, Fascin

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology Milton S. Hershey Medical Center Penn State College of Medicine Hershey, PA, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Shengyu Yang, PhD
Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology Milton S. Hershey Medical Center Penn State College of Medicine Hershey, PA, USA


