### Accession
PXD017165

### Title
Influence of Body Mass Index in the saliva and plasma proteomes

### Description
Obesity is a chronic inflammatory condition which leads to a change in the production of adipokines and cytokines that can be found in blood plasma and saliva. It increases the risk for periodontal and cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, dyslipidemia, type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, cancer and others. This study aims to analyze the plasma and saliva proteomes of young adults with obesity and overweight comparing to normal weight individuals, to reveal the influence of body index in the proteome profiles and to identify early biomarkers of obesity-associated diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The reported population consisted of 18 students and employees of Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil, aged between 18 and 35 years. Individuals were categorized according to their anthropometric measures in the Normal Weigth, Overweight and Obese groups. The proteomic profiles of saliva and plasma was analyzed by quantitative Mass Spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Differences among groups regarding demographic and clinical parameters were evaluated using Chi-square and Kruskal-Wallis tests in a statistical program (SPSS Statistics 20, IBM Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil). The data obtained by MS were used in searches against a database of human proteins from UNIPROT (https://www.uniprot.org/), through the Progenesis tool (Waters), in the case of salivary proteome, and with Mascot Distiller v.2.4.0.0 program (Matrix Science Ltd.), for plasma samples, to identify and characterize the proteins of each and detect variations in the proteomes. Any non-tryptic peptide passing from the filter criterion were discarded. The modifications used were: carbamidomethyl c, carbamyl N-TERM and oxidation, trypsin for digestion and one missed peptide. False Discovery Rate was less than 4%. The ion matching requirements were: fragments / peptides-3 or more; fragments / protein-7 or more; peptides / protein-1 or more (35). Finally, only the proteins which at least one unique and specific matched peptide in at least two replicates (3 in saliva and 2 or more in plasma samples) were reported here. The level of significance of 5% or less was stablished for statistically acceptable differences. Correlation between proteins was assessed by STRING 11.0 (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Proteome, Bioindicators, Overweight

### Affiliations
UEZO-Universidade Estadual da Zona Oeste
Unigranrio

### Submitter
Carlos Vinicius Ferreira daSilva

### Lab Head
Dr Eidy de Oliveira Santos
UEZO-Universidade Estadual da Zona Oeste


