### Accession
PXD033508

### Title
SENP2 is an important regulator of energy metabolism in adipocytes and knockdown increases markers of browning

### Description
Adipose tissue is one of the main regulative sites for energy metabolism. Excess lipid storage and expansion of white adipose tissue (WAT) is the primary contributor to obesity, a strong predisposing factor for development of insulin resistance. Sentrin-specific protease (SENP) 2 has been shown to play a role in metabolism in murine fat and skeletal muscle cells, and we have previously demonstrated its role in energy metabolism of human skeletal muscle cells. In the present work, we have investigated the impact of SENP2 on fatty acid and glucose metabolism in primary human fat cells by using cultured primary human adipocytes to knock down the SENP2 gene. Glucose uptake and oxidation, as well as accumulation and distribution of oleic acid into complex lipids were decreased while oleic acid oxidation was increased in SENP2-knockdown cells compared to control cells. Furthermore, de novo lipogenesis was reduced by SENP2-knockdown in the adipocytes and expression of several metabolically important regulators and markers of browning of WAT were upregulated both on gene and protein level. In conclusion, SENP2 is an important regulator of energy metabolism in primary human adipocytes, and the results indicates a potential role in browning of the cells as well.

### Sample Protocol
Preadipocytes from six individual experiments, using a mix of three donors, were seeded in 6-well CellBIND® tissue culture plates, transduced and proliferated until approximately 90% confluent. Then, cells were differentiated for 11 days, before washed twice and harvested in PBS. The cell pellets were dissolved in 4% SDS and sonicated, before protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay (Pierce). Equal amount of protein samples (20 µg) were aggregated on amine beads. For on-beads digestion, 50 mmol/l ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to beads. Proteins were reduced with 10 mmol/l DTT for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mmol/l IAA for 30 min at room temperature in dark after which 1 µg of trypsin was added, and trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. Beads were separated by magnet, and the supernatant was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of the resulting peptides was performed using an Evosep liquid chromatography system coupled to a TimsTOF flex mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were separated using the ‘extended’ 88 min method in Evosep.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0 for protein identification and label-free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. UniProt database with ‘human’ entries (2020) was used for the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lysate, Lc-ms/ms, Adipocytes, Senp2

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


