### Accession
PXD001566

### Title
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor - a therapeutic target in gallbladder cancer

### Description
Poor prognosis in gallbladder cancer is due to late presentation of the disease, lack of reliable biomarkers for early diagnosis and limited targeted therapies. Early diagnostic markers and novel therapeutic targets can significantly improve clinical management of GBC. We carried out quantitative proteomic analysis using a panel of gallbladder cancer cell lines using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). We identified 3,655 proteins among which 654 were found to be overexpressed and 387 were downregulated in the invasive cell lines (OCUG-1, NOZ and GB-d1) compared to the non-invasive cell line, TGBC24TKB. Among these, macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF) was observed to be >3-fold overexpressed. MIF is a pleiotropic proinflammatory cytokine that plays a causative role in multiple diseases including cancer. MIF has been reported to play a central role in tumor cell proliferation and invasion in several cancers. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed our findings showing overexpression of MIF in 21 of 29 gallbladder adenocarcinoma cases. A significant decrease in cell viability, colony forming ability and invasive property of the gallbladder cancer cells was observed upon MIF inhibition using MIF siRNA and MIF antagonists. Our findings support the role of MIF in tumor aggressiveness and suggest its potential application as a therapeutic target for gallbladder cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Gallbladder cancer cell lines, TGBC24TKB, OCUG-1, NOZ, GB-d1, were grown to ~80% confluence, serum starved for 8h, lysed in 0.5% SDS containing buffer and centrifuged at 350g for 10 min. The protein concentration of the cleared lysates was estimated using BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein from each cell line were then split into two to serve as technical replicates. The protein samples were treated with reducing agent (TCEP, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) at 60°C for 1 h and alkylated with 1 l of cysteine blocking reagent, MMTS, methyl methanethiosulfate for 10 min at room temperature. This was followed by in-solution digestion using sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides from each cell line were labeled with 8 iTRAQ reagents in 60 l of isopropanol at room temperature as follows – TGBC24TKB (113 and 114), OCUG-1 (115 and 116), NOZ (117 and 118) and GB-d1 (119 and 121). The samples were then pooled, vacuum dried, fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography using a PolySULFOETHYL A column (5 μm, 200 Å, 200x 2.1 mm) (PolyLC, Columbia, MD). 96 fractions were collected which were pooled into 24 fractions based on chromatographic peaks, vacuum dried and desalted using C18 STAGE tips and stored at -20oC till further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from the LC-MS/MS analysis was searched against human protein database NCBI RefSeq (Release 63 containing 71,434 protein sequences and known contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Search parameters included: trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed, alkylation (methylthio) at cysteine and iTRAQ 8-plex modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine as static modifications and oxidation at methionine as the dynamic modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The peptide and protein data were extracted using high peptide confidence and top one peptide rank filters. The data were also searched against a decoy database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) at 1% FDR were used for protein identifications. iTRAQ quantitation was done by taking the average of the reporter ion intensities from the technical replicates. The ratios, invasive neoplastic/non-invasive neoplastic, were obtained as follows – 115+116 (OCUG-1)/113+114 (TGBC24TKB), 117+118 (NOZ)/113+114 (TGBC24TKB) and 191+121 (GB-d1)/113+114 (TGBC24TKB).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Suicide substrate, Targeted therapy, Gastrointestinal cancer, Rna interference, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


