### Accession
PXD011937

### Title
Proteomics characterization of Chromosomal Common Fragile Site (CFS) - associated proteins uncovers ATRX as a regulator of CFS stability

### Description
Chromosomal Common Fragile Sites (CFSs) are conserved regions of our genome prone to break in conditions of replication stress (RS. Here, we have performed Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with FACND2 antibodies coupled to Mass Spectrometry to isolate CFSs from HeLa cells and identify the proteins enriched at these loci.

### Sample Protocol
ChIP eluates were separated by SDS-page and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Samples were stage-tipped and analysed analysed with an Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled to the Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS data was process using MaxQuant (v.1.6.0.1) and the integrated database search engine, Andromeda against the Uniprot database. Common contaminants were included in the database and excluded upon data analysis. False discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and protein level, calculated using the decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Common fragile sites (CFSs) are conserved genomic regions prone to break under conditions of replication stress (RS). Thus, CFSs are hotspots for rearrangements in cancer and contribute to its chromosomal instability. Here, we have performed a global analysis of proteins that recruit to CFSs upon mild RS to identify novel players in CFS stability. To this end, we performed Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of FANCD2, a protein that localizes specifically to CFSs in G2/M, coupled to mass spectrometry to acquire a CFS interactome. Our strategy was validated by the enrichment of many known regulators of CFS maintenance, including Fanconi Anemia, DNA repair and replication proteins. Among the proteins identified with unknown functions at CFSs was the chromatin remodeler ATRX. Here we demonstrate that ATRX forms foci at a fraction of CFSs upon RS, and that ATRX depletion increases the occurrence of chromosomal breaks, a phenotype further exacerbated under mild RS conditions. Accordingly, ATRX depletion increases the number of 53BP1 bodies and micronuclei, overall indicating that ATRX is required for CFS stability. Overall, our study provides the first proteomic characterization of CFSs as a valuable resource for the identification of novel regulators of CFS stability.

### Keywords
Common fragile sites, Hela, Interactome, Atrx, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Center for Chromosome Stability and Center for Healthy Aging, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark

### Submitter
Stephanie Munk

### Lab Head
Dr Andres Joaquin Lopez-Contreras
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Center for Chromosome Stability and Center for Healthy Aging, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark


