### Accession
PXD010285

### Title
Identification of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi is the causal agent of Chagas’ disease, which is one of the biggest public health problems in Latin America. Several post-translational modifications (PTM) have been studied in T. cruzi but there is no work focused on the O-GlcNAcylation, which is a highly conserved monosaccharide PTM found on serine and threonine residues of proteins mainly from the nucleus, cytoplasm and mitochondria. It is thought to regulate proteins in a manner analogous to protein phosphorylation, even their crosstalk allows the regulation of cellular functions in response to nutrients and stress. In the present work we demonstrate O-GlcNacylation in T. cruzi epimastigotes using two different methods: western blot with specific antibodies and click chemistry labelling. Then, we identify 2033 O-GlcNAcilated proteins and 48 modification sequences by mass spectrometry. Most of this proteins are part of structures, functions and pathways that are essentials for the parasite survival and evolution. For the first time O-GlcNacylation is idenytified in T. cruzi proteins and due to the many biological processes in which they participate, this study opens a new research field in Trypanosomatids biology, infection processes and potential identification of therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi epimastigotes were cultured at 28°C in RPMI 1640 medium, supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum.  Parasite cultures were lysed in the homogenization buffer: 10mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, proteases inhibitor, pH 7.4. After centrifugation at 20 000g for 10 min supernatant were recovered, cleaned by TCA-acetone protocol, re-suspended on 1N phosphate buffer.  Click iT O-GlcNAc Enzymatic Labeling System was performed on 500 µg of T. cruzi protein extracts as manufacturer protocol indicates (Invitrogen C33368). Then, the GalNaz tagged proteins were then enriched by covalent capture onto an alkyne resin. The Cu(I) catalyzed cyclic addition reaction between an azide and a terminal alkyne generating a 1,4 disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole as covalent linkage. After overnight Click reaction, the supernatant was discarded and the resin was subjected to washes  3x with 1.5 ml 10 mM DTPA, then washes with 2 x 1.5 mL of MS grade wáter. Proteins were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, 55 °C) and alkylated (50 mM IAM, 60 min, room temperature). The alkyne resin containing the covalent coupled O-GlcNAc proteins was subjected to high stringency washing procedure performed in column with 5x 2 ml SDS wash buffer (100 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 1% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA), 5x 2 ml urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8) and 5x 2 ml 20% acetonitrile (eliminating non-specifically bound proteins. Following extensive washing, the resin-bound proteins were trypsin digested to obtain O-GlcNac proteins. Peptides-linked to agarose beads were submitted to dephosphorylation at 37 °C for 6 h in 400 μL of dephosphorylation buffer using 800 U λ phosphatase and 20 U calf intestine phosphatase. Following dephosphorylation, the resin was washed twice with 1.8 mL of H2O, and the slurry volume was adjusted to 300 μL with H2O before β-elimination with the GlycoProfile β-elimination kit. The β-elimination reaction was incubated on an end-over-end shaker with extensive mixing at 4 °C and quenched after 24 h with 1% TFA. Agarose beads were discarded, and the resulting solution contained the β-eliminated peptides, corresponding to the initially O-GlcNAcylated peptides.  Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available pararallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.0; Matrix Science, London, U.K.) and SEQUEST HT against the Uniprot Trypanosoma cruzi reference proteome database (version 09.08.2013, 50,850 entries). The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 8 ppm, followed by 0.8 Da 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; and (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) and methionine oxidation (+15.995) as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was processed the built-in Percolator  node and was set to 5%. Protein identification from ß-elimination experiments was performed similarly as above for data processing with the exception of the following modifications. Dehydration of Ser and Thr (-18.011) as well as ß-elimination of Cys (-33.988 Da) was added as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Originally an anthropozoonosis in the Americas, Chagas disease has spread from its previous borders through migration. It is caused by the protozoan <i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i>. Differences in disease severity have been attributed to a natural pleomorphism in <i>T. cruzi</i>. Several post-translational modifications (PTMs) have been studied in <i>T. cruzi</i>, but to date no work has focused on O-GlcNAcylation, a highly conserved monosaccharide-PTM of serine and threonine residues mainly found in nucleus, cytoplasm, and mitochondrion proteins. O-GlcNAcylation is thought to regulate protein function analogously to protein phosphorylation; indeed, crosstalk between both PTMs allows the cell to regulate its functions in response to nutrient levels and stress. Herein, we demonstrate O-GlcNAcylation in <i>T. cruzi</i> epimastigotes by three methods: by using specific antibodies against the modification in lysates and whole parasites, by click chemistry labeling, and by proteomics. In total, 1,271 putative O-GlcNAcylated proteins and six modification sequences were identified by mass spectrometry (data available via ProteomeXchange, ID PXD010285). Most of these proteins have structural and metabolic functions that are essential for parasite survival and evolution. Furthermore, O-GlcNAcylation pattern variations were observed by antibody detection under glucose deprivation and heat stress conditions, supporting their possible role in the adaptive response. Given the numerous biological processes in which O-GlcNAcylated proteins participate, its identification in <i>T. cruzi</i> proteins opens a new research field in the biology of Trypanosomatids, improve our understanding of infection processes and may allow us to identify new therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Epimastigote, Ptm, O-glcnac, Click chemistry, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Aix-Marseille univ, CNRS, Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Aix-Marseille univ, CNRS, Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique


