### Accession
PXD002332

### Title
Lysine acetyltransfer supports platelet function

### Description
Identification of lysine acetylated proteins from washed, human platelets.

### Sample Protocol
Washed human platelets (prepared from 100 ml anticoagulated blood as described above) were spun at 1000×g for 10 min and the pellet suspended in 5 ml of deionized 8M urea containing 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) supplemented with 10 mM nicotinamide and 10 μM SAHA.  Platelets were then lysed by probe sonication (Model 60 Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) at a 15 watt setting for 15 sec, with cooling on ice for 30 sec between 3 treatments.  Proteins were then reduced by addition of 18 μl of 1.25 M dithiothreitol and incubation at 55°C for 30 min.  The sample was then cooled to room temp and cysteines alkylated by addition of 500 μl of 100 mM idoacetamide and incubation for 15 min.  The sample was then diluted by addition of 15 ml of 10 mM TEAB (+10 mM nicotinamide and 10 μM SAHA) and proteins digested overnight at 37°C with slow rotation following addition of 200 μg of MS Grade Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) dissolved in 200 μ1 of 1 mM HCl.  Following digestion, the sample was acidified by addition of TFA at a final 1% concentration, and the sample centrifuged at 2000×g for 15 min.  Peptides in the supernatant were then solid phase extracted using a Sep-Pak Plus C18 cartridge (Waters) and eluted in 5 ml of 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA.  The final recovery of peptides was 2.5 mg, based on a BCA assay using BSA as a standard (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were then shell frozen using a dry ice bath, and dried in a vacuum centrifuge for 20 hours without heating.  Acetylated peptides were then purified using a PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signaling) using 80 μl of immunoaffinity beads as recommended by the manufacturer.  Affinity purified peptides were then solid phase extracted using a Sep-Pak light C18 cartridge and eluted in 1 ml of 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA.  Following vacuum centrifugation, the peptides were dissolved in 20μl of 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and separated by 2-dimensional chromatography using tandem reverse phase separations at high and low pH. A Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system was used for sample loading and 2nd dimension reverse phase separation, and a Dionex NCP-3200RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system was used for dilution of the 1st dimension reverse phase eluent. The sample was injected for 10 min onto a NanoEase 5 μm XBridge BEH130 C18 300 μm × 5 cm column (Waters) at 3 μl/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), 2% acetonitrile (ACN).  Peptides were then eluted by sequential injection of 20 μl volumes of 20, 24, 28, 40 and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at a 3 ul/min flow rate.  Eluted peptides were then diluted at a tee with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 12 ul/min flow rate and bound to an Acclaim PepMap 100 μm × 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 μm trap column on a switching valve.  After loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 μm × 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were then separated at low pH in the 2nd dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 83 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nl/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific).  Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and data-dependent MS2 scans in the linear ion trap following HCD fragmentation in the instrument’s ion routing multipole.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were then identified using Protein Discoverer, version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific), using Sequest HT, a human Swiss-Prot database downloaded in April 2013 containing 20,221 protein entries, static modification of +57.021 for C residues, variable modifications of +15.995 and +42.011 for M and K residues, respectively, parent ion tolerance of +/- 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages).  Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery [1] and identifications were validated by Percolator software.  Only peptides with q-values < 0.01 were accepted, corresponding to a false discovery rate of below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Platelet, P300, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Oregon Health & Science University
Department of Biomedical Engineering, 3303 SW Bond Avenue, Center for Health and Healing CH13B, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA

### Submitter
Joseph Aslan

### Lab Head
Dr Owen J. T. McCarty
Department of Biomedical Engineering, 3303 SW Bond Avenue, Center for Health and Healing CH13B, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA


