### Accession
PXD003486

### Title
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry analysis revealed unknown structure of complement iC3

### Description
We applied quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS) to interrogate the structure of iC3 (or C3(H2O)), the activated hydrolytic product of the abundant human complement protein C3. The slow but spontaneous and ubiquitous formation of iC3 from C3 initiates antibody-independent activation of the complement system that is a key first line of antimicrobial defense. QCLMS revealed structural differences and similarities between iC3 and C3, as well as between iC3 and C3b that is a pivotal proteolytic cleavage product of C3 and is functionally similar to iC3. Considered in combination with the crystal structures of C3 and C3b, our data support a model wherein the thioester-containing domain of C3 swings to the other end of the molecule creating, in iC3, a stable C3b-like platform for binding the zymogen, factor B, or the regulator, factor H. The integration of available crystallographic and QCLMS data allowed the determination of a 3D model for iC3. The unique arrangement of domains in iC3, which retains the anaphylatoxin (ANA) domain (while ANA is excised when C3 is enzymatically activated to C3b), is consistent with observed differences in activation and regulation between iC3 and C3b.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein C3, C3b and iC3 were each cross-linked with either bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS3) (Thermo Scientific) or its deuterated analogue bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] 2,2,7,7-suberate-d4 (BS3-d4), giving rise to six different protein-cross-linker combinations: C3+BS3, C3+BS3-d4, iC3+BS3, iC3+BS3-d4, C3b+BS3 and C3b+BS3-d4. Cross-linked proteins were digested with Trypsin. Equimolar quantities of the tryptic products from cross-linked iC3 samples were mixed pair-wise with cross-linked C3 samples and C3b samples. This led to four combinations: C3+BS3 and iC3+BS3-d4; C3+BS3-d4 and iC3+BS3; C3b+BS3 and iC3+BS3-d4; and finally C3b+BS3-d4 and iC3+BS3. Each of the four samples was fractionated using SCX-StageTips into two fractions for LC-MS/MS. A “high-high” acquisition strategy was applied for the analysis. Peptides were separated on an analytical column that was packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a spray emitter (75-μm inner diameter, 8-μm opening, 250-mm length; New Objectives). The eluted peptides were directly introduced into a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, ThermoElectron, Germany). MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. For each acquisition cycle, the mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 100,000. The eight most intense ions with a precursor charge state 3+ or greater were fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced disassociation (CID). The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 with default parameters, except that “Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da” was set to 20. The peak lists were searched against C3 and a decoy C3 sequences using Xi software (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were as follows: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3/BS3-d4; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine. The linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini. Identified candidates for cross-linked peptides were validated manually in Xi, after applying an estimated FDR of 3% (based on decoy matches) for cross-linked peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The slow but spontaneous and ubiquitous formation of C3(H2O), the hydrolytic and conformationally rearranged product of C3, initiates antibody-independent activation of the complement system that is a key first line of antimicrobial defense. The structure of C3(H2O) has not been determined. Here we subjected C3(H2O) to quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS). This revealed details of the structural differences and similarities between C3(H2O) and C3, as well as between C3(H2O) and its pivotal proteolytic cleavage product, C3b, which shares functionally similarity with C3(H2O). Considered in combination with the crystal structures of C3 and C3b, the QCMLS data suggest that C3(H2O) generation is accompanied by the migration of the thioester-containing domain of C3 from one end of the molecule to the other. This creates a stable C3b-like platform able to bind the zymogen, factor B, or the regulator, factor H. Integration of available crystallographic and QCLMS data allowed the determination of a 3D model of the C3(H2O) domain architecture. The unique arrangement of domains thus observed in C3(H2O), which retains the anaphylatoxin domain (that is excised when C3 is enzymatically activated to C3b), can be used to rationalize observed differences between C3(H2O) and C3b in terms of complement activation and regulation.

### Keywords
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry; domain architecture; activation of complement system; alternative pathway

### Affiliations
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK 2. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
Technischen Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK 2. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany


