### Accession
PXD013705

### Title
Identification of a collagen marker in urine improves the detection of colorectal liver metastases

### Description
Previously, we reported that a combination of a collagen alpha-1(I) natural occurring peptide (NOP) AGPP(-OH)GEAGKP(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (AGP) and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) has the potential to detect colorectal liver metastases (CRLM). The combined method needs to be adapted to increase the sensitivity and specificity before it can be implemented in the clinic. This mass spectrometry study aimed to identify additional collagen NOPs in urine to further increase the sensitivity and specificity of our previously published method and search for the most discriminating NOP panel. The new assay was developed based on urine samples from 100 healthy controls and 100 patients suffering from CRLM. Two additional NOPs were identified: GPPGEAGK(-OH)P(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (GPP) originating from collagen alpha-1(I) and GNDGARGSDGQPGPP(-OH)GP(-OH)P(-OH)GTAGFP(-OH)GSP(-OH)GAK(-OH)GEVGP (GND) originating from collagen alpha-1(III). A molecular model combining NOPs (AGP, GPP, and GND) and CEA was generated. Molecules that did not contribute to the diagnostic power of the model were removed, resulting in a model only consisting of GND and CEA. In this model, 86% sensitivity and 84% specificity in the discovery set, and 92% sensitivity and 90% specificity in the validation set were reached. These percentages are significantly higher than the current model based on AGP and CEA (p=0.032). The performance of the new model is better than the currently used techniques in the clinic (e.g. CT-scan, ultrasound, serum CEA), which have a sensitivity between 57-70% and a specificity between 90-96%.

### Sample Protocol
NOPs for bottom-up and targeted mass spectrometry were isolated from urine in the same way as described by Lalmahomed et al. [8]. In short, the NOPs were separated from small molecules, salts, and proteins with a mRP C-18 Hi-Recovery Protein Column (4.6 × 50 mm) (Agilent, Amstelveen, the Netherlands) installed in a Ultimate 300 LC (Dionex, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) that was equipped with an online-fractionator. After separation, the NOP fraction was collected, dried, reconstituted, and analyzed with mass spectrometry. For the identification of NOPs we applied a standard bottom-up LC-MS/MS method as described by van Huizen et al.[9]. In short, an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germering, Germany) was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Injected samples were trapped and washed on a trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, 2 µm particles size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, The Netherlands). After washing, the trap column was switched in line with an analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, The Netherlands) for peptide separation prior to mass spectrometry analysis. A deviation from the protocol described by van Huizen et al. is that, prior to mass spectrometry analysis, neither the samples were analyzed on a test HPLC-system, nor the injection volume was normalized. For every sample, a volume of 2 µL was injected. [8] Lalmahomed ZS, Broker MEE, van Huizen NA, van den Braak R, Dekker LJM, Rizopoulos D, et al. Hydroxylated collagen peptide in urine as biomarker for detecting colorectal liver metastases. Am J Cancer Res. 2016;6:321-30. [9] van Huizen NA, Coebergh van den Braak R, Doukas M, Dekker LJ, IJzermans JNM, Luider TM. Up-regulation of collagen proteins in colorectal liver metastasis compared with normal liver tissue. J Biol Chem. 2018;294:281-9.

### Data Protocol
The developed PRM is conform Tier 3 (of 3 levels) of analytical assay validation [12] meaning that the assay is a targeted discovery assay. The PRM method was applied on the full discovery and the validation set. To determine the best model, containing NOPs and CEA, a logistic regression model (LRM) was made. The optimal-LRM was formed by backward elimination of predictors from the LRM that contained all molecular markers (AGP, GND, GPP, CEA). The optimal model was validated on the validation set. The statistical analysis was performed on the discovery set 2, and on the combined discovery set 1 and 2 (full discovery set). However, combining the discovery set 1 with discovery set 2 creates a dependent data set, because discovery set 1 was already measured with bottom-up proteomics, although with a higher statistical power. After measuring all samples, and optimizing the LRM, three samples were selected with low, medium, and high levels of the chosen predictors. These three samples were processed five times to get an estimate of the reproducibility, because SIL peptides were not available for all predictors. [12] Carr SA, Abbatiello SE, Ackermann BL, Borchers C, Domon B, Deutsch EW, et al. Targeted peptide measurements in biology and medicine: best practices for mass spectrometry-based assay development using a fit-for-purpose approach. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014;13:907-17.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we reported a combination of an urine collagen alpha-1(I) natural occurring peptide (NOP) AGPP(-OH)GEAGKP(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (AGP) and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) to have the potential to detect colorectal liver metastasis (CRLM). The combined method requires further adaption for better sensitivity and specificity prior to clinical implementation. This mass spectrometry study aimed to identify additional collagen NOPs in urine and determine the most discriminating NOP panel. We improved the combined method on the basis of analysis of urine samples from 100 healthy controls and 100 CRLM patients. Two additional NOPs were identified: <b>GPP</b>GEAGK(-OH)P(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (<b>GPP</b>), collagen alpha-1(I), and <b>GND</b>GARGSDGQPGPP(-OH)GP(-OH)P(-OH)GTAGFP(-OH)GSP(-OH)GAK(-OH)GEVGP (<b>GND</b>), collagen alpha-1(III). A molecular model combining NOPs (AGP, GPP, and GND) and CEA was generated. Molecules that did not contribute significantly were removed, resulting in a model consisting of GND and CEA. With this model, 88% sensitivity and 88% specificity were reached in the discovery set and 75% sensitivity and 100% specificity in the validation set (control, <i>n</i> = 12; CRLM, <i>n</i> = 10). The AUC of the ROC curve is significantly higher than the current model based on AGP and CEA (<i>p</i> = 3.3 &#xd7; 10<sup>-4</sup>). The new model performs better than the currently used techniques in the clinic that have a 57-70% sensitivity and a 90-96% specificity.

### Keywords
Urine, Natural occurring peptides, Colon cancer, Collagen, Colorectal cancer, Prm, Logistic regression model, Colorectal liver metastases, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Nick van Huizen

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands


