### Accession
PXD037671

### Title
Identification of interaction partners of novel polyacetylene

### Description
To elucidate molecular interaction partners of a novel plant-derived polyacetylene, we used a biotin-labelled polyacetylene in two cell lines (HEK293 and HepG2) and performed biotin-pulldown assays and proteomic analyses via LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin Pulldown – HEK293 80% confluent HEK293 cells were harvesting by scraping and pelleted by centrifugation (500 x g for 5 min at 4°C). The cell pellet was dissolved in 250 µl lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.3, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.01% NP40, 2 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4) and incubated for 15 min on ice. Samples were disrupted by sonication (3x for 2 s; 50% amplitude). Samples were left on ice for 15 min and afterwards centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The protein supernatant was collected and quantified by BCA (Pierce BCA protein assay, ThermoFisher Scientific). 2 µl of a 2 mM stock of biotin-alkene (negative control) was added to 80 µl Dynabeads™ M-280 Streptavidin (ThermoFisher, #11205D) in lysis buffer and incubated in an end-over-end rotator for 30 min at RT. The lysis buffer was removed from the beads and 500 µg of protein per condition was added to the beads and incubated for 4 h at 4°C on an end-over-end rotator. Meanwhile, new beads were prepared by including both, negative control and biotin-sample (2 µl of a 2 mM stock concentration per condition). When 4 h have passed, the samples were put on the magnetic holder and the supernatant collected in a new tube. The freshly prepared bead-compound mix was mixed with the protein supernatant and incubated another 4 h at 4°C on an end-over-end rotator. After this incubation time, the beads were washed 5 times with lysis buffer without protease inhibitor and without detergent. Dry beads were frozen in liquid nitrogen until further processed.  Biotin Pulldown – HepG2 3.5 million HepG2 cells per 10 cm culture dish were seeded and incubated until reaching 80% confluency. Cells were then treated with 10 µM biotin-sample or negative control (biotin-alkene) for 20 min. Cells were harvested by scraping and pelleted by centrifugation (500 x g for 5 min at 4°C). The supernatant was removed and the cell pellet flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further needed. Prior to the pull-down assay, the cell pellet was thawed on ice and dissolved in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.3, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.01% NP40, 2 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4) in a ratio of 4:1 (vol:wt). Afterwards, the samples were disrupted by one freeze and thaw cycle. To degrade nucleic acids, the samples incubated with 0.1% Benzonase (250 U/ul) (Sigma Aldrich #E1014-5KU) for 30 min on an end-over-end rotator at 4°C. After this incubation time, the tubes were centrifuged for 20 min at 16,100 x g at 4°C and the protein quantified by BCA (Pierce BCA protein assay, ThermoFisher Scientific). After determination of the protein concentration, 500 µg of protein per condition was taken and mixed with 40 µl of the Streptavidin beads in lysis buffer by gentle snipping. The samples were incubated on an end-over-end rotator for 4 h at 4°C to allow binding to the beads. Beads were washed 5 times with lysis buffer without protease inhibitor and detergent. Dry beads were frozen in liquid nitrogen until further processed.   On-bead Trypsin digest and preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis Proteins on beads were eluted and digested by adding 20 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) supplemented with 2 M urea, 5 mM DTT and 100 ng Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega, #V5111) and incubated for 15 min. Digested protein were reduced by adding more DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM, and alkylated with 3 mM iodoacetamide. The digestion was continued at 32 °C for 6 hours or overnight. pH was checked to ensure that they were within the pH range of 7-9 as it is critical for the optimal trypsinization. All incubation steps were carried out on thermoshaker with gentle shaking at 400 rpm.   The trypsinization was stopped by adding 5% trifluoroacetic acid in several steps until it reached 0.5% TFA, the pH was monitored to ensure it was around 2. Tryptic peptides were centrifuged at max speed before desalting with self-packed C18 Stage-Tips. Desalted tryptic peptides were vacuum dried and resolubilized in 20 μl 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, with the help of 10 min on thermoshaker and sonication each. Four microliters of digested peptides were injected for shotgun liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described below.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS) analysis  All MS experiments were done at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ). Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed phase chromatography using Acquity UPLC M-Class system (Waters Inc.) on HSS C18 T3 Col 100 A column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters Inc.). Peptides were separated on a multistep acetonitrile gradient (5-35% in 135 min, 40% in 5 min, and 80% in 1 min) with 0.1% formic acid at a nanoflow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were directly ionized by electrospray ionization Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView nanospray source (New Objective) in a data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were further analysed with MaxQuant software suite version 1.6 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich) supported by the Andromeda search engine. Data were searched against a UniProt Human proteime database encompassing 75,004 protein entries, downloaded from UniProt (Proteome ID: UP000005640, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640).  Peptides were searched with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. A maximum of two or four missed cleavages were allowed while requiring strict trypsin specificity, and only peptides with a minimum sequence length of six were considered for further data analysis. Data were search with concatenated target/decoy (forward and reversed) version of the libraries. Only proteins identified with at least 2 peptides were included for quantification. Proteins with ≥ 1.5-fold intensity over negative control were considered as the interaction partner.

### Publication Abstract
To ameliorate or even prevent signatures of aging in ultimately humans, we here report the identification of a previously undescribed polyacetylene contained in the root of carrots (Daucus carota), hereafter named isofalcarintriol, which we reveal as potent promoter of longevity in the nematode C. elegans. We assign the absolute configuration of the compound as (3&#x2009;S,8&#x2009;R,9&#x2009;R,E)-heptadeca-10-en-4,6-diyne-3,8,9-triol, and develop a modular asymmetric synthesis route for all E-isofalcarintriol stereoisomers. At the molecular level, isofalcarintriol affects cellular respiration in mammalian cells, C. elegans, and mice, and interacts with the &#x3b1;-subunit of the mitochondrial ATP synthase to promote mitochondrial biogenesis. Phenotypically, this also results in decreased mammalian cancer cell growth, as well as improved motility and stress resistance in C. elegans, paralleled by reduced protein accumulation in nematodal models of neurodegeneration. In addition, isofalcarintriol supplementation to both wild-type C57BL/6NRj mice on high-fat diet, and aged mice on chow diet results in improved glucose metabolism, increased exercise endurance, and attenuated parameters of frailty at an advanced age. Given these diverse effects on health parameters in both nematodes and mice, isofalcarintriol might become a promising mitohormesis-inducing&#xa0;compound to delay, ameliorate, or prevent aging-associated diseases in humans.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Human cell lines, Biotin-label compound

### Affiliations
Energy Metabolism Laboratory Institute of Translational Medicine Dept. of Health Sciences and Technology ETH Zurich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology) 16, Schorenstrasse, Building SLA C6 Schwerzenbach-Zurich, CH-8603 Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Michael Ristow

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael Ristow
Energy Metabolism Laboratory Institute of Translational Medicine Dept. of Health Sciences and Technology ETH Zurich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology) 16, Schorenstrasse, Building SLA C6 Schwerzenbach-Zurich, CH-8603 Switzerland


