### Accession
PXD012374

### Title
Analysis of the midbody interactome reveals new roles for PP1 phosphatases in late cytokinesis

### Description
The midbody is an organelle assembled at the intercellular bridge connecting the two daughter cells at the end of mitosis. It is essential for the final separation of the daughter cells and involved in other important processes, including cell fate, pluripotency, apical-basal polarity, and cilium/lumen formation. The midbody is composed of numerous proteins with diverse functions distributed in a precise pattern. Here we report the first characterization of the midbody protein-protein interaction network (interactome), which provides an extremely valuable resource for understanding its multiple roles. Analysis of this midbody interactome led to the discovery that PP1/MYPT1 phosphatase regulates microtubule dynamics in late cytokinesis through de-phosphorylation of the kinesin MKLP1/KIF23, a finding that unexpectedly expands the temporal window of activity of this phosphatase during mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
o analyze SILAC midbody samples, proteins were resuspended in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 100 mM tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine, 4%SDS [w/v], 8 M urea) and alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 40 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then mixed with NuPAGE LDS 4x Sample Buffer (Invitrogen), boiled for 5 min at 90°C and loaded on NuPAGE Novex 4–12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Invitrogen). Gels were then fixed for 30 min at RT in fixing solution (40% [v/v] methanol, 2% [v/v] acetic acid) and stained overnight with Brilliant Blue G-Colloidal Concentrate (Sigma-Aldrich), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each gel lane was then excised into ~10 bands. Gel bands were cut into smaller pieces, destained completely in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% (v/v) acetonitrile at 37°C, and dehydrated in pure acetonitrile for 15 min. Gel pieces were then rehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with Trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Roche) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces twice for 30 min at 37°C in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.5% (v/v) formic acid, dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), and resuspended in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid.  For LC-MS/MS analysis of SILAC samples, an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC nano ultra high pressure HPLC system (Dionex) was used. Peptides were loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 precolumn (5 µ- beads, 100 µm x 20mm,Dionex) and then separated on a PepMap analytical column (2 µm beads, 75 µm x 50 cm, Dionex) over a 60 min linear gradient (90 min/cycle) of 4–34% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid /3% DMSO at a flow rate of 0.3 l/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in the “top 10” data-dependent acquisition mode where the preview mode was disabled. The Orbitrap full scan was set at m/z 380–1600 with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The ion at m/z 401.92278 (DMSO) was set for lock mass.  The 10 most abundant multiply charged precursor ions, with a minimal signal above 2000 counts, were dynamically selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (MS/MS) in the LTQ Velos ion trap, and the dynamic exclusion was set ±20 ppm within 45 sec.  The AGC and maximum injection time for Orbitrap were set at 1e6 and 200 msec, and 1e4 and 150 msec for ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification in the SILAC experiments, the raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.8) and the Andromeda search engine (29-31). In all cases, peptides were searched against the UniProt human database concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences and supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. The following search parameters were used: full trypsin specificity was required, a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as a fixed modification, whereas acetyl (Protein N-term), oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn/Gln) and carbamylation (Lys and N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Maximum protein and peptide false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 1% and minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Quantification of proteins in the SILAC experiment was performed using MaxQuant (29). SILAC multiplicity were set to doublets where Lys0/Arg0 and Lys8/Arg10 were selected as light and heavy labels, respectively. Peptides considered for quantification were unique and razor peptides including unmodified, and modified with carbamidomethylated (Cys), acetylated (Protein N-term), oxidated (Met), carbamylated (Lys and N-term) and deamidated (Asn/Gln). The re-quantification feature was enabled. Statistical evaluation of MS results generated by MaxQuant was performed using Perseus (29).

### Publication Abstract
The midbody is an organelle assembled at the intercellular bridge between the two daughter cells at the end of mitosis. It controls the final separation of the daughter cells and has been involved in cell fate, polarity, tissue organization, and cilium and lumen formation. Here, we report the characterization of the intricate midbody protein-protein interaction network (interactome), which identifies many previously unknown interactions and provides an extremely valuable resource for dissecting the multiple roles of the midbody. Initial analysis of this interactome revealed that PP1&#x3b2;-MYPT1 phosphatase regulates microtubule dynamics in late cytokinesis and de-phosphorylates the kinesin component MKLP1/KIF23 of the centralspindlin complex. This de-phosphorylation antagonizes Aurora B kinase to modify the functions and interactions of centralspindlin in late cytokinesis. Our findings expand the repertoire of PP1 functions during mitosis and indicate that spatiotemporal changes in the distribution of kinases and counteracting phosphatases finely tune the activity of cytokinesis proteins.

### Keywords
Obritrap, Maxquant, Interactome, Midbody, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Cytokinesis

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute & The Institute of Cancer Research
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute & The Institute of Cancer Research


