### Accession
PXD030670

### Title
Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography contributes to integrated N-glycoproteomics analysis of human saliva for lung cancer

### Description
We aimed to in-depth characterize and quantify salivary N-glycoproteomics. HILIC enrichment and LC-MS/MS were combined to investigate salivary glycosylation both at deglycopeptides level and glycopepeptides level, and alterations in site-specific glycoforms for human saliva were detected between lung cancer patients and healthy subjects. Firstly, intact glycopeptides were enriched from human saliva through using HILIC. Obtained intact glycopeptides were characterized by LC-MS/MS directly. Furthermore, the glycosylation sites were fully identified by LC-MS/MS followed by incubating with PNGase F. The developed workflow was applied to compare N-glycosites and intact N-glycopeptides in lung cancer group and healthy control group. Dysregulated N-glycosites as well as site-specific glycoforms were confidently observed in lung cancer and their potential value in clinical applications will be discussed.

### Sample Protocol
1 Enrichment of salivary intact glycopeptides by ZIC-HILIC Salivary intact glycopeptides were enriched through using ZIC-HILIC material as described previously with slight modifications. Briefly, 1 mg digested peptides were re-dissolved in 80% ACN and 1% TFA and loaded onto an in-house packed micro-column containing 30 mg ZIC-HILIC material. The column was washed six times with 80% ACN and 1% TFA. Trapped glycopeptides were eluted by 0.1% TFA, dried and stored at -80 ℃ until further use. 2 De-glycosylation of salivary glycopeptides by PNGase F The captured salivary intact glycopeptides were dissolved in 50 μL H218O. 2 μL PNGase F was added and the samples were digested overnight at 37 °C. The resulting deglycopeptides were dried and stored at -80 ℃ for further process.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software by label-free quantification (LFQ) using raw data files of MS/MS spectra searched against the UniProtKB human database (release 2017_11_28, 20244 entries). The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. Maximum FDR, calculated by employing a reverse database strategy, was set at 1% for peptides and proteins. Label-free quantification was performed by Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ).  For identification of intact N-glycopeptides, the raw data were searched by Byonic  (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA, version 3.10.10 ) against the UniProt Homo sapiens database. 309 mammalian N-glycans were employed for data searching. The enzyme cleavage sites were set as RK with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of C and oxidation of M were set as fixed and common modifications, respectively. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm. The presence of oxonium ions, such as m/z 204.087 for HexNAc, 292.103 for NeuAc, 274.092 for NeuAcH2O, 366.139 for HexHexNAc, 512.190 for HexHexNAcFuc were used as check criteria. Results were filtered at 1% FDR and Byonic score > 100, and further validation was performed manually.   Quantitative analysis of intact N-glycopeptides was performed through using Byologic (Protein Metrics Inc.), which used both MS1 raw data and Byonic search results as input. The peak area of the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of glycopeptide precursor ions were used for label-free quantitative analysis of intact N-glycopeptides. Intact N-glycopeptides with at least twice quantification in three technical replicates were quantified. In addition, to investigate differentially expressed proteins, N-glycosites, and intact N-glycopeptides, the criteria of 1.5 fold change (FC) and a cutoff value of p <0.05 were applied. Besides, the proteins, N-glycosites, and intact N-glycopeptides, which were only observed in the lung cancer group and normal control group, were defined as “up-regulated” and “down-regulated” in lung cancer, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation is a cancer hallmark, which has great potential for cancer detection. However, large-scale and in-depth analysis of <i>N</i>-glycosylation remains challenging because of its high heterogeneity, complexity, and low abundance. Human saliva is an attractive diagnostic body fluid, while few efforts explored its <i>N</i>-glycoproteome for lung cancer. Here, we utilized a zwitterionic-hydrophilic interaction chromatography-based strategy to specifically enrich salivary glycopeptides. Through quantitative proteomics analysis, 1492 and 1234 intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides were confidently identified from pooled saliva samples of 10 subjects in the nonsmall-cell lung cancer group and 10 subjects in the normal control group. Accordingly, 575 and 404 <i>N</i>-glycosites were revealed for the lung cancer group and normal control group. In particular, 154 <i>N</i>-glycosites and 259 site-specific glycoforms were significantly dysregulated in the lung cancer group. Several <i>N</i>-glycosites located at the same glycoprotein and glycans attached to the same <i>N</i>-glycosites were observed with differential expressions, including haptoglobin, Mucin-5B, lactotransferrin, and &#x3b1;-1-acid glycoprotein 1. These <i>N</i>-glycoproteins were mainly related to inflammatory responses, infectious diseases, and cancers. Our study achieved comprehensive characterization of salivary <i>N</i>-glycoproteome, and dysregulated site-specific glycoforms hold promise for noninvasive detection of lung cancer.

### Keywords
Hilic, Intact n-glycopeptides, Lung cancer, N-glycosites, Saliva

### Affiliations
18272583259
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China

### Submitter
Huiyu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Hua Xiao
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China


