### Accession
PXD008953

### Title
Proteome and acetylome of Sulfurospirillum halorespirans during long-term downregulation of organohalide respiratory genes

### Description
Organohalide respiration is an environmentally relevant type of anaerobic respiration. We show that Sulfurospirillum halorespirans undergoes the same type of downregulation of the organohalide respiratory genes as had been overserved before in S. multivorans when cultivated without chlorinated ethenes for a long period of time. We compared the proteomes and acetylomes of S. halorespirans cells cultivated in the presence of PCE with those of cells long- and short-term cultivated with nitrate as sole electron acceptor.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation of S. multivorans S. halorespirans DSM 13726 (PCE-M2) was cultivated anaerobically at 28°C in a defined mineral medium in the absence of exogenous cobamide and yeast extract. Pyruvate (40 mM) was used as an electron donor and nitrate (40 mM) or PCE as an electron acceptor. PCE was added to the medium (10 mM nominal concentration) from a hexadecane stock solution (0.5 M). In order to generate S. halorespirans cells with down-regulated pceA gene expression, the organism was cultivated for 60 transfers (10% inoculum each) with nitrate as a sole electron acceptor. Each cultivation was performed in 100 ml glass serum bottles. For proteomic analyses, cells were cultivated in 1 L or 500 mL medium in rubber-stoppered 2 L or 1 L glass bottles, respectively. All cultivations were performed in triplicates. Peptide preparation from lysed cells S. halorespirans cells were harvested in the early (OD578 ≈0.11) and late (OD578 ≈0.20) exponential growth phases by centrifugation (12,000 x g, 10 min at 10°C). The cell pellets were washed once in PBS buffer (140 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 6.4 mM Na2PO4, and 2 mM KH2PO4). Protein extraction, digestion, and peptide purification were performed as described before [1]. Briefly, cells were dissolved in 8 M urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 8M urea, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 1 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate) and lysed by four cycles of freeze/ thaw/ ultrasonic bath treatment. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (15 min, 4 °C, 20,000 g), proteins were quantified by BCA-assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), reduced (4.5 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, 55 °C) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 15 min, room temperature, in the dark). Samples were diluted fourfold with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8, and 5.3 mg was digested overnight with 20 µg trypsin (Promega) and subsequently with 3.5 µg lysyl endopeptidase (Wako, Japan) for six hours. Digested peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted over SEP PAK Classic C18 columns (Waters, USA) and eluted using 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. 5% of the eluate was aliquoted for the proteome analysis; all samples were lyophilized and stored at  80°C.  Immunoaffinity enrichment of lysine-acetylated peptides Enrichment of acetylated peptides was conducted using the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, USA) as described in [1]. Peptides were dissolved in IAP buffer and incubated with the antibody beads for 2 h at 4 °C. The beads were washed with IAP buffer and water and the peptides were eluted in two steps with 0.15% TFA. Non-modified and acetylated peptides were desalted by using C18 Zip Tip columns (Millipore, Germany), dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and injected into a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). Mass spectrometry  Separation of tryptic peptides was performed using a 120 min non-linear gradient from 3.2% to 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm, C18, Thermo Scientiﬁc) in a UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Idstein, Germany). Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive HF MS (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. Mass spectrometer full scans were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer within the mass range of 400–1,600 m/z, at 60,000 resolution using an automatic gain control target of 3×106 and maximum fill time of 50 ms. An MS/MS isolation window for ions in the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z. MS/MS scans were acquired using the higher energy dissociation mode at a normalized collision-induced energy of 28%, within a scan range of 200–2,000 m/z and a resolution of 15,000. The exclusion time to reject masses from repetitive MS/MS fragmentation was set to 30 s. [1] A. Guo, H. Gu, J. Zhou, D. Mulhern, Y. Wang, K.A. Lee, V. Yang, M. Aguiar, J. Kornhauser, X. Jia, J. Ren, S.A. Beausoleil, J.C. Silva, V. Vemulapalli, M.T. Bedford, M.J. Comb, Immunoaffinity Enrichment and Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Protein Methylation, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 13(1) (2014) 372-387.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS spectra were processed in Proteome Discoverer (v1.4 and v2.1, Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against an S. halorespirans database containing 2,965 non-redundant protein-coding sequence entries (downloaded December 2016 from NCBI Genbank accession number CP017111.1) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Enzyme specificity was selected as trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerances. Oxidation (methionine) was selected as a dynamic and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as a static modiﬁcation. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 calculated by Percolator, high confidence and XCorr > 2.0, and acetylated peptides with XCorr > 2.1, q-value < 0.01 and PEP < 0.01 were considered as identiﬁed. Quantification of proteins was performed using the average of top 3 peptide MS1-areas. Protein quantification was considered successful for proteins quantified in > 50% of biological replicates, otherwise, they were classified as identified proteins. After log10 transformation, the protein values were median-normalized and scaled, so that the global minimum is zero.  MS1-areas of acetylated peptides which only differ in their modification status (oxidation, carbamidomethylation) were summed and counted as one acetylation site. Acetylation abundance ratios were obtained by subtracting the log-area of the most abundant acetylated peptide of a protein which was detected in at least two replicates from the logarithmized protein abundance values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Two-component regulatory system; acetylomics; proteomics; lc-ms/ms; bioremediation; dehalorespiration, Thermo qexactive; sulfurospirillum halorespirans; organohalide respiration; tetrachloroethene; nitrate; reductive dehalogenation

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstr. 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Dominique Türkowsky

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstr. 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


