### Accession
PXD043545

### Title
MULTIMODAL STIMULATION SCREENS REVEAL UNIQUE AND SHARED GENES LIMITING T-CELL FITNESS

### Description
T-cell dysfunction genes limit antitumor activity and may serve as therapeutic targets. It has not been systematically studied whether there are regulators that either uniquely or broadly contribute to T-cell fitness. We performed genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screens in primary CD8 T-cells to uncover genes negatively impacting on fitness upon three modes of stimulation: (1) intense stimulation, triggering activation-induced cell death (AICD); (2) acute stimulation, triggering T-cell expansion; (3) chronic stimulation, causing dysfunction. Besides established regulators, we uncovered genes controlling T-cell fitness either specifically or commonly upon differential stimulation. Dap5 ablation, ranking highly in all three screens, increased translation while enhancing tumor killing. Loss of Icam1-mediated homotypic T-cell clustering amplified T-cell expansion and effector functions after both acute and intense stimulation. Lastly, Ctbp1 inactivation induced functional T-cell persistence exclusively upon chronic stimulation. Our results functionally annotate fitness regulators based on their unique or shared contribution to traits limiting T-cell antitumor activity.

### Sample Protocol
For differential protein expression analysis of sgIcam1 or sgCtrl-expressing OT-I/Cas9 cells, cells were stimulated with CD3 antibody for 24h. Right after stimulation, cells were collected, washed twice with PBS and snap frozen. For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in boiling Guanidine (GuHCl) lysis buffer.210 Protein concentration was quantified and diluted to 2M GuHCl, and samples were digested twice (4h and overnight) with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C at an enzyme/substrate ratio 1:75. Digestion was quenched by the addition of TFA (final concentration 1%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). The eluates were vacuum dried and prior to mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were reconstituted again in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer equipped with an EASY-NLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house) and eluted at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile.  For single-run proteome analysis, a 3h gradient was employed containing a linear increase from 5% to 27% solvent B, followed by a 15-minute wash. For immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry, washed beads were resuspended in 1x S-Trap lysis buffer and heated at 950C for 7 min. in the presence of 20mM DTT. Supernantants were transferred to new 1.5mL tubes, after which proteins were alkylated with 40mM iodoacetamide (30 min. at RT in the dark). Finally, proteins were digested o/n with 2 µg trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) on S-Trap Micro spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ProtiFi, NY, USA). Peptides were eluted, vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS was performed using the same instrumentation and setup as described above, with the exception that a 90-min. gradient containing a 70-minute linear increase from 7% to 29% solvent B was applied for peptide separation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43)211 using standard settings. MS/MS data were searched against the Mus Musculus Swissprot database (17,027 entries, release 2020_02) complemented with a list of common contaminants. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm in the main search and 20 ppm for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation was used as variable modification. For Proteome data, LFQ intensities were log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.10.43).212 Differentially expressed proteins were determined using t test (minimal threshold: FDR: 5% and S0: 0.1). Immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using standard settings with ‘match between runs’ selected. MS/MS data were searched against the Mus Musculus Swissprot database (17,042 entries, release 2020_07) complemented with a list of common contaminants. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm in the main search and 20 ppm for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) (REF) after which protein abundance values were filtered for at least two valid values (out of 3) in at least one condition. Missing values were  replaced by imputation based a normal distribution, using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a t-test (thresholds: p<0.05 and 2Log LFQ abundance ratio < -1.0 ^ > 1.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T-cells, Dap5, Activation-induced cell death, Ctbp1, Dysfunction, Exhaustion, Icam1, Cancer immunotherapy, Crispr/cas9 screen, Effector function

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute
NKI Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr Onno B Bleijerveld
NKI Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


