### Accession
PXD017936

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analyses of MLKL -/- mouse heart in response to influenza virus infection

### Description
Influenza virus infection leads to global cardiac proteome remodeling during convalescence MTD project_description "Influenza virus infections lead to more than 500,000 hospitalizations in the U.S. every year. Patients with cardiovascular diseases have been shown to be at high risk of influenza mediated cardiac complications. Importantly, recent reports have provided clinical data supporting a direct link between laboratory-confirmed influenza virus infection and adverse cardiac events. However, the molecular mechanisms of how influenza virus infection induces detrimental cardiac changes, even after resolution of the pulmonary infection, is completely unknown. Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) is a pseudokinas that mediates necroptosis. We performed global quantitative proteomics as well as phosphoproteomics to understand its role in the heart in response to inflenza virus infection in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were lysed using bead beater, and around 50ug proteins were digested using self-packed suspension trap (STrap) filters and desalted using C18 based StageTip protocol. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using Ultimate 3000 nano LC coupled to Q Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Andromeda software suite (version 1.6) were used for label-free quantitation; Perseus (version 1.6) was employed for downstream bioinformatics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; phosphoproteomics; phosphorylation; heart; mlkl

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute 9605 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Norberto Gonzalez-Juarbe
J. Craig Venter Institute 9605 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, MD 20850


