### Accession
PXD008785

### Title
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial fractions by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Investigation into the role of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATP-dependent RNA helicase MSS116 in mitochondrial splicing.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were processed by trypsin digestion using the FASP protocol on 30kDa molecular weight cut-off concentrators. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a U3000 RSLC nanoflow chromatography system using a 50cm column coupled via an Easyspray source to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos tandem mass spectrometer which was operated in CID fragmentation mode.

### Data Protocol
The data was analysed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1) using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. The preselected standard search parameters were used unless stated otherwise. The database search was performed against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (v20160815, 6729 entries). LFQ settings were as follows, Minimum ratio count: 2; Fast LFQ: disabled; Match between runs: enabled; Match time window: 1.0 min; Alignment time window: 20min.

### Publication Abstract
Self-splicing introns are mobile elements that have invaded a number of highly conserved genes in prokaryotic and organellar genomes. Here, we show that deletion of these selfish elements from the <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> mitochondrial genome is stressful to the host. A strain without mitochondrial introns displays hallmarks of the retrograde response, with altered mitochondrial morphology, gene expression and metabolism impacting growth and lifespan. Deletion of the complete suite of mitochondrial introns is phenocopied by overexpression of the splicing factor Mss116. We show that, in both cases, abnormally efficient transcript maturation results in excess levels of mature <i>cob</i> and <i>cox1</i> host mRNA. Thus, inefficient splicing has become an integral part of normal mitochondrial gene expression. We propose that the persistence of <i>S. cerevisiae</i> self-splicing introns has been facilitated by an evolutionary lock-in event, where the host genome adapted to primordial invasion in a way that incidentally rendered subsequent intron loss deleterious.

### Keywords
Yeast mitochondrial fraction; mitochondria; mss116

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN  United Kingdom

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Warnecke
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN  United Kingdom


