### Accession
PXD011482

### Title
Deep undepleted human serum proteome profiling toward biomarker discovery for Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease, the most common cause of dementia in elderly persons. Accumulation of amyloid plaques in the brain is a characteristic of AD. The requirements for a biomarker include the ability to measure a pathologic process, predict outcome, distinguish disease or measure a pharmacological response to a drug treatment or therapeutic intervention. However, there are no reliable blood based biomarkers for AD. Serum-based protein measurement is a routine practice for biomarkers in human disease, but comprehensive profiling of serum proteome is often masked by the twenty most abundant proteins and impacted by large dynamic range. The commonly used depletion method can alleviate the challenge but introduce additional experimental variation. Here we present a deep analysis of un-depleted human serum proteome by combining 11-plex TMT labeling, exhaustive 2D liquid chromatography fractionation, and high resolution tandem mass spectrometry. This platform is capable of identifying 4,500 protein components, covering 6 orders of dynamic range, representing one of the deepest serum proteome datasets. Finally, a subset of proteins, show statistically significant difference between AD and control samples, which may serve as biomarker candidates.

### Sample Protocol
Human serum proteins were lysed, digested and labeled with 11 different TMT tags. We present an ultra-deep analysis of undepleted human serum proteome by combining the latest 11-plex tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling, exhaustive two dimensional liquid chromatography (LC/LC) fractionation coupled with high resolution tandem mass spectrometry. The pooled TMT labeled peptides were resolved by offline basic pH reverse phase LC, and acidic pH reverse phase LC coupled with MS/MS analysis. The setting of basic pH LC included a XBridge C18 column (3.5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm × 25 cm, Waters), buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0), buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0) [28], and a 3 h gradient of 15-15% buffer B. Each fraction was collected every minute, ending with a total of 180 fractions. In the acidic pH LC-MS/MS analysis, each previous fraction was analyzed on a column (75 µm x 25 cm, heated to 65º C to reduce backpressure) coupled with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resolved by a 3 h gradient (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile). MS settings included MS1 scans (60,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC and 50 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (410-1600 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 1 x 105 AGC, ~150 ms maximal ion time, HCD, 32% normalized collision energy, and ~15 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
The bioinformatics processing of identification was carried out with our recently developed JUMP search engine, which combines the advantage of pattern- and tag-dependent scoring to improve sensitivity and specificity. A composite target-decoy database was used to estimate false discovery rate (FDR). The protein database was generated by combining downloaded Swiss-prot, TrEMBL, and UCSC databases. Major parameters were precursor and product ion mass tolerance (±15 ppm), full trypticity, two maximal missed cleavage, static mass shift for TMT tags (+229.16293 on Lys and N-termini) and carbamidomethyl modification (+57.02146 on Cys), dynamic mass shift for oxidation (+15.99491 on Met), and three maximal modification sites. The resulting PSMs were filtered by mass accuracy, and then grouped by precursor ion charge state followed by the cutoffs of JUMP-based matching scores (Jscore and ΔJn) to reduce FDR below 1% for proteins. When the same peptide is derived from numerous homologous proteins, the peptide was matched to the protein with the top PSM number, according to the rule of parsimony. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Biomarker, Alzheimer’s disease, Tandem mass tag, Proteomics, Serum, Proteome, Mass spectrometry, Human blood

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


