### Accession
PXD004062

### Title
Changes in the membrane proteome of exosomes released from human macrophages after infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

### Description
One of the greatest obstacles to eliminating TB is the lack of predictive and diagnostic biomarkers. Exosomes are a promising alternative source of biomarkers for TB since they can carry mycobacterial antigens. We hypothesize that exosomes from Mtb-infected macrophages exhibit a characteristic selection of human protein that can be evaluated as TB biomarkers. We looked for the localization—exosomal membrane or lumen—of the differentially abundant proteins. Exosomes were obtained from THP-1-derived macrophages (Mtb infected and uninfected controls). The exosome population was validated by nanoparticle tracking analysis and western blot. The protein composition of exosomes was evaluated by tandem mass spectrometry. Differences in protein composition and abundances between exosomes from infected and control cells were evaluated by t-test the proteomics findings were confirmed by western blot. Using a biotinylation strategy we verified the protein localization. Forty-seven proteins were significantly more abundant in exosomes from Mtb-infected cells, 66% were predicted to be membrane associated. The biotinylation pattern confirmed the membrane-association of some of these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 human monocytes were cultured at 37°C at 5% CO2 in complete RPMI (cRPMI) media. 250,000 cells/ml were activated to macrophages (MΦ). THP-1 MΦ were infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) strain H37Rv at a 1:5 ratio (MΦ: Bacteria) during 4 h. After infection, the THP-1 MΦs fresh cRPMI was added. The cells were returned to culture conditions for 24 h for the production of exosomes. Identical flasks of uninfected MΦ were treated in the same way as control. Supernatants from infected and control THP-1 MΦ were collected after 24 h of infection and filtered through 0.2 µm membrane. The collected material was filtered using an Amicon centrifugal filter unit with a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) of 100 KDa. The concentrated material was resuspended in 15 ml of PBS and filtered again. The resultant concentrated material was mixed with ExoQuick-TC to precipitate exosomes following manufacturer recommendations. Exosomes were resuspended in PBS and the total protein concentration was measured by the microbicinchoninic acid assay, aliquoted at 50 µg per vial and stored at -20°C until further analysis. The concentration and size distribution of the exosomes were evaluated by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis. The presence of CD63, CD81, HSP70 and Rab5B as exosomal markers was evaluated by Western Blot (WB). Two hundred micrograms of intact exosomes were mixed with 10 mM Sulfo-NHS-LC-LC-Biotin at room temperature for 30 min to label proteins exposed on the exosome surface. Biotinylated exosomes were lysed with RIPA buffer for 1h and three freeze/thaw cycles. Lysed-Biotinylated exosomes were exposed to 10mM Sulfo-NHS-Biotin for labeling of remaining free amines, at room temperature for 30 min. For the protein digestion of biotinylated and unlabeled exosomes 50 µg of exosomes were resolved in a denaturalizing NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel for 5 min. Then, gels were stained with Coomassie Blue. The stained gels were cut into 1 mm3 pieces and destained using 60% acetonitrile (ACN). Unlabeled samples: the gel pieces were dried and digested with trypsin at a ratio of 50:1 (sample: trypsin). The tryptic peptides were extracted with 60% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The extracted peptides were resuspended in 3% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water and stored at -20°C in auto-sampler vials. Biotinylated samples: The endoproteinase AspN was used for protein digestion. After obtaining the dried and destained gel pieces as described above, protein samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiotreitol and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested with AspN using also the 50:1 ratio. Subsequent steps after enzymatic digestion were similarly performed as described for trypsin digestion. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS): Approximately 1 g of digested peptides for each sample was injected using an EASY nanoLC-II system. Peptides were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (EASY-Column, 100 m ID x 2cm ReproSil-Pur C18). Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (EASY-Column, 3m, 75m ID x 100mm ReproSil-Pur C18) using a 90 minute linear gradient from 5%-45% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min. Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer Orbitrap Velos. The instrument was operated in Orbitrap-LTQ mode where precursor measurements were acquired in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution) and MS/MS spectra (top 20) were acquired in the LTQ ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Mass spectra were collected over a m/z range of 400-2000 Da using a dynamic exclusion limit of 2 MS/MS spectra of a given peptide mass for 30 s (exclusion duration of 90 s). Compound lists of the resulting spectra were generated using Xcalibur 2.2 software with an S/N threshold of 1.5 and 1 scan/group.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by ProteoWizard (MSConvert version 3.0). Raw data files were converted to mzXML format and submitted to the Sorcerer2 integrated data analysis platform (version 5.0.1); subsequent MS/MS analysis was performed using SEQUEST (version v. 3.5). SEQUEST was set up to search the Uni-Prot Homo sapiens Reference Proteome (ID: UP000005640, 70076 entries) assuming the enzymatic digestion with trypsin (after Arg or Lys) or AspN (before Asp or Glu). SEQUEST was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 50 PPM. Oxidation of methionine (+15.99) and carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57.02) were specified in SEQUEST as variable modifications for the unlabeled experiment. Biotin (+226.08) and LC-LC Biotin (+452.24) in lysine and N-termini were also included as variable modification for the labeling experiment. Scaffold (version 4.3.2) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identification thresholds were set such that a peptide FDR of 5% was achieved based on hits to the reverse database. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 5.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Differences in protein abundances between exosomes from Mtb-infected MΦ and control cells were evaluated by t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis (TB) is the deadliest infectious disease worldwide. One obstacle hindering the elimination of TB is our lack of understanding of host-pathogen interactions. Exosomes, naturally loaded with microbial molecules, are circulating markers of TB. Changes in the host protein composition of exosomes from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)-infected cells have not been described, can contribute to our understanding of the disease process, and serve as a direct source of biomarkers or as capture targets to enrich for exosomes containing microbial molecules. Here, the protein composition of exosomes from Mtb-infected and uninfected THP-1-derived macrophages was evaluated by tandem-mass-spectrometry and differences in protein abundances were assessed. Our results show that infection with Mtb leads to significant changes in the protein composition of exosomes. Specifically, 41 proteins were significantly more abundant in exosomes from Mtb-infected cells; 63% of these were predicted to be membrane associated. Thus, we used a novel biotinylation strategy to verify protein localization, and confirmed the localization of some of these proteins in the exosomal membrane. Our findings reveal another important scenario where Mtb could be influencing changes in host cells that unveil new features of the host-pathogen interaction and may also be exploited as a source of biomarkers for TB.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis; exosomes; membrane proteins; macrophage

### Affiliations
Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office (http://ricro.colostate.edu/)  Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology (http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edu/DirectorySearch/Search/MemberProfile/CVMBS/3607) Colorado State University
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Gustavo Diaz

### Lab Head
Dr Karen Dobos
Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office (http://ricro.colostate.edu/)  Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology (http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edu/DirectorySearch/Search/MemberProfile/CVMBS/3607) Colorado State University


