### Accession
PXD020073

### Title
Heterogeneous adaptation of cysteine reactivity to a covalent oncometabolite

### Description
Metabolism and signaling intersect in the genetic cancer syndrome hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC), a disease in which mutation of the TCA cycle enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH) causes hyperaccumulation of fumarate. This electrophilic oncometabolite can alter gene activity at the level of transcription, via reversible inhibition of epigenetic dioxygenases, as well as posttranslationally, via covalent modification of cysteine residues. To better understand how metabolites function as covalent signals, here we report a chemoproteomic analysis of a kidney-derived HLRCC cell line. Building on previous studies, we applied a general reactivity probe to compile a dataset of cysteine residues sensitive to rescue of cellular FH activity. This revealed a broad upregulation of cysteine reactivity upon FH rescue, caused by an approximately equal proportion of transcriptional and posttranslational regulation in the rescue cell line. Gene ontology analysis highlights new targets and pathways potentially modulated by FH mutation. Comparison of the new dataset to literature studies highlights considerable heterogeneity in the adaptive response of cysteine-containing proteins in different models of HLRCC. Our analysis provides a resource for understanding the proteomic adaptation to fumarate accumulation, and a foundation for future efforts to exploit this knowledge for cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
For Cysteine Reactivity: UOK268/UOK268WT lysates were labeled with IA-alkyne, appended to UV-cleavable biotin-azide tags through copper catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloadditon (CuAAC), and enriched on streptavidin-agarose beads. Proteins were then denatured, reduced, and alkylated, followed by on-bead trypsin digestion and ReDiMe isotopic labeling of UOK268WT (light – HCHO) and UOK268 (heavy – D13CDO) peptide samples. Samples were combined and peptides released from beads by UV irradiation. LC/LC-MS/MS was performed using standard MudPIT protocols on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. For Protein Abundance: Proteins were precipitated from UOK262/UOK262WT lysates with TCA, then denatured, reduced, and alkylated before in-solution trypsin digestion and ReDiMe isotopic labeling: UOK268WT (light – HCHO), UOK268 (heavy – D13CDO).  Samples were combined and fractionated off-line into a 96-well plate on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC coupled to a Gilson FC203B fraction collector. These were concatenated and six-pooled fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS performed on a Thermo LTQ Oribtrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an easy-nanoLC system (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data was analyzed by the SEQUEST algorithm. For Cysteine Reactivity: Both static (+57.0215 m/z, iodoacetamide alkylation) and differential (+180.1375 m/z, iodacetamide alkyne labeling) modifications on cysteine residues were specified. Static modifications on lysine residues and the n-terminus of +28.0313 m/z (light) or +34.0632m/z  (heavy) were also applied. For Protein Abundance: Static modification of cysteine residues  of +57.0215 m/z (iodoacetamide alkylation) as well as lysine residues and the n-terminus of +28.0313 m/z (light) or +34.0632 m/z (heavy) were assumed. MS2 spectra matches were assembled into protein identifications and filtered using DTASelect2.0. Quantification of L/H ratios were calculated using the cimage quantification package described previously.

### Publication Abstract
An important context in which metabolism influences tumorigenesis is the genetic cancer syndrome hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC), a disease in which mutation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH) causes hyperaccumulation of fumarate. This electrophilic oncometabolite can alter gene activity at the level of transcription, via reversible inhibition of epigenetic dioxygenases, as well as posttranslationally, via covalent modification of cysteine residues. To better understand the potential for metabolites to influence posttranslational modifications important to tumorigenesis and cancer cell growth, here we report a chemoproteomic analysis of a kidney-derived HLRCC cell line. Using a general reactivity probe, we generated a data set of proteomic cysteine residues sensitive to the reduction in fumarate levels caused by genetic reintroduction of active FH into HLRCC cell lines. This revealed a broad up-regulation of cysteine reactivity upon FH rescue, which evidence suggests is caused by an approximately equal proportion of transcriptional and posttranslational modification-mediated regulation. Gene ontology analysis highlighted several new targets and pathways potentially modulated by FH mutation. Comparison of the new data set with prior studies highlights considerable heterogeneity in the adaptive response of cysteine-containing proteins in different models of HLRCC. This is consistent with emerging studies indicating the existence of cell- and tissue-specific cysteine-omes, further emphasizing the need for characterization of diverse models. Our analysis provides a resource for understanding the proteomic adaptation to fumarate accumulation and a foundation for future efforts to exploit this knowledge for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Cysteine reactivity, Hlrcc, Uok268, Kidney

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA
Boston College

### Submitter
Daniel Bak

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA


