### Accession
PXD004600

### Title
Rhizopus delemar LC-MS/MS high low oxygen

### Description
The R. delemar strain ATCC 20344 was cultured under nitrogen starvation conditions with varied oxygen availability to induce high (aerobic) and low (anaerobic) fumarate production.

### Sample Protocol
Culture conditions - R. delemar ATCC 20344 was grown in batch fermentations under nitrogen starved conditions. 10^6 spores/mL were inoculated in 1L flasks containing 500 mL of pre-culture medium and cultivations were carried out at 35°C and 250 rpm for 24 hours. The mycelium obtained was washed and transferred to medium containing 10% (w/v) D-glucose, 0.06% (w/v) KH2PO4, 0.05% (w/v) MgSO4.7H2O, 0.0018% (w/v) ZnSO4.7H2O, and 1% (w/v) CaCO3 (used as a neutralizing agent). Fermentations were performed at 35°C and 600 rpm in 2.5 L fermentors, with a working volume of 1.75 L. Antifoam 204 was added to each fermentor (85 μL). The fermentation medium was aerated with 1.0 L/L min, either with filtered air or N2 gas.   Preparation of cell free extracts for proteomic analysis - Mycelium samples (2-3 g, press-dried), were washed with an ice-cold 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.6, containing 150 mM NaCl, and resuspended in the same solution containing 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail for yeast and fungi (Sigma). Mycelium suspensions were immediately disrupted using a French press (8000 psi). Cell free extracts were centrifuged for 5 min at low speed (500 g), in order to remove unbroken cells and pellet debris. The remaining supernantants were further processed for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS - Membrane-bound proteins were solubilised by mixing volumes of each sample, containing 25 μg of protein, with equal volumes of a 2x solution of 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, containing 1 M 6-aminocaproic acid and 10 g L−1 of n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside. Cell free extract-detergent mixes were incubated in a thermoblock for 1 h at 20°C and vigorous stirring (1000 rpm). Later, samples were sonicated in a water bath for 15 min, and finally they were centrifuged at 22000 g, in a benchtop centrifuge, for 30 min. Obtained supernatants were concentrated using MMicrocon YM-10 columns. Samples from each biological replicate and culture condition were loaded into a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, which was run until the loaded samples entered the gel. The gel was stained according to the manufacturer’s instructions using Page Blue staining and rinsed with ultrapure water. Each sample-gel lane was cut into one slice (approx. 1 cm2), carefully sliced into smaller pieces of about 1 mm^3 and transferred into microcentrifuge tubes. Samples were destained and equilibrated through three washing steps using the following solutions: 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (incubated 5 min), ABC/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) (incubated 5 min) and neat acetonitrile (incubated 5 min). These washing steps were repeated two times. The gel samples were then swelled in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 56°C to reduce protein disulfide bonds. Subsequently, the DTT solutions were removed and samples were alkylated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in ABC, for 20 min, at room temperature, in the dark. The 2-chloroacetamide solutions were removed, and samples were again washed twice with: neat acetonitrile (incubated 5 min), ABC (incubated 5 min) and neat acetonitrile (incubated 5 min). Approximately 150 μL of digestion buffer, containing sequencing grade modified trypsin (12.5 ng/μL) in ABC, was added to each sample, making sure that all gel pieces were kept wet during digestion (adding, if necessary, additional ABC solution). Protein samples were digested overnight at 37°C. Peptide digestion products were extracted by adding 50 μL of 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by an incubation step in a thermoblock for 20 min, at room temperature and vigorous stirring (1400 rpm). Gel pieces were then subjected to 20 s sonication in a water bath, centrifuged and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The peptide extraction step was then repeated once by washing the gel pieces with buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) followed by the mentioned incubation and sonication steps. Supernatants from both extractions were pooled and samples were placed in a vacuum centrifuge for acetonitrile evaporation util 20-40 μL were left. Samples were acidified by addition of TFA (1:1, v/v) and peptide clean-up procedure, prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, was performed.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra obtained from the proteomics experiment were identified and quantified using the maxQuant software. The peptides were mapped against the in silico proteomes of R. delemar ATCC 20344 (obtained from an in-house transcriptomics experiment) and RA 99-880 (obtained from Genbank, Project ID: 13066) using the default settings of the maxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (variable modifications: oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term); enzyme used: trypsin/P; fixed modifications carbamidomethyl (cys)), except for the variables affecting the label free quantification. For this, the multiplicity was set to 1, and the parameters for label-free quantification as well as the iBAQ and peak property calculations were selected. Only proteins with 2 or more unique peptide hits were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhizopus delemar, Aerobic, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Dorett Odoni

### Lab Head
Dr Vitor A. P. Martins dos Santos
Wageningen University


