### Accession
PXD002573

### Title
Translational regulation via ribosome modification

### Description
This dataset compares the proteomes of WT P. fluorescens and a delta-hfq mutant strain. This forms part of our characterisation of a new mechanism for translational control in bacteria, based on the covalent modification of a ribosomal protein by the enzyme RimK. RimK modification induces specific effects on ribosomal stability and function, which in turn affects the abundance of the important translational regulator Hfq. RimK is itself controlled by binding to the small regulatory proteins RimA and RimB and the widespread signalling molecule cyclic-di-GMP.  Deletion of rimK compromises motility, virulence and plant colonisation/infection in several different Pseudomonas species. Changes in intracellular RimK activity enable Pseudomonas to translate environmental pressures into dynamic ribosomal changes, and in turn into adaptive phenotypic responses to the surroundings. This promotes motility and virulence during the initial stages of plant contact, and phenotypes including attachment, metabolite transport and stress control during long-term environmental adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
The soluble fraction of whole cell lysates was separated on an SDS gel, then the region of the gel between 25 and 58 kDa was excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spec raw data was processed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8, and the genereated peaklist used for a database search using an in-house Mascot Srver 2.4.1

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional control of protein abundance is a highly important, underexplored regulatory process by which organisms respond to their environments. Here we describe an important and previously unidentified regulatory pathway involving the ribosomal modification protein RimK, its regulator proteins RimA and RimB, and the widespread bacterial second messenger cyclic-di-GMP (cdG). Disruption of rimK affects motility and surface attachment in pathogenic and commensal Pseudomonas species, with rimK deletion significantly compromising rhizosphere colonisation by the commensal soil bacterium P. fluorescens, and plant infection by the pathogens P. syringae and P. aeruginosa. RimK functions as an ATP-dependent glutamyl ligase, adding glutamate residues to the C-terminus of ribosomal protein RpsF and inducing specific effects on both ribosome protein complement and function. Deletion of rimK in P. fluorescens leads to markedly reduced levels of multiple ribosomal proteins, and also of the key translational regulator Hfq. In turn, reduced Hfq levels induce specific downstream proteomic changes, with significant increases in multiple ABC transporters, stress response proteins and non-ribosomal peptide synthetases seen for both &#x394;rimK and &#x394;hfq mutants. The activity of RimK is itself controlled by interactions with RimA, RimB and cdG. We propose that control of RimK activity represents a novel regulatory mechanism that dynamically influences interactions between bacteria and their hosts; translating environmental pressures into dynamic ribosomal changes, and consequently to an adaptive remodeling of the bacterial proteome.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Pseudomonas, Translational control, Ribosomal modification

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
University of East Anglia/John Innes Centre

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jacob George Malone
University of East Anglia/John Innes Centre


