### Accession
PXD008094

### Title
A Selected Reaction Monitoring Approach for Validating Candidate Biomarkers

### Description
We here describe a Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM)-based approach for the discovery and validation of peptide biomarkers for cancer.   The first stage of this approach is the direct identification of candidate peptides through comparison of proteolytic peptides derived from the plasma of cancer patients or healthy individuals.   Several hundred candidate peptides were identified through this method, providing challenges for choosing and validating the small number of peptides that might prove diagnostically useful.  To accomplish this validation, we used two-dimensional chromatography coupled with Selected Reaction Monitoring of candidate peptides.   We applied this approach, called SAFE-SRM (for Sequential Analysis of Fractionated Eluates by Selected Reaction Monitoring) to plasma from cancer patients and discovered two peptides encoded by the PPIA (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A) gene whose abundance was increased in the plasma of ovarian cancer patients. At optimal thresholds, elevated levels of at least one of these two peptides was detected in 43 (68.3%) of 63 women with ovarian cancer but in none of 50 healthy controls.   In addition to providing a potentially new biomarker for ovarian cancer, this approach is generally applicable to the discovery of proteins and peptides characteristic of various disease states.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma samples were depleted to remove the top-abundance 14 proteins. Low-abundance proteins were subject to denaturation, reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion. C-18 based clean up is performed. Cleaned peptide digest is labeled with different iTRAQ tags and combined and further fractionated through a bRPLC HPLC protocol and 24 fractions of the protein digest samples were generated after pooling the fractions according to the principle of best separation according to each fraction's hydrophobicity in high pH. Each fraction was then subject to shotgun mass spectrometry analysis through an orbitrap MS platform. Potential biomarkers were identified through statistical analysis and regression modeling. Validating plasma samples were processed the same way until before labeling, unlabeled peptides were directly fractionated through bRPLC and 20 different SAFE-SRM groups were generated for each sample.  Each SAFE-SRM fraction group is subject to an SRM detection with a method optimized to its own target peptides. SAFE-SRM method for each group is different and dynamically adjusted to achieve the best sensitivity and robustness of the detection.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ labeling dependent proteomics data is processed through Proteome Discoverer 2.2. SAFE-SRM data is processed through Skyline 3.7.

### Publication Abstract
We here describe a selected reaction monitoring (SRM)-based approach for the discovery and validation of peptide biomarkers for cancer. The first stage of this approach is the direct identification of candidate peptides through comparison of proteolytic peptides derived from the plasma of cancer patients or healthy individuals. Several hundred candidate peptides were identified through this method, providing challenges for choosing and validating the small number of peptides that might prove diagnostically useful. To accomplish this validation, we used 2D chromatography coupled with SRM of candidate peptides. We applied this approach, called sequential analysis of fractionated eluates by SRM (SAFE-SRM), to plasma from cancer patients and discovered two peptides encoded by the peptidyl-prolyl <i>cis-trans</i> isomerase A (PPIA) gene whose abundance was increased in the plasma of ovarian cancer patients. At optimal thresholds, elevated levels of at least one of these two peptides was detected in 43 (68.3%) of 63 women with ovarian cancer but in none of 50 healthy controls. In addition to providing a potential biomarker for ovarian cancer, this approach is generally applicable to the discovery of peptides characteristic of various disease states.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Diagnostics, Targeted detecton, Clinical proteomics

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Ludwig Center and Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center

### Submitter
QING WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Wang
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


