### Accession
PXD011850

### Title
MDC1 interacts with TOPBP1 to maintain chromosomal stability during mitosis

### Description
MDC1 is a large, modular phospho-protein scaffold that mediates recruitment of signaling and repair complexes to sites of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). MDC1 is anchored to damaged chromatin through interaction of its C-terminal BRCT-repeat domain with phosphorylated H2AX (γH2AX), where it recruits downstream factors via direct phosphorylation-dependent protein-protein interactions. Here, using unbiased proteomic analyses we identify a highly conserved protein interaction surface near the MDC1 N-terminus for the DNA damage response protein TOPBP1. We show that TOPBP1 directly binds to two residues in MDC1 that are phosphorylated by CK2. Interestingly, we find that TOPBP1 recruitment to DSBs depends on direct interaction with MDC1 only during mitosis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that disrupting MDC1-TOPBP1 binding causes hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation in mitosis, as well as increased micronuclei and chromosomal instability. Thus, our results highlight an important and hitherto unnoticed function for MDC1 and TOPBP1 in maintaining genome stability during cell division.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated peptides (Biomatik) were bound to streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads M-280 (Life Technologies). HeLa nuclear extracts (Ipracell) were diluted 1:1 with 2X dilution buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaF, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.4% Igepal CA-630, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and cleared by centrifugation. Dynabead-conjugated peptides were incubated with clarified extracts with end-to-end mixing at 4 °C for 2 hr. Beads were washed with peptide pulldown buffer (50 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM NaF, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.2% Igepal CA-630, 10% glycerol, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), before elution in 2X SDS sample buffer for mass spectrometry or SDS-PAGE. Peptide sequences were as follows: Biotin-GGSGSRTTSSSVIVPESDEEGHSPV-NH2 (MDC1-S196) and Biotin-GGSGSRTTSSSVIVPE[pS]DEEGHSPV (MDC1-pS196).

### Data Protocol
Precipitated material in SDS sample buffer was subjected to two rounds of chloroform-methanol precipitation followed by in-solution trypsin digestion as described previously (Fischer and Kessler, 2015). Digested and desalted samples were resuspended in 20 μl H2O supplemented with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described previously (Wijnhoven et al., 2015). Raw Samples were analysed on an Orbitrp Fusion Lumos instrument, coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nUPLC with an Easyspray column (50cm). MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120000 in the Orbitrap and MS2 scan were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds. MS data was processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.6.2.3) (doi: 10.1038/nbt.1511)using Proteo Wizard, and mgf file and searched against the UniProt/Swissprot database (human, retrieved 18/07/2017 sequences) using the Mascot search engine. We used the FastLFQ algorithm for quantitation and the match between runs feature for identification transfer.

### Publication Abstract
In mitosis, cells inactivate DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair pathways to preserve genome stability. However, some early signaling events still occur, such as recruitment of the scaffold protein MDC1 to phosphorylated histone H2AX at DSBs. Yet, it remains unclear whether these events are important for maintaining genome stability during mitosis. Here, we identify a highly conserved protein-interaction surface in MDC1 that is phosphorylated by CK2 and recognized by the DNA-damage response mediator protein TOPBP1. Disruption of MDC1-TOPBP1 binding causes a specific loss of TOPBP1 recruitment to DSBs in mitotic but not interphase cells, accompanied by mitotic radiosensitivity, increased micronuclei, and chromosomal instability. Mechanistically, we find that TOPBP1 forms filamentous structures capable of bridging MDC1 foci in mitosis, indicating that MDC1-TOPBP1 complexes tether DSBs until repair is reactivated in the following G1 phase. Thus, we reveal an important, hitherto-unnoticed cooperation between MDC1 and TOPBP1 in maintaining genome stability during cell division.

### Keywords
Mdc1 topbp1 mitosis

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford


