### Accession
PXD029547

### Title
Neutrophil and monocyte dysfunctional effector response towards bacterial challenge in critically ill COVID-19 patients

### Description
In this study, we aim to evaluate the relation between COVID-19 and bacterial secondary superinfections. We assessed the functional responses of neutrophils and monocytes isolated from acute and recovery COVID-19 patients upon bacterial infection using Flow-cytometry and proteomics based assays. Both neutrophils and monocytes showed impared intracellular microbicidal capacity along with a decreased functional response. Determination of plasma cytokines levels showed a significant association of certain cytokines towards secondary bacterial infection.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was obtained from peripherial blood drawn in EDTA tubes, and separated using a sucrose grandient and centrifugation. Silica beads (Strataclean agilent) were used for protein enrichment from plasma by overnight incubation at 4°C(twice) and vacuum dried for processing and storage. In brief, dried beads were processed as perstandard protocols, beads were washed, reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with trypsin. On-beads digestion with trypsin was performed for each sample of beads, followed by washing and resuspension in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  The samples were analyzed on an EVOsep One coupled to TIMS TOF Pro.  Summarized protocol (Performed at the Functional Genomic Center Zurich)  On-beads digestion Samples were prepared as follow: Reduction and alkylation  + 45 μl of 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate(TEAB) buffer, pH 8;  + 0.9 μl of 100 mM TCEP;  + 1.4 μl of 500 mM CIAA; Incubate samples for 60min in the dark at room temperature. Tryptic digestion and peptide extraction  + 5 μl trypsin (100 ng/μl in 2.5 mM HCl, 50mM TEAB); pH 8 Microwave assisted digestion (60° C, 30 min). Supernatants were collected and the peptides were extracted from beads with:  150 μl of 0.1% TFA (for agarose beads). The supernatants were combined and dried.  Data acquisition LC-MS/MS analysis The digested samples were:  Dried and dissolved in 20 μl ddH2O + 0.1% formic acid;  Samples were 1:100 diluted in ddH2O + 0.1% formic acid;  10 μl per sample was loaded on an Evotip following the manufacturer instructions. https://www.evosep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Sample-loading-protocol.pdf for Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS); Samples were analyzed on an Evosep LC coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) with ddaPASEF acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the protein quantification was performed using lable-free quantification with FragPipe, MSFragger and Philosopher software. The resulting spectra was analyzed against UNIPROT data base for human (UP000005640) merged with SARSCOVID (UP000464024). As parameters, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages by Trypsin were defined. Carbamidomethylation ofcysteine was set as fixed modification.  For the data analysis and statistics the R package prolfqua was used. Protein intensity estimates were used as reported in the combined_protein.tsv file. Only those hits with a minimum of 2 identified peptides were reported as proteins. The data is showing a log2 transformation of the protein intensities, using the robnormalization. A linear model was fitted to all proteins using lm function from R. Then the contrast within the evaluated conditions (wave vs patient condition) was performed. Finally the empirical Bayes variance method was used with the R package limma and the Benjamin-Hochberg model was used to infer the false discovery rate. Data analysis perforemd at the Functional Genomic Center Zurich (FGCZ)

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 displays diverse disease severities and symptoms including acute systemic inflammation and hypercytokinemia, with subsequent dysregulation of immune cells. Bacterial superinfections in COVID-19 can further complicate the disease course and are associated with increased mortality. However, there is limited understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and hypercytokinemia impede the innate immune function against bacterial superinfections. We assessed the influence of COVID-19 plasma hypercytokinemia on the functional responses of myeloid immune cells upon bacterial challenges from acute-phase COVID-19 patients and their corresponding recovery-phase. We show that a severe hypercytokinemia status in COVID-19 patients correlates with the development of bacterial superinfections. Neutrophils and monocytes derived from COVID-19 patients in their acute-phase showed an impaired intracellular microbicidal capacity upon bacterial challenges. The impaired microbicidal capacity was reflected by abrogated MPO and reduced NETs production in neutrophils along with reduced ROS production in both neutrophils and monocytes. Moreover, we observed a distinct pattern of cell surface receptor expression on both neutrophils and monocytes, in line with suppressed autocrine and paracrine cytokine signaling. This phenotype was characterized by a high expression of CD66b, CXCR4 and low expression of CXCR1, CXCR2 and CD15 in neutrophils and low expression of HLA-DR, CD86 and high expression of CD163 and CD11b in monocytes. Furthermore, the impaired antibacterial effector function was mediated by synergistic effect of the cytokines TNF-&#x3b1;, IFN-&#x3b3; and IL-4. COVID-19 patients receiving dexamethasone showed a significant reduction of overall inflammatory markers in the plasma as well as exhibited an enhanced immune response towards bacterial challenge ex vivo. Finally, broad anti-inflammatory treatment was associated with a reduction in CRP, IL-6 levels as well as length of ICU stay and ventilation-days in critically ill COVID-19 patients. Our data provides insights into the transient functional dysregulation of myeloid immune cells against subsequent bacterial infections in COVID-19 patients and describe a beneficial role for the use of dexamethasone in these patients.

### Keywords
Hypercytokinemia, Reactive oxygen species, Monocytes, Bacterial superinfections, Covid-19, Neutrophils, Effector response, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University Hospital Zurich, Department of Infectious diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Switzerland
University Hospital of Zürich

### Submitter
Alejandro Gomez Mejia

### Lab Head
Dr Annelies S. Zinkernagel
University Hospital Zurich, Department of Infectious diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Switzerland


