### Accession
PXD013040

### Title
Model data for the evaluation of dependent-peptide visualisation tools

### Description
Dependent peptide searching is a method for detecting modified peptides using data from shotgun proteomics analyses. We have developed a set of tools for visualising the results of dependent-peptide searches (as performed in MaxQuant). The tools were developed using four sets of search results: two sets for a sample of N-ethylmaleimide-treated bovine serum albumin (BSA), and two sets for a corresponding control sample (replicates = different LC-MS/MS analyses). This submission includes our raw data, MaxQuant output files, and a *.fasta file containing the sequence of mature BSA. An accompanying *.csv file summarises the structure of the data set.

### Sample Protocol
BSA (ThermoFisher Scientific) was exposed to 1 mM N-ethylmaleimide in buffered solution (0.1 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.4) at ambient temperature. After 160 min, 1,4-dithiothreitol was added to scavenge unreacted N-ethylmaleimide. The modified protein was purified (buffer exchange), reduced with further 1,4-dithiothreitol, carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide, and purified again (acetone precipitation). The protein was then digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were diluted into a mixture of water, acetonitrile and formic acid. A control sample was prepared in the same way, but without the exposure or scavenging steps. Each sample was analysed twice using nano reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nanoACQUITY liquid chromatograph, Waters) with on-line ‘top-speed’ DDA tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Each *.raw file was searched against the sequences of mature BSA and 244 potential contaminants using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1). The source of the BSA sequence (4f5s_A.fasta) was Protein Data Bank entry 4F5S (Bujacz A, Acta Crystallogr. D, 68, 2012, 1278-1289). The search parameters included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, trypsin/P as the enzyme, a maximum of two missed cleavages, and a maximum of five modifications per peptide. The ‘dependent peptides’ function was enabled, thereby appending a dependent-peptide search to the database search. The combined results of both searches were obtained as a *.txt file (allPeptides.txt, one per *.raw file). A uniquely-named copy of each allPeptides.txt file (e.g., treated_replicate1_allPeptides.txt) was made using the ‘file.copy’ function in R (version 3.4.0).

### Publication Abstract
Dependent peptide searching is a method for discovering covalently-modified peptides-and therefore proteins-in mass-spectrometry-based proteomics experiments. Being more permissive than standard search methods, it has the potential to discover novel modifications (e.g., post-translational modifications occurring in vivo, or modifications introduced in vitro). However, few studies have explored dependent peptide search results in an untargeted way. In the present study, we sought to evaluate dependent peptide searching as a means of characterising proteins that have been modified in vitro. We generated a model data set by analysing N-ethylmaleimide-treated bovine serum albumin, and performed dependent peptide searches using the popular MaxQuant software. To facilitate interpretation of the search results (hundreds of dependent peptides), we developed a series of visualisation tools (R scripts). We used the tools to assess the diversity of putative modifications in the albumin, and to pinpoint hypothesised modifications. We went on to explore the tools' generality via analyses of public data from studies of rat and human proteomes. Of 19 expected sites of modification (one in rat cofilin-1 and 18 across six different human plasma proteins), eight were found and correctly localised. Apparently, some sites went undetected because chemical enrichment had depleted necessary analytes (potential 'base' peptides). Our results demonstrate (i) the ability of the tools to provide accurate and informative visualisations, and (ii) the usefulness of dependent peptide searching for characterising in vitro protein modifications. Our model data are available via PRIDE/ProteomeXchange (accession number PXD013040).

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Bos taurus, Ptms, Dependent peptides

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University
King's College London

### Submitter
George Preston

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia S. Maier
Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University


