### Accession
PXD032769

### Title
The long noncoding RNA ADIPINT regulates human adipocyte metabolism via pyruvate carboxylase

### Description
The pleiotropic function of long noncoding RNAs is well recognized, but their direct role in governing metabolic homeostasis is less understood. Here, we describe a human adipocyte-specific lncRNA, ADIPINT, that regulates pyruvate carboxylase , a pivotal enzyme in energy metabolism. With a novel approach, Targeted RNA-protein identification using Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation, and validation with electron microscopy, we show that ADIPINT binds to PC. ADIPINT knockdown alters the interactome and decreases the abundance and enzymatic activty of PC in the mitochondria. Reduced ADIPINT or PC expression lowers adipocyte lipid synthesis, breakdown, and lipid content. In human white adipose tissue, ADIPINT expression is increased in obesity and linked to fat cell size, adipose insulin resistance, and PC activity. Thus, we identify ADIPINT as a regulator of lipid metabolism in human white adipocytes, which at least in part is mediated through its interaction with PC.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were solubilized with 100 µL of 8 M urea and sonicated in a water bath for 10 min followed by further sonication using a VibraCell probe (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 40 s, with pulse 5/2, at 20% amplitude. Proteins were precipitated with 400 µL chilled acetone and incubated at -20°C overnight. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (ThermoFisher) after centrifugation  (16,000 x g) at 4°C for 20 minutes and solubilizing proteins with 10 µL of 8 M urea and adding 10 µL ddH2O. 10 µg of protein in 253 µL of 133 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), pH 8 were sonicated in a water bath for 5 minutes and subjected to tryptic digestion following protein reduction in 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 37°C for 60 minutes and alkylation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 60 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:20 (5 µL of 0.1 µg/µL) and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid at a final concentration of 5%. The samples then were cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate with 40 µL bed volume (Thermo Scientific) and dried using a speedvac (MiVac, ThermoFisher).  Samples were dissolved in 70 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium-bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8, and 40 µg of TMT-11 plex reagents (ThermoFisher) in 30 µL of dry acetonitrile were added. Samples were scrambled and then incubated at RT, 100 x g for 2 hours. The reaction was stopped by adding hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.5% and incubated at RT with 100 x g for 15 minutes. Individual samples were combined to one analytical sample and dried in a speedvac, followed by cleaning on a C18 StageTip and re-dried in a speedvac. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a 50 cm long C18 reversed phase EASY-spray column connected to an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher). The gradient was run for 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minutes and was as follows: 2-26% of buffer B (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 110 minutes, up to 35% of buffer B for 10 minutes and up to 95% of buffer B for 2 minutes. Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) in 375 m/z to 1600 m/z at resolution of R=120,000 (200 m/z) for full mass, targeting 4x105 ions, followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentations from precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+ in 3 s cycle time. The tandem mass spectra were acquired with a resolution of R=60,000, targeting 5x104 ions, setting quadrupole isolation width to 1.6 m/z and normalized collision energy to 30%.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were imported to Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (ThermoFisher) and analyzed using the SwissProt protein database with Mascot v 2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd) search engine. Parameters were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin, peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, 0.02 Da for the HCD fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine was defined as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The pleiotropic function of long noncoding RNAs is well recognized, but their direct role in governing metabolic homeostasis is less understood. Here, we describe a human adipocyte-specific lncRNA, ADIPINT, that regulates pyruvate carboxylase, a pivotal enzyme in energy metabolism. We developed an approach, Targeted RNA-protein identification using Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation, which identifies that ADIPINT binds to pyruvate carboxylase and validated the interaction with electron microscopy. ADIPINT knockdown alters the interactome and decreases the abundance and enzymatic activity of pyruvate carboxylase in the mitochondria. Reduced ADIPINT or pyruvate carboxylase expression lowers adipocyte lipid synthesis, breakdown, and lipid content. In human white adipose tissue, ADIPINT expression is increased in obesity and linked to fat cell size, adipose insulin resistance, and pyruvate carboxylase activity. Thus, we identify ADIPINT as a regulator of lipid metabolism in human white adipocytes, which at least in part is mediated through its interaction with pyruvate carboxylase.

### Keywords
Human adipocyte troops rna-interaction pyruvate carboxylase metabolism

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Alastair Kerr

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Gao
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet


