### Accession
PXD022320

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of four subtypes of M2 macrophages

### Description
In this study, we used mass spectrometry and label-free quantification (LFQ) to characterize the global proteomics of polarized (M1, M2a, M2b, M2c, and M2d) and unpolarized (M0) phenotypes of macrophages from human THP-1 monocytes. The results described the biological functions of the four M2 macrophages subtypes and provided available references for identifying M2 macrophages or subtypes of M2 macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 macrophages were then polarized into M1 by IFN-γ and LPS, into M2a by IL4, into M2b by LPS and immune complexes, into M2c by IL-10, into M2d by NECA and LPS, and the nonpolarized THP-1 macrophages were considered as M0. Proteins were extracted and digested with sequencing grade trypsin. Each sample underwent triplicate LC-MS/MS runs on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer equipped with an Easy-nLCTM  1200 system.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the label-free quantification in Proteome Discover. The human protein database (20568 proteins) was downloaded from the UniProt. The gene ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway, protein-protein interaction (PPI) and disease correlation analysis were performed for differentially expressed proteins. The PRM data were analyzed using Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are widely distributed immune cells that contribute to tissue homeostasis. Human THP-1 cells have been widely used in various macrophage-associated studies, especially those involving pro-inflammatory M1 and anti-inflammatory M2 phenotypes. However, the molecular characterization of four M2 subtypes (M2a, M2b, M2c, and M2d) derived from THP-1 has not been fully investigated. In this study, we systematically analyzed the protein expression profiles of human THP-1-derived macrophages (M0, M1, M2a, M2b, M2c, and M2d) using quantitative proteomics approaches. The commonly and specially regulated proteins of the four M2 subtypes and their potential biological functions were further investigated. The results showed that M2a and M2b, and M2c and M2d have very similar protein expression profiles. These data could serve as an important resource for studies of macrophages using THP-1 cells, and provide a reference to distinguish different M2 subtypes in macrophage-associated diseases for subsequent clinical research.

### Keywords
Polarization, M2 macrophage, Biomarker, Lc-ms/ms, Prm

### Affiliations
Northwest University

### Submitter
Chen Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest University


