### Accession
PXD028700

### Title
Individualized proteogenomics reveals mutational landscape of melanoma patients in response to immunotherapy

### Description
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are used to restore or augment antitumor immune response and show great promise in treatment of melanoma and other types of cancers. However, only a relatively small percentage of patients are fully responsive to immune checkpoint inhibition, mostly due to tumor heterogeneity and primary resistance to therapy. Both of these features are largely driven by accumulation of patient-specific mutations, pointing to the need for personalized approaches in diagnostics and immunotherapy. Proteogenomics integrates patient-specific genomic and proteomic data to study cancer development and resistance mechanisms, as well as tumor heterogeneity in individual patients. Here, we use a proteogenomic approach to characterize the mutational landscape of samples derived from four clinical melanoma patients at the genomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic level. Integration of datasets enabled identification and quantification of an extensive number of sample-specific amino acid variants, among them many were not previously reported in melanoma. We detected a disproportional number of alternate peptides between treated and untreated (naïve) samples with a high potential to influence signal transduction. This is one of the first proteogenomic study designed to study the mutational landscape of patient-derived melanoma tissue samples in response to immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of patient-derived xenografts To generate patient derived xenografts (PDX), tumor tissue was finely minced using the cross-blade technique, digested in nevi solution (HBBS (w/o Ca2+ and Mg2+) with 0.05% collagenase, 0.1% hyaluronidase and 0.15% dispase) and filtered through a 100 µm cell strainer. The melanoma cell suspension was implanted with Matrigel (Corning Life Sciences) subcutaneously in NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl / SzJ) mice, leading to patient derived xenografts. Tumor grafts were harvested when they reached a diameter of 10 to 15 mm, digested as above, resuspended in Biofreeze medium and 1 ml per cryotube of the cell suspension was frozen for short-term cryoconservation in −80 °C and for long-term storage in liquid nitrogen. Isolation and cultivation of melanocytes  Primary human melanocytes were isolated out of foreskin according to the protocol of CELLnTEC. After isolation, cells were cultured in CnT-40 medium containing antibiotics/antimycotics. Protein extraction from patient-derived xenografts Cell lysis of snap-frozen PDX was performed with lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor (complete Mini EDTA-free tablets) and phosphatase inhibitor buffers (5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate). Glass beads (zirconia/glass beads 0.23 mm) were added and cell lysis was performed in a BeadBug microtube homogenizer (3 cycles, 1 min at full speed). Cell extracts were centrifuged at 13,000rpm for 20 min and proteins were purified by acetone precipitation. Briefly, cell lysates were mixed with 8 volumes of ice-cold acetone and one volume of methanol and incubated overnight at -21°C. After centrifugation (2,800 xg, 20 min, 10°C), protein pellets were washed with 80% acetone and dissolved in lysis buffer. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Protein extraction from melanocytes Cells were washed twice with PBS and cell lysis was performed with lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor (complete Mini EDTA-free tablets), phosphatase inhibitor buffers (5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and 1% N-Ocetylglucoside (NOG) on ice for 10 min. DNA and RNA was removed with benzonase for 10 min at RT followed by centrifugation at 2,800 xg (10°C, 20 min). Proteins were purified by acetone precipitation and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Protein extraction from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue preparation  FFPE tissue were first de-paraffinized by two washes in xylene (5 min, 50°C) followed by three serial washes in ethanol (100%, 95% to 70%) for 10 min each. Ethanol was removed completely and sections air-dried. Lysis was carried out in 4% (v/v) SDS, 50 mM DTT, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5 supplemented with protease inhibitor at 95°C for 60 min and by sonication for 15 min. Proteins were purified by acetone precipitation and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Sample preparation for MS analysis  Purified protein pellets of different samples types were dissolved in lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), reduced using 100 mM DTT, and alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide followed by pre-digestion using endopeptidase Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase) for 3h. After diluting the sample to 2 M Urea with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, proteins were digested into peptides using sequencing grade trypsin (1 µg per 100 mg protein) overnight. Peptides were then acidified with 1% TFA and then either purified on C18 stage tips (as described previously) or purified on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge and eluted in 80% ACN for high pH reverse phase chromatography.  High pH reverse phase chromatography of PDX and melanocyte samples High pH reverse phase chromatography was conducted using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC equipped with xBridge BEH130 C18 130A, 3.5 µm, 4.6 x 250 mm column. Peptides were eluted with an 80 min gradient generated from solvent A (5 mM NH4OH) and solvent B (5 mM NH4OH, 90% ACN) at pH 10. Fractions were collected in the first 60 min of the gradient and concatenated into 30 pools followed by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide pools were resuspended in 500 µl 80% ACN, 10 µg of the pool were concentrated and desalted on StageTips prior LC-MS/MS measurements for proteome analysis. Phosphopeptide enrichment  Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads (Titansphere, 10 µm) as described previously 41. 1 mg of beads (in 80% ACN, 1% TFA) were added to acidified high pH fractions and incubated for 30 min in a rotation wheel. Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were sequentially washed with 30% ACN, 1% TFA, followed by 50% ACN, 1%TFA and 80% ACN, 1% TFA Peptides were eluted with 5% NH4OH into 20% TFA followed by 80% ACN in 1% FA. The eluate was reduced by vacuum centrifugation, pH was adjusted to < 2.7 with TFA and peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography- mass spectrometry  LC-MS/MS runs were performed on EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q Exactive HF and HFX Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated on 20‐cm analytical HPLC‐columns (75 μm ID PicoTip fused silica emitter (New Objective); in‐house packed using ReproSil‐Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm silica beads (Dr Maisch GmbH)) using a water-acetonitrile gradient of 60 min and 90 min for proteomic samples and phosphoproteomic sample fractions, respectively. The FFPE samples were measured twice with 60 min and 130 min gradient. Gradients were generated by solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% acetic acid) with a flow rate of 200 nl/min at 40°C. Peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray ionization at 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 275°C. For high pH proteomic fractions and FFPE samples each full spectrum, acquired with 60,000 resolution (automated control target of 3e6; fill time 25 ms for Q Exactive HF and 20 ms for Q Exactive HFX), was followed by 12 tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra, where the 12 most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an automated control target of 1e5, an injection time of 45 ms, and collision energy of 27% for Q Exactive HF and 28% for Q Exactive HFX. Phosphopeptide enriched samples, full MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 (AGC target 3e6, fill time 25 ms). The seven most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 45,000 on Q Exactive HFX and 60,000 on Q Exactive HF, an AGC target of 1e5 and a fill time of 220 ms.  Mass spectrometry data analysis  The LC-MS/MS data were searched against PCTi H. sapiens reference (100,906 entries) and individualized alternate databases (101 = 43,086 entries; 110 = 44,789 entries; 111 = 28,333 entries; 129 = 39,811 entries), as well as UniProt H. sapiens (release 2019/12/11; 96,788 entries) and M. musculus (release 2019/12/11; 63,660 entries) databases and commonly observed contaminants using the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) 57. The PDX samples were also searched against UniProt M. musculus (release 2019/02/13; 95,943 entries) database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine or tyrosine were defined as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as a protease. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. The MS tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 20 ppm for the analysis using HCD fragmentation method. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 1%. The PDX and FFPE samples were quantified using intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ).

### Publication Abstract
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are used to restore or augment antitumor immune responses and show great promise in the treatment of melanoma and other types of cancers. However, only a small percentage of patients are fully responsive to immune checkpoint inhibition, mostly due to tumor heterogeneity and primary resistance to therapy. Both of these features are largely driven by the accumulation of patient-specific mutations, pointing to the need for personalized approaches in diagnostics and immunotherapy. Proteogenomics integrates patient-specific genomic and proteomic data to study cancer development, tumor heterogeneity and resistance mechanisms. Using this approach, we characterized the mutational landscape of four clinical melanoma patients. This enabled the quantification of hundreds of sample-specific amino acid variants, among them many that were previously not reported in melanoma. Changes in abundance at the protein and phosphorylation site levels revealed patient-specific over-represented pathways, notably linked to melanoma development (MAPK1 activation) or immunotherapy (NLRP1 inflammasome). Personalized data integration resulted in the prediction of protein drug targets, such as the drugs vandetanib and bosutinib, which were experimentally validated and led to a reduction in the viability of tumor cells. Our study emphasizes the potential of proteogenomic approaches to study personalized mutational landscapes, signaling networks and therapy options.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Whole exome sequencing, Immunotherapy, Melanoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Chair Quantitative Proteomics Director Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Macek
Chair Quantitative Proteomics Director Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


