### Accession
PXD005605

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cell cycle arrest and differentiation induction caused by ATPR, a derivative of all-trans retinoic acid, in human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells

### Description
Experimental design: Peptides digested from the total cellular proteins were analyzed by reverse phase LC–MS/MS followed by a label-free quantification analysis. The SEQUEST search engine was used to identify proteins and bioinformatics resources were used to investigate the involved pathways for the differentially expressed proteins. Results: 13 down-regulated proteins were identified in the ATPR-treated group. Bioinformatics analysis showed that the effects of ATPR on 14-3-3 might potentially involve the PI3K-AKT-FOXO pathway and P27Kip1 expression. Western blot and RT-PCR analysis showed that ATPR could inhibit AKT phosphorylation, up-regulate the expression of FOXO1A and P27Kip1 at both the protein and mRNA levels, and down-regulate the cytoplasmic expression of cyclin E and CDK2. ATPR-induced G0/G1 phase arrest and differentiation can be ablated if the P27kip1 gene is silenced with sequence-specific siRNA. Conclusions and clinical relevance: ATPR might cause cell cycle arrest and differentiation in SGC-7901 cells by simultaneously inhibiting the phosphorylation of AKT and down-regulating 14-3-3. This change would then enhance the inhibition of cyclin E/CDK2 by up-regulating FOXO1A and P27Kip1. Our findings could be of value for finding new drug targets and for developing more effective differentiation inducer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation  Cells were lysed using a total protein extraction kit (Vazyme Biotech) containing protease inhibitor, and a phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce USA) was added according to the instructions. Samples were incubated for 15 min on ice with intervals of vigorous vortexing. Proteins were collected by centrifugation for 15 min at 14000×g at 4℃ to pellet the unbroken cells and debris. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentrations were determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime China) with BSA as the standard. Each 200μg aliquot of the SGC-7901 cell lysate was stored in 1.5 ml centrifuge tube at -80 ℃ prior to further purification.  Protein digestion  A total of 200μg of cell lysate from the different group was precipitated by adding 4 vol pre-iced acetone and incubating for 12 h at -20℃. The precipitated protein was then recovered by centrifugation at 10000 g for 5 min at 4 ℃, and the resulting pellet was washed three times with 100μL ice-cold acetone. The residual acetone was volatilized at room temperature and the protein pellet was then resuspended in 12.5 μL ULB solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % CHAPS) with vigorous vortexing. To ensure good efficiency of trypsin digestion, 87.5 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to ensure that the final concentration of urea was 1 M in the mixture. A sample containing 200 μg of protein was reduced using 4 μL of 100 mM DTT for 15 min at 50℃ and alkylated with 4 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide for 15min at room temperature in darkness. Alkylated proteins were digested with 4 μg of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, USA) at a 1:50 enzyme/protein ratio at 37℃overnight (17 h). The resulting samples were dried using a Speed Vac concentrator (Labconco, USA). These experiments were repeated three times.  Mass spectrometric analysis The vacuum concentrated peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and were analyzed on a LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (ThermoFisher Science, USA) equipped with a nano-ESI and operated in data-dependent mode with the Xcalibur software (version 2.1.0.1139, Thermo Fisher Science). An ACCELA 600 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Science, USA) was used and 2μL of peptide mixtures were injected into a C18 reversed phase column (Zorbax 300SB, 3.5μm，150x0.075mm，300A, Agilent ) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (100% acetonitrile). Separation of peptides was conducted using a continuous gradient consisting of the following: 5% solvent B was used for 10 min, solvent B was increased from 5% to 40% over 100min, solvent B was increased to 95% over 30 min, and finally solvent B was maintained at 95% for 25 min. To re-equilibrate the system, solvent B was decreased to 5% over 5 min and maintained at 5% for 10 min. A 120 min liner gradient blank was run between samples to prevent sample carryover. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the eluted peptides were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer with a voltage of 1.8 KV in positive ion mode. The ion transfer tube temperature was set at 200 °C. Full scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 300-2000 m/z with the resolution set to 60000. The top ten most intense parent ions were selected for CID in the liner ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s.  2.5 Identification and quantification of proteins using a label-free approach The raw data files were analyzed using the SEQUEST (v.1.13, ThermoFisher Science) search engine and the Proteome Discoverer (v.1.2, ThermoFisher Science) using the human nonredundant peptide database obtained from the Uniprot human database (Nov 3 2014, 88717 sequences). FDR for peptide identification of all of the searches were less than 1%. Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (cysteine) was set as static modification and Oxidation / +15.995Da (methionine) was set as the dynamic modification. Trypsin (full) was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da. For differential analyses of proteins between the ATPR group and the Vehicle group, a label-free mass spectrometry-based protein quantification software, SIEVE (v 1.3, ThermoFisher Science), was used for comparing the relative abundance of peptides and proteins. The chromatograms were time-aligned before the intensities of all of the identified peptides were measured; then, the framing parameters were set at 2.5 min frame time widths and 0.02 frame m/z widths. The criteria used to identify differentially expressed proteins were: at least six peptide sequence matches, more than 10% sequence coverage and peptide scores greater than 16 scores, and more or less than a 1.2-fold change of the protein quantities between the ATPR treated samples and the Vehicle samples. Significant differences of P<0.05 were accepted for differentially expressed proteins.

### Data Protocol
Exclusively expressed proteins from the protein profiles of the ATPR and Vehicle groups were subjected to DAVID bioinformatics resources  to analyze their molecular functions, subcellular localizations and biological processes. Differentially expressed proteins from the SIEVE processing were analyzed using IPA and the KEGG Pathway Database to find concurrent patterns, functional interactions and stable interactomes. For DAVID analysis, the exclusively expressed proteins were compiled by reporting the UniProtKB accession number, which were then were uploaded into the DAVID database and mapped against the human dataset for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis using the default settings. For the IPA and KEGG investigations, the proteins derived from the SIEVE differential analysis and related to cell differentiation were imported and analyzed. The biological networks were generated to observe the potential direct and indirect relationship in which the differentially expressed proteins were involved.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atpr，cell cycle arrest and differentiation，proteomics analysis，pi3k-akt-foxo-p27kip1 pathway，sgc-7901 cells

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China
Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University

### Submitter
Xia Quan

### Lab Head
Dr Quan Xia
School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China


