### Accession
PXD004104

### Title
Spike-in SILAC MS of C. elegans CPEB homolog mutants.

### Description
Comparative proteomic study between C. elegans wild-type N2 and CPEB homolog mutants: fog-1, cpb-2, and cpb-3.

### Sample Protocol
Light labelled SILAC samples: C. elegans CPEB homolog mutants and wild-type N2 at different developmental stage (fog-1 and cpb-2 at L3; cpb-3 at L4; and N2 at L3, L4, and YA). Heavy labelled SILAC sample: mixed stages of N2. SILAC labelling was performed as described in [Subasic et al. 2015; PMID: 26232411]. Protein extraction and digestion was performed as described in [Singh et al. 2016; PMID: 26985669]. Peptides were separated by offline pre-fractionation with hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC). Resulting fractions were desalted by using ZipTip C18. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 chromatography instrument.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification of protein groups was done sing MaxQuant software (version: 1.5.0.30). In each MaxQuant run all raw data files from each sample were analysed as a single “Parameter group” (Group 0), categorized by three biological replicates as “Experiment” (only two biological replicates for cpb-2, one biological replicate was lost during data acquisition), where each “Experiment” contains 11 HILIC “Fractions”. Further downstream analyses were performed in “R”.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding (CPEB) proteins are evolutionary conserved RNA-binding proteins that control mRNA polyadenylation and translation. Orthologs in humans and other vertebrates are mainly involved in oogenesis. This is also the case for the C. elegans CPEB family member CPB-3, whereas two further CPEB proteins (CPB-1 and FOG-1) are involved in spermatogenesis. Here we describe the characterisation of a new missense allele of cpb-3 and show that loss of cpb-3 function leads to an increase in physiological germ cell death. To better understand the interaction and effect of C. elegans CPEB proteins on processes such as physiological apoptosis, germ cell differentiation, and regulation of gene expression, we characterised changes in the transcriptome and proteome of C. elegans CPEB mutants. Our results show that, despite their sequence similarities CPEB family members tend to have distinct overall effects on gene expression (both at the transcript and protein levels). This observation is consistent with the distinct phenotypes observed in the various CPEB family mutants.

### Keywords
Hilic, C. elegans, Maxquant, Cpeb proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Spike-in silac

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Kapil Dev Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hengartner
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


