### Accession
PXD030456

### Title
Simultaneous characterisation of RNA and protein subcellular dynamics

### Description
Existing methods to analyse RNA localisation are constrained to specific RNAs or subcellular niches, precluding the cell-wide mapping of RNA. We present Localisation of RNA (LoRNA), which maps, at once, RNAs to membranous (nucleus, ER and mitochondria) and membraneless compartments (cytosol, nucleolus and phase-separated granules). Simultaneous interrogation of all RNA locations allows the system-wide quantification of RNA proportional distribution and the comprehensive analysis of RNA subcellular dynamics. Moreover, we have re-engineered the LOPIT (Localisation Of Proteins by Isotope Tagging) method, enabling integration with LoRNA, to jointly map RNA and protein subcellular localisation. Applying this framework, we obtain a global re-localisation map for 31839 transcripts and 5314 proteins during the unfolded protein response, uncovering that ER-localised transcripts are more efficiently recruited to stress granules than cytosolic RNAs, and revealing eIF3d is key to sustain cytoskeletal function. Overall, we provide the most exhaustive map to date of RNA and protein subcellular dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation Samples were resuspended in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB, reduced with 10 mM at room temperature for 60 min and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for at least 60 min. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with 1 µg of trypsin. Subsequently, 1 µg of modified trypsin was added, and the samples were incubated for 3–4 h at 37 °C. Samples were then acidified with TFA (0.5% (v/v) final concentration and centrifuged at 21,000g for 10 min. The supernatant was frozen at –80 °C until required. For peptide clean-up and quantification, 200 µL of Poros Oligo R3 resin slurry (approximately 150–200 µL resin) was packed into Pierce centrifuge columns and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded, washed twice with 200 µL 0.1% TFA and eluted with 300 µL 70% acetonitrile (ACN). TMT labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Equal amounts of desalted peptides were labeled immediately after being quantified with Qubit protein assay. Multiplexed TMT samples were then fractionated using high-pH reverse phase chromatography. In detail, the TMT-labelled peptide samples were resuspended in 100 μL of 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 (Buffer A). The total volume of each sample was injected onto an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1-mm i.d. × 150-mm; 1.7-μm particle size) on an Acquity UPLC System with a diode array detector and the peptides were eluted from the column using a linear gradient of 4–60% (v/v) acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 over 50 min and at a 0.244 mL/min flow rate (with a total run time of 75 min). The gradient was set up as follows: 0 min–95% Buffer A–5% Buffer B (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 + 80% (v/v) acetonitrile), 10 min–95% Buffer A–5% Buffer B, 60 min–25% Buffer A–75% Buffer B, 62 min–0% Buffer A–100% Buffer B, 67.5 min–0% Buffer A–100% Buffer B, 67.6 min–95% Buffer A–5% Buffer B. Approximately 40–50 1-min fractions, representing peak peptide elution, were collected since the moment that the peptides began to elute and were reduced to dryness by vacuum centrifugation shortly thereafter. For downstream MS analysis, the fractions were concatenated into 20 samples by combining pairs of fractions which eluted at different time points during the gradient. Each sample was analyzed in an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying data acquisition using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) acquisition mode34 triggered using Real-time Search against human protein sequences from UniProt/Swiss-Prot, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-6plex (total proteome samples) or TMTpro-16plex tagging (Subcellular fractionated samples) of lysine and peptide N terminus as static modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, as scoring thresholds Xcorr=1.4, dCn=0.1 and  Precursor PPM=10.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS acquisition TMT-labelled samples were analysed in an Orbitrap Eclipse coupled to a nanoLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. Peptides were trapped on a 100 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100) in μL-pickup injection mode at 15 μL/min flow rate for 3 minutes. Samples were then loaded on a Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography, 75 μm × 50 cm nanoViper C18 3 μm 100 column (Acclaim, PepMap) at 50 ºC retrofitted to an EASY-Spray source with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Analytical chromatography was performed over 120 min (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–3 min: at 2% buffer B, 3–105 min: linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 105-105.3 min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 105.3-110 min: at 90% buffer B, 110-110.3 min: 90% to 3% buffer B, 100.3-120 min: at 3% buffer B). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying data acquisition using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) acquisition mode triggered using Real-time Search against human protein sequences from UniProt/Swiss-Prot, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-6plex (total proteome samples) or TMTpro-16plex tagging (Subcellular fractionated samples) of lysine and peptide N terminus as static modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, as scoring thresholds Xcorr=1.4, dCn=0.1 and  Precursor PPM=10. Each MS scan in the Orbitrap analyser (mass range = m/z 400 –1500, resolution = 120,000). Precursors with charge between 2 and 6 and intensity above 5000 were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation, with normalised AGC target of 200% and maximum accumulation time of 50 ms. Mass filtering was performed by the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with 30% normalized collision energy. Selected fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s. Real-time Search (RTS) was used to trigger SPS-MS3 acquisition. RTS used Human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-6plex (total proteome samples) or TMTpro-16plex tagging (Subcellular fractionated samples) of lysine and peptide N terminus as static modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, as scoring thresholds Xcorr=1.4, dCn=0.1,  Precursor PPM=10, one missed cleavage and maximum search time of 35 ms. SPS was applied to co-select 10 fragment ions for HCD-MS3 analysis. SPS ions were all selected within the 400–1,500 m/z range and were set to preclude selection of the precursor ion and TMT or TMTpro ion series. Normalised AGC targets and maximum accumulation times were set to 200% and 120 ms. Co-selected precursors for SPS-MS3 underwent HCD fragmentation with 55% normalized collision energy and were analysed in the Orbitrap with nominal resolution of 50,000. The number of SPS-MS3 spectra acquired between full scans was restricted to a duty cycle of 3 s.  MS spectra processing and peptide and protein identification Raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v.2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw files were submitted to a database search using Proteome Discoverer with SequestHF and MS Amanda  algorithms against the Homo sapiens database downloaded in June 2020 from UniProt/Swiss-Prot. Common contaminant proteins (several types of human keratins, BSA and porcine trypsin) were added to the database, and all contaminant proteins identified were removed from the result lists before further analysis. The spectra identification was performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy, 10 p.p.m.; MS/MS accuracy of 0.5 Da; up to two missed cleavage sites allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-6plex (total proteome samples) or TMTpro-16plex tagging (Subcellular fractionated samples) of lysine and peptide N terminus as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine and deamidated asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only rank 1 peptide identifications of high confidence (FDR < 1%) were accepted. TMT reporter values were assessed through Proteome Discoverer v2.3 using the Most Confident Centroid method for peak integration and integration tolerance of 20 p.p.m. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents (manufacturer specifications). Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents (following manufacturer specifications).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Subcellular localisation, Dynamics, Tmt, Lopit, Spatial-proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Rayner Queiroz

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge


