### Accession
PXD001105

### Title
Quantitative phosphoprotoemic analysis of cold induced signaling in jurkat cells

### Description
We have performed quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis on jurkat cells. Phosphorylation change was compared between jurkat cells incubated on ice and those incubated in 37 degree water bath. And the combination of cold induced and OKT3/4 antibody induced signaling was compared.

### Sample Protocol
After jurkat cells were treated, lysis buffer was added to cells to stop treatment. Protein was then digested with trypsin. Phosphorylated tyrosin peptides were enriched by immunoprecipitation using  beads pre-conjugated with pTyr-100 antibody. Peptides were then analyzed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the non-redundant UniProt complete proteome database containg 72078 forward and an equal number of reversed decoy protein entries using the Mascot algorithm provided with Matrix Science. Peak Lists were generated using extractMSn provided from Thermo Fisher version 07/12/07 using mass range of 600-4500.

### Publication Abstract
The activation of T lymphocytes through antigen-mediated T cell receptor (TCR) clustering is vital in regulating the adaptive immune response. Although T cell receptor signaling has been extensively studied, the fundamental mechanisms for signal initiation are not fully understood. Reduced temperatures have initiated some of the hallmarks of TCR signaling, such as increased phosphorylation and activation on ERK and calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum, as well as coalesced the T cell membrane microdomains. The precise mechanism of the TCR signaling initiation due to temperature change remains obscure. One critical question is whether the signaling initiated by the cold treatment of T cells differs from the signaling initiated by the cross-linking of the T cell receptor. To address this uncertainty, we performed a wide-scale, quantitative mass-spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analysis on T cells stimulated either by temperature shifts or through the cross-linking of the TCR. Careful statistical comparisons between the two stimulations revealed a striking level of identity among the subset of 339 sites that changed significantly with both stimulations. This study demonstrates for the first time, in unprecedented detail, that T cell cold treatment was sufficient to initiate signaling patterns that were nearly identical to those of soluble antibody stimulation, shedding new light on the mechanism of activation of these critically important immune cells.

### Keywords
Phosphorylated, Label free, Jurkat, Cold induced

### Affiliations
Brown University
Chemistry

### Submitter
QINQIN JI

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Brown University


