### Accession
PXD023906

### Title
The interacting protein peptide sequences of stathmin

### Description
The peptide sequences identified by mass spectrometry in the proteins immunoprecipitated from stathmin-GFP expressed HEK293T lysates with the GFP-beads.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins interacting with stathmin-GFP, the immunoprecipitated proteins bound to GFP-beads were subjected to mass spectrometry by Lu-Ming Biotech Co. (Shanghai, China).

### Data Protocol
The data processing was conducted using the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure of mucosal epithelial cells to the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) envelope glycoprotein gp120 is known to disrupt epithelial cell junctions by impairing stathmin-mediated microtubule depolymerization. However, the pathological significance of this process and its underlying molecular mechanism remain unclear. Here we show that treatment of epithelial cells with pseudotyped HIV-1 viral particles or recombinant gp120 protein results in the activation of protein kinase G 1 (PKG1). Examination of epithelial cells by immunofluorescence microscopy reveals that PKG1 activation mediates the epithelial barrier damage upon HIV-1 exposure. Immunoprecipitation experiments show that PKG1 interacts with stathmin and phosphorylates stathmin at serine 63 in the presence of gp120. Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence microscopy further demonstrate that PKG1-mediated phosphorylation of stathmin promotes its autophagic degradation by enhancing the interaction between stathmin and the autophagy adaptor protein p62. Collectively, these results suggest that HIV-1 exposure exploits the PKG1/stathmin axis to affect the microtubule cytoskeleton and thereby perturbs epithelial cell junctions. Our findings reveal a novel molecular mechanism by which exposure to HIV-1 increases epithelial permeability, which has implications for the development of effective strategies to prevent mucosal HIV-1 transmission.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Cell

### Affiliations
Shandong Normal University

### Submitter
Wei Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Zhou
Shandong Normal University


