### Accession
PXD029842

### Title
Inhaled Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes modulate differently global gene and protein expression in lung rats (additipon to PXD018900)

### Description
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are among the most promising nanomaterials because of their physical and chemical properties. However, since they are biopersistent fiber-like materials which share similarities with asbestos, concerns have arisen about their health effects. With their various industrial usages, occupational exposure to MWCNTs may occur mainly by inhalation as these nanomaterials can get aerosolised. The number of toxicological studies on CNTs has steadily increased for the last decades. Different works showed that MWCNT exposure by inhalation or intratracheal instillation could lead to pulmonary toxicity, such as lung inflammation, genotoxicity, fibrosis or lung cancer (Kasai et al. 2015, Kasai et al. 2016, Porter et al. 2013, Suzui et al. 2016). To date, only one MWCNT (MWNT-7) has been classified as possibly carcinogen to human (Group 2B) while the others have not been as classifiable as to their carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3) because of the lack of data on their carcinogenic potential (IARC 2017). Because of the wide variety of CNTs with various length, diameter or functionalisation, additional effort is required to assess their pulmonary toxicity. As a complementary approach to conventional toxicological assays, the omics methods are useful technologies for the mechanistic understanding of the toxicological effects observed following exposure to chemicals and particulate matters. Importantly, they can also be used as predictive tools for identifying the mode of action of other particles with similar physical and chemical characteristics. These molecular approaches may also be used for the discovery of exposure markers or early markers of adverse effects, before the appearance of clinical signs of a disease (Rahman et al. 2017). Several studies assessed gene expression alteration following in vivo exposure to CNTs (Poulsen et al. 2015, Snyder-Talkington et al. 2013, Ellinger-Ziegelbauer and Pauluhn 2009). These omics approaches were used to identify genes and pathways modulated in response to exposure. However, there are still too few studies to assess the link between MWCNT physico-chemical properties, global gene or protein expression profiles, and long-term effects. In a previous study, we showed that inhalation of two pristine MWCNTs, the long and thick NM-401, and the short and thin NM-403, induced alveolar neutrophilic granulocyte influx, a hallmark of inflammation, which was proportional to the lung CNT BET surface deposited dose (Gate et al. 2019). However, due to their different physical and chemical properties, one could assume that these two CNTs may have diverse toxicological profiles, but the conventional toxicology approaches used in this early work were probably not sensitive enough to identify such differences. In order to gain additional insight about their toxicological properties, in the current study, we compare the alteration induced by the two MWCNTs on the transcriptome in the lung tissue and the proteome in the broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) after rat exposure by inhalation. The omics analyses were performed from 3 days up to 180 days.

### Sample Protocol
Animal exposure Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the EC Directive 2010/63/UE and with the approval of the local Ethical Committee and the French Ministry for Research and Higher Education (APAFIS# 3468). The laboratory animal facility has been approved by The French Ministry of Agriculture (Agreement #D54-547-10). The animal exposure has been previously published. 13-week-old female Sprague Dawley rats were housed in individually ventilated cages (Tecniplast), maintained in 12h/12h light/dark cycles, and when not in restraining tubes had ad libitum access to food and water. The experimental procedure is detailed in (Gate et al. 2019). Animals were exposed to two concentrations of an aerosol of CNTs (0.5 and 1.5 mg/m3) generated with an acoustic generator 2 x 3h/day, 5 days/week for 4 weeks. Tissue sampling Lung tissues were collected 3, 30, 90 and 180 days after the end of exposure following animal anesthesia with pentobarbital (60 mg/kg) and exsanguination through the abdominal aorta. Accessory lung lobes were stored in RNA later until use. Broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed on the left lung as described in. Transcriptomic analysis from lung Accessory lung lobes from 6 animals per group were disrupted and total RNAs were extracted and purified as described previously. The RNA purity was analysed using Nanophotometer® spectrophotometer (IMPLEN) and A260/A280 ratios were between 2 and 2.1. The RNA integrity was analysed with the RNA Nano 6000 Assay kit on the Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies) and the RNA integrity numbers were above 6.2. The gene expression analyses were assessed using Low Input Quick Amp Labelling kits (Agilent Technologies). Briefly, 100 ng of RNAs were reverse transcribed into cDNA and then cRNA labelled by Cyanine 3-CTP were synthesized and purified using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). The specific activity was analysed for each sample (pmol Cyanine / µg RNA) and the threshold was fixed to 6 as indicated by the manufacturer. Labelled cRNAs were hybridized for 17h at 65°C onto Agilent G4853A SurePrint G3 Rat GE 8*60K v2 microarrays (Agilent Technologies) and scanned on an Agilent G2505C microarray scanner with a 3 µm resolution. Data were extracted with Agilent Feature Extraction software version 11.0. Microarray data have been uploaded to the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession number GSE113532 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). Proteomic analysis from broncho-alveolar lavage Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed as previously described [Distiller 2016]. Briefly, 50 μg protein was reduced by adding IM DTT to a final concentration of 0.1 M DTT. The samples were mixed with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.9 (UA buffer) and loaded onto ultracentrifugation units of nominal molecular weight cutoff 10.000 (Vivacon 500, catalogue no. VN01H02, Sartorius Stedim Biotech) and detergents were removed washing the samples twice with the 8 M urea buffer. Afterward, proteins alkylated with 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer (IAA). Afterward, the filter units were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using sequence grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Peptides were recovered by centrifugation and two additional washes with 50 mM NH4HCO3, combining the flow-throughs. Afterward, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) TFA and lyophilized. 20 μg of the tryptic digests were loaded separately and desalted on C18 Stage tip as described by (Rappsilber et al. 2007). After elution, the samples were evaporated by placing in a CentriVap Concentrator with open caps for approximately 10-15 minutes, until approximately 5 μL volume remained. The sample was then resuspended in 15 μL of 0.1% TFA and stored at 4°C until mass spectrometry analysis. MS Settings Each sample was run in triplicate on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75 μm ID), pulled using a laser puller (Sutter Instruments P2000, Novato, CA, USA), packed with Reprocil Pur (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) C18 (1.9 μm; 12 cm in length) reverse phase media and were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min direct into a Q-Exactive MS. The MS was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and with a potential of 2300 V applied to the frit. All data was acquired while operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Analysis Proteins were identified and quantified by MaxLFQ (Cox et al. 2014) by searching with the MaxQuant version 1.5 against the Homo Sapiens reference proteome database (Uniprot). Modifications included C carbamlylation (fixed) and M oxidation (variable). Gene and protein differential expression analysis Raw microarray dataset was filtered in order to exclude unexpressed probes and then normalized by the quantile method (Bolstad et al. 2003). Analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was performed using a Bayesian model implemented in the limma package in R/Bioconductor (Ritchie et al. 2015). The genes were considered as significantly differentially expressed if (1) the expression changes were equal to or larger than 1.5-fold in either direction for MWCNTs exposed group compared to control group for each experimental conditions and (2) the BH-adjusted (FDR) p-values were less than or equal to 0.05 (p ≤ 0.05). As input for proteomics analysis, we used MaxQuant output files. The data were log2-transformed after removing reversed matches and contaminants. Missing values in LFQ intensities were imputed using group mean imputation with normal distribution correction as follows: when a protein was identified in at least two replicas in a certain experimental condition, the missing values were replaced by random draws from a Gaussian distribution centered on their mean value. In all other cases, the missing values were replaced by random draws from a Gaussian distribution centered in a minimal value for an experimental condition. Analysis of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) was performed using the limma package in R/Bioconductor (Ritchie et al. 2015). The proteins were considered as significantly differentially expressed if (1) the expression changes were equal to or larger than 1.3-fold in either direction for MWCNTs exposed group compared to control group for each experimental conditions and (2) the BH-adjusted (FDR) p-values were less than or equal to 0.1 (p ≤ 0.1). Unsupervised integration of transcriptomics and proteomics datasets was performed using Multi-Omics Factor analysis (MOFA) (Argelaguet et al. 2018). Pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes/proteins was performed using the gprofiler2 package in R (Raudvere et al. 2019) and the KEGG database (Kanehisa et al. 2017). Gene regulatory networks were inferred using GENIE3 algorithm, the list of transcription factors was derived from the Animal TFDB 3.0 database (Hu et al. 2019). Optimal threshold cut-off for selecting ranked gene pairs was identified using a gene ontology semantic similarity approach described in (Zhernovkov et al. 2019). Statistical analysis and data processing were performed with R version 3.6.1 (https://www.r-project.org/) and RStudio version 1.1.383 (https://www.rstudio.com).

### Publication Abstract
Inhalation of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) induces lung inflammation. Depending on industrial applications, CNTs with different physicochemical characteristics are produced and workers can potentially be exposed. This raises concerns about the long-term health effects of these nanomaterials. Because of the wide variety of MWCNTs, it is essential to study the toxicological effects of CNTs of various shapes and to better understand the impact physical and chemical properties have on their toxicity. In this study, rats were exposed by nose-only to two pristine MWCNTs with different morphologies: the long and thick NM-401 or the short and thin NM-403. After four weeks of inhalation, animals were euthanized at four different times during the recovery period: three days (short-term), 30 and 90&#x2009;days (intermediate-term) and 180&#x2009;days (long-term). Analyses of the transcriptome in the whole lung and the proteome in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of exposed animals were performed to understand the MWCNT underlying mechanisms of toxicity. Following inhalation of NM-401, we observed a dose-dependent increase in the number of differentially expressed genes and proteins, whereas there is no clear difference between the two concentrations of NM-403. After NM-403 inhalation, the number of differentially expressed genes and proteins varied less between the four post-exposure times compared to NM-401, which supports the postulation of a persistent effect of this type of CNT. Our toxicogenomics approaches give insights into the different toxicological profile following MWCNT exposure.

### Keywords
Nanotubes mwcnts rat lung

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Matallanas Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


