### Accession
PXD022884

### Title
Immunopeptidomics of ex-vivo tissues to identify T cell vaccine candidates for influenza

### Description
We present data comparing an immortal macrophage-like cell lines with ex-vivo infected lung tissues as the presentation models of direct observation of CD4 and CD8 T cell epitopes eluted from the cell surface using mass spectrometry (immunopeptidomics) of presented HLA bound peptides.

### Sample Protocol
### LC-MS/MS analysis of HLA-I and -II peptides HLA peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) using a PepMap C18 EASY-Spray LC column, 2 μm particle size, 75 μm x 50 cm column (Thermo Scientific) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) with a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 3%-30% buffer B (Acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 110 minutes. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser using the Top Speed data dependent mode, performing a MS scan every 3 second cycle, followed by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans. MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 120,000 at 300 m/z, RF lens 60% and an automatic gain control (AGC) ion target value of 4.0e5 for a maximum of 100 ms. MS/MS resolution was 30,000 at 100 m/z. Higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was induced at an energy setting of 28 for peptides with a charge state of 2–4, while singly charged peptides were fragmented at an energy setting of 32 at lower priority. Fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.  ### LC-MS/MS analysis of global proteome tryptic peptides Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and applied to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer with a nano-electrospray ion source as previously described. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 3-8% buffer B (Acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 5 minutes and then from 8-30% over a further 192 minutes. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser using the Top Speed data dependent mode, preforming a MS scan every 3 second cycle, followed by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans. MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 120,000 at 300-1,500 m/z, RF lens 60% and an automatic gain control (AGC) ion target value of 4.0e5 for a maximum of 100 ms and an exclusion duration of 40s. MS/MS data were collected in the Ion trap using a fixed collision energy of 32% with a first mass of 110 and AGC ion target of 5.0e3 for a maximum of 100ms.

### Data Protocol
## Peptidomes Raw spectrum files were analysed using Peaks Studio 10.0 build 20190129, with the data processed to generate reduced charge state and deisotoped precursor and associated product ion peak lists which were searched against a Uniprot database (20,350, 2020-04) appended with the full sequences for both influenza strains: A/Wisconsin/67/2005(H3N2), 12 entries or A/X-31(H3N2), 11 entries. A contaminants list (245 entries) in unspecific digest mode was applied. Parent mass error tolerance was set a 5ppm and fragment mass error tolerance at 0.03 Da. Variable modifications were set for N-term Acetylation (42.01 Da), Methionine oxidation (15.99 Da) and carboxyamidomethylation (57.02 Da) of cysteine.  A maximum of three variable modifications per peptide were set. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with decoy-fusion database searches and were filtered to 1% FDR.  ## Proteomes Raw data files were analysed using Peaks Studio 10.0 build 20190129.  Parent ion tolerance was set to 10ppm and fragment ion tolerance set to 0.6Da, and searched against the same database as used for peptidomes   Fixed carbamidomethylation, variable N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were specified. Variable modifications were set for N-term Acetylation (42.01 Da), Methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), fixed carboxyamidomethylation modification (57.02 Da) of cysteine was specified.  A maximum of three variable modifications per peptide were set. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with decoy-fusion database searches and were filtered to 1% FDR.  Relative protein quantification was performed using Peaks software and normalized between samples using a histone ruler.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dendritic cell, Influenza, Lung, Hla, Peptidome

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Centre for Proteomic Research,  B85,  Life Sciences Building,  University of Southampton,  University Road Highfield,  Southampton,  Hants.  SO17 1BJ  United Kingdom

### Submitter
Alistair Bailey

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J Skipp
Centre for Proteomic Research,  B85,  Life Sciences Building,  University of Southampton,  University Road Highfield,  Southampton,  Hants.  SO17 1BJ  United Kingdom


