### Accession
PXD022626

### Title
An Updated overview of the Virion Proteome of Kaposi Sarcoma Associated Herpesvirus

### Description
The virion proteins of Kaposi Sarcoma Associated Herpesvirus (KSHV) were initially characterized in 2005 in two separate studies that combined detected 24 viral proteins and a few cellular components via LC-MS/MS or MALDI-TOF. Despite considerable advances in the sensitivity and specificity of mass spectrometry instrumentation in recent years, leading to significantly higher yields in detections, the KSHV virion proteome has not been revisited. In this study, we have re-examined the protein composition of purified KSHV virions via Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight mass spectrometry (UHR-QqTOF). Our results confirm the detection of all previously reported virion proteins, in addition to 17 other viral proteins, some of which have been characterized as virion-associated using other methods, and 10 novel proteins identified as virion-associated for the first time in this study. These results add KSHV ORF9, ORF23, ORF35, ORF48, ORF58, ORF72/vCyclin, K3, K9/vIRF1, K10/vIRF4, and K10.5/vIRF3 to the list of KSHV proteins that can be incorporated into virions. The addition of these proteins to the KSHV virion proteome provides novel and important insight into early events in KSHV infection mediated by virion-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Latently infected iSLK producer cells stably infected with BAC16 recombinant KSHV WT were grown to 70-75% confluency in DMEM (Caisson Labs, Catalog#: DML10-500ML) supplemented with 10% cosmic calf serum (Sigma-Aldrich, Catalog#: C8056-500ML), 250µg/ml Geneticin (Goldbio, Catalog#: G-418-1), 1µM Puromycin (Bio Basic, Catalog#: PJ593), and 1.2mg/ml Hygromycin B (A.G. Scientific, Catalog#: H-1012-PBS). Then induced for 72 hours with 3mM Sodium Butyrate (Sigma86 Aldrich, Catalog#: B5887-1G), and 2µM Doxycycline (Tocris, Catalog#: 4090-50mg). Culture supernatants were clarified by centrifugation at 500g for 12 minutes and passed through a 0.45 uM filter placed on ice. The virus was then pelleted out of clarified supernatants over a 50% Opti-prep (Iodixanol) [22] cushion prepared in TNE buffer at pH 7.40 by ultracentrifugation at 41,000 g for 120 minutes using an SW28 rotor. Immediately after (adapting a previously reported purification method used for mass spectrometry of virions), the concentrated virus particles were centrifuged through a 10%-50% Iodixanol density step gradient prepared in TNE buffer [23] at 45,000 g for 2 hours. The virus band at the gradient junctions of 22-24% was collected and kept at -80°C for further processing. Iodixanol fractions were also collected and the viral DNA was extracted from them using the Zymo Viruses 2020, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18 Quick DNA/RNA Viral kit (ZymoResearch, Catalog#: D7020), Endpoint RFU qPCR assay was then performed on DNA fractions using probes and primers against LANA (LANA forward (5’- AATGGGAGCCACCGGTAAAG-3’), LANA reverse (5’- CGCCCTTAACGAGAGGAAGT-3’), LANA probe (5' [6FAM]-ACACAAATGCTGGCAGCCCG-[BHQ1]3’)) using TaqProbe 5x qPCR MasterMix -Multiplex (ABM MasterMix-5PM), 5% DMSO, primers at 900nM and probes at 250nM on BioRad CFX qPCR machine in 40 cycles. The purified virion sample was then divided into two fractions. One fraction was treated with 0.25% trypsin- 2.21mM EDTA for 60 minutes at 37°C while shaking at 300rpm, to cleave and strip external envelope proteins and non-viral proteins and debris from virion preparations followed by virion lysis. This fraction is herein referred to as VTT fraction. The second fraction was kept untreated and is herein referred to as VT fraction. Both fractions were then treated with Pierce protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific, Catalog#: A32963). Proteins were extracted and lipids removed using ReadyPrep 2D-Cleanup Kit (BioRad, Catalog#: 1632130). Protein concentration was then quantified using a Qubit 3.0 fluorometer (Invitrogen). The sample concentration was adjusted to a minimum of 0.5 mg/ml and pH as adjusted to [pH 7.5]. The purified proteome samples were reduced and alkylated, using Thermofisher EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog#: A40006). The samples were then either tryptic digested for 6-8 hours at 37°C in Tris-HCl buffer with final protease to protein ratio of 1:100 w/w of Pierce Trypsin/Lys-C to protease mix (Thermo Scientific, Catalog#:1863467) or digested with Pierce Chymotrypsin Protease (TLCK treated) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog#: 90056) with final protease to protein ratio of 1:100 w/w, for 12-14 hours at 37°C in 1mM HCl while shaking at 300rpm. The digestion was stopped using the digestion stop reagent of the EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit, and the samples were further cleaned and filtered following the kit’s protocol. The samples were then extracted in 0.1% formic acid in diH2O and kept at -80 until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Utilizing PEAKS Studio software, Spider Search, the. mzxml files were analyzed against a sequence database with the HHV8 protein database's customized library pulled from Uniprot (Swiss-prot) (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=reviewed:yes%20taxonomy:37296#) downloaded on 07/01/2020 containing 86 sequences. Trypsin (for trypsin digested samples) and Chymotrypsin were selected with a maximum of three missed cleavages permitted; the search parameters were set to fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl and variable modification of methionine oxidation. Additional criteria used in the search were peptide mass tolerance of ±20.0 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da followed with the peptide score P value of less than 0.00316. Single amino acid mutation and up to three additional modifications per peptide were automatically detected with PTM_Ascore of 20 and mutation Ion Intensity of 5%. All of reported peptides (supplementary tables 1-6) have a score (-10lgP) greater than 25 and corresponding to a statistically significant (P < 0.00316) confident identification, moreover from our positive matches only proteins identified with more than at least 3 non-overlapping peptide sequences with a mass tolerance of < 0.05 Da were reported.

### Publication Abstract
The virion proteins of Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) were initially characterized in 2005 in two separate studies that combined the detection of 24 viral proteins and a few cellular components via LC-MS/MS or MALDI-TOF. Despite considerable advances in the sensitivity and specificity of mass spectrometry instrumentation in recent years, leading to significantly higher yields in detections, the KSHV virion proteome has not been revisited. In this study, we have re-examined the protein composition of purified KSHV virions via ultra-high resolution Qq time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHR-QqTOF). Our results confirm the detection of all previously reported virion proteins, in addition to 17 other viral proteins, some of which have been characterized as virion-associated using other methods, and 10 novel proteins identified as virion-associated for the first time in this study. These results add KSHV ORF9, ORF23, ORF35, ORF48, ORF58, ORF72/vCyclin, K3, K9/vIRF1, K10/vIRF4, and K10.5/vIRF3 to the list of KSHV proteins that can be incorporated into virions. The addition of these proteins to the KSHV virion proteome provides novel and important insight into early events in KSHV infection mediated by virion-associated proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022626.

### Keywords
Hhv8 bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
chapman University school of pharmacy
Assistant Professor Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences Department, ChapmanUniversity School of Pharmacy, Irvine,California, USA

### Submitter
basir syed

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer E. Totonchy
Assistant Professor Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences Department, ChapmanUniversity School of Pharmacy, Irvine,California, USA


