### Accession
PXD011966

### Title
Akt binding proteins - We try to identify Akt interaction proteins and Akt modifications. For mass spectrometry analysis, immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed with the whole cell lysates in different treated cells.

### Description
We try to identify Akt interaction proteins and Akt modifications. For mass spectrometry analysis, immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed with the whole cell lysates in different treated cells.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed with the whole cell lysates in different treated cells. The IP proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie staining. The band containing target protein or whole lane was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes, and in-gel-digested with trypsin enzymes.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptides were analyzed by Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Elite with Waters NanoAcuity UPLC. MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot Human protein database (version 20151209 containing 21,024 entries) using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) and data analysis was performed using the Scaffold 4.4.8 software (Proteome Software). Peptides and modified peptides were accepted if they passed a 1% FDR threshold. After the mass spectrometry analysis, we pick up the data with the 3-fold-change cutoff as the potential binding proteins or modifications, then we subject to Co- Immunoprecipitation to further confirm protein-protein binding or modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Akt

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest Baptist Hospital
Tongji Hospital，Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Guihua Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui-Kuan LIN
Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest Baptist Hospital


