### Accession
PXD029132

### Title
Mitochondrial calcium uniporter controls melanoma aggressive behavior through a redox-controlled phenotype switch

### Description
Melanoma is the deadliest of skin cancers and has a high tendency to metastasize to distant organs. Calcium and metabolic signals contribute to melanoma invasiveness; however, the underlying molecular details are elusive. The mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) complex is a major route for calcium into the mitochondrial matrix but if and how MCU affects melanoma pathobiology is not understood. Here, we show that MCUA expression correlates with melanoma patient survival, similarly as in kidney, cervical and other cancers, while in pancreatic, breast and liver cancer, this correlation is inverse. Knockdown (KD) of MCUA suppressed melanoma cell growth but promoted migration and invasion in 2D and 3D cultures. In melanoma xenografts, MCUA_KD reduced tumor volumes but promoted lung metastases. Proteomic analyses and protein microarrays identified pathways that link MCUA abundance and melanoma cell phenotype and suggested a major role for metabolic and redox regulation. Accordingly, antioxidants enhanced melanoma cell migration, while pro-oxidants diminished the MCUA_KD-induced invasive phenotype. Furthermore, MCUA_KD amplified the resistance of melanoma cells to immunotherapies and ferroptosis. Col¬lectively, we demonstrate that MCUA controls melanoma aggressive behavior and therapeutic sen¬sitivity. Manipulations of mitochondrial calcium and redox homeostasis, in combination with cur¬rent therapies, should be considered in treating advanced melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg protein per sample were loaded onto a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen) and run into the gel for 1.5 cm. Following Coomassie staining, the protein areas were cut out, diced and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and finally overnight digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel, the solution dried in a Speedvac and kept at -20°C for further analysis (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to ta total amount of 80 µg, and separated into eight fractions using a reversed phase spin column (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific)  Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.3 µg/µl. For each analysis 1.5 µg of digested protein were enriched on a self-packed precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 100 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1. Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top30 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 380–1250 accumulated for 250 ms at a resolution of 35 000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1500 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 3.4 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 200 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Two technical replicates per reversed phase fraction were analysed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 100 variable size windows across the 400-1200 m/z range (Zhang et al., 2015). Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 180–1500 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 250 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 4.3 s. Two replicate injections were acquired for each biological sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. A total of 126,301 MS/MS spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome (revision 04-2018, 93,610 entries) augmented with a set of 51 known common laboratory contaminants to identify xxxx proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction on endogenous peptides spanning the entire retention time range, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1% (Lambert et al., 2013). The resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide and ﬁnally protein area values, which were used for further statistical analysis.  Volcano plots were created to display protein hits. Student’s t-tests were calculated for each shCTRL and MCUA_KD cell line independently. Hits were shown in red if the unadjusted p-value was significant and the absolute logarithmical fold change was higher than 0.5. Hits were shown in green if the adjusted (Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, FDR < 0.05) p-value was significant and an absolute logarithmical fold change higher than 1 occurred.

### Publication Abstract
Melanoma is the deadliest of skin cancers and has a high tendency to metastasize to distant organs. Calcium and metabolic signals contribute to melanoma invasiveness; however, the underlying molecular details are elusive. The MCU complex is a major route for calcium into the mitochondrial matrix but whether MCU affects melanoma pathobiology was not understood. Here, we show that MCU<sub>A</sub> expression correlates with melanoma patient survival and is decreased in BRAF kinase inhibitor-resistant melanomas. Knockdown (KD) of MCU<sub>A</sub> suppresses melanoma cell growth and stimulates migration and invasion. In melanoma xenografts, MCU<sub>A_KD</sub> reduces tumor volumes but promotes lung metastases. Proteomic analyses and protein microarrays identify pathways that link MCU<sub>A</sub> and melanoma cell phenotype and suggest a major role for redox regulation. Antioxidants enhance melanoma cell migration, while prooxidants diminish the MCU<sub>A_KD</sub> -induced invasive phenotype. Furthermore, MCU<sub>A_KD</sub> increases melanoma cell resistance to immunotherapies and ferroptosis. Collectively, we demonstrate that MCU<sub>A</sub> controls melanoma aggressive behavior and therapeutic sensitivity. Manipulations of mitochondrial calcium and redox homeostasis, in combination with current therapies, should be considered in treating advanced melanoma.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Phenotype, Calcium, Ros, Melanoma, Redox, Mcu, Invasion, Cancer

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Core Facility Proteomics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


