### Accession
PXD006280

### Title
The nuclear receptor ERbeta engages AGO2 in regulation of gene transcription, RNA splicing and RISC loading

### Description
Background: The RNA-binding protein Argonaute 2 (AGO2) is a key effector of RNAsilencing pathways, exerting a pivotal role in microRNA maturation and activity, that in the cell nucleus is able to modulate chromatin remodeling, transcriptional gene regulation and RNA splicing. The Estrogen Receptor beta (ERβ), a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of trancriptional regulators, is endowed with oncosuppressive activities, antagonizing hormone-induced carcinogenesis and inhibiting growth and oncogenic functions in luminal-like breast cancers (BCs), where its expression correlates with a better prognosis of the disease. Results: Applying interaction proteomics coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) to characterize nuclear factors cooperating with ERβ in gene regulation, we identified AGO2 as a novel partner of ERβ in human BC cells. ERβ-AGO2 association was confirmed in vitro and in vivo both in the nucleus and cytoplasm. ChIP-Seq demonstrated AGO2 association to a large number of ERβ binding sites, and total and nascent RNA-Seq in ERβ+ vs ERβ- cells, and before and after AGO2 knock-down in ERβ+ cells, revealed a widespread involvement of this factor in ERβ-mediated regulation of gene transcription rate and RNA splicing. Moreover, isolation and sequencing by RIP-Seq of ERβ-associated long and small RNAs in the cytoplasm suggested involvement of the nuclear receptor in RISC loading, indicating that it may able to control directly also mRNA translation efficiency and stability. Conclusions: These results demonstrate that AGO2 is a pleiotropic functional partner of ERβ in BC cells, indicating that both factors are endowed with multiple roles in the control of BC cell functions.

### Sample Protocol
For experiment performed in presence or absence of AGO2 silencing, three biological replicates of partially purified sample from C-TAP-ERβ for each of the two conditions were analyzed. The proteins were precipitated  and dissolved in 40 µL  0.2% ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant, Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by protein reduction, alkulation and in-solution digestion with trypsin (Promega) overnight in 37 °C. Peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1 % TFA / 50 % ACN, dried, and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % FA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides we employed an EasySpray column capillary of 50 cm bed length (C18, 2 μm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 120 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B 100 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ration (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.5.7.4 for protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was employed with default settings. The SwissProt human database was used (August 2016, with 154,660 entries) for the database searches. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in the samples were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Ago2, Erbeta receptor

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics, Group leader

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics, Group leader


