### Accession
PXD027887

### Title
Intrinsic bias at non-canonical, β-arrestin-coupled seven transmembrane receptors

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are typically characterized by their seven transmembrane (7TM) architecture, and interaction with two universal signal-transducers namely, the heterotrimeric G-proteins and β-arrestins (βarrs). Synthetic ligands and receptor mutants have been designed to elicit transducer-coupling preferences and distinct downstream signaling outcomes for many GPCRs. This raises the question if some naturally-occurring 7TMRs may selectively engage one of these two signal-transducers, even in response to their endogenous agonists. Although there are scattered hints in the literature that some 7TMRs lack G-protein coupling but interact with βarrs, an in-depth understanding of their transducer-coupling preference, GRK-engagement, downstream signaling and structural mechanism remains elusive. Here, we use an array of cellular, biochemical and structural approaches to comprehensively characterize two non-canonical 7TMRs namely, the human decoy D6 receptor (D6R) and the human complement C5a receptor (C5aR2), in parallel with their canonical GPCR counterparts, CCR2 and C5aR1, respectively. We discover that D6R and C5aR2 couple exclusively to βarrs, exhibit distinct GRK-preference, and activate non-canonical downstream signaling partners. We also observe that βarrs, in complex with these receptors, adopt distinct conformations compared to their canonical GPCR counterparts despite being activated by a common natural agonist. Our study therefore establishes D6R and C5aR2 as bona-fide arrestin-coupled receptors (ACRs), and provides important insights into their regulation by GRKs and downstream signaling with direct implications for biased agonism.

### Sample Protocol
In order to identify potential pathways involved in signaling downstream of D6R, we used a Signaling Explorer Antibody Array (Full Moon Biosystems) that features 1358 unique antibodies covering twenty different cellular signaling pathways. This array is designed for broad-scope protein phosphorylation profiling, and we measured the change in phosphorylation status of a large set of proteins upon agonist-stimulation of D6R-expressing cells by comparing the cellular lysates under the basal and agonist-treatment conditions (Figure S8A). A list of all the target proteins, their phosphorylation sites being detected using this array, and the fold change over basal (agonist-treatment vs. no-treatment) are presented in Supplementary Table 1. We observed that about thirty target proteins exhibited ≥1.4 fold increase in their phosphorylation upon agonist-stimulation over basal condition while another thirty proteins displayed a ≤0.75 fold decrease in their phosphorylation status. In addition, we also carried out a mass-spectrometry-based phospho-proteomics study using HEK-293 cells expressing D6R. Similar to Explorer Antibody Array approach described above, we compared the samples prepared under basal (i.e. without agonist-treatment) and stimulated (i.e. agonist-treatment) conditions. We generated the proteolytic fragments using trypsin digestion of cellular lysate from both conditions followed by TiO2 based phospho-peptide enrichment  and detection of phospho-peptides using LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
A simplified schematic of phospho-proteomics experiment is described in Figure S8B, and the complete details of data including the identified hits, fold-change in phosphorylation status and other parameters are included in Supplementary Table 2. We identified a total of 2220 proteins, of which 1265 were phospho-proteins i.e. 57% of the identified proteins after TiO2 based phosphoenrichment were phospho-proteins. The total number of identified peptides was 4972, of which 3424 were phospho-peptides i.e. 69% of the identified peptides were phospho-peptides. A simplified schematic of phospho-proteomics experiment is described in Figure S8B, and the complete details of data including the identified hits, fold-change in phosphorylation status and other parameters are included in Supplementary Table 2. Based on t-test statistics on the two groups i.e. basal and stimulated, we identified a total of 444 significant phospho-peptides, which exhibited differential abundance between the two conditions.     A classification of these proteins based on their cellular localization, molecular function and biological processes suggests that D6R activation is linked to a broad spectrum of cellular and functional outcomes (Figure 6B).   In order to gain further insights into D6R signaling, we first compared the phospho-proteins identified in the Signaling Explorer Antibody Array and MS-based phosphoproteomics study by manually curating and analyzing the hits obtained in these two methods. We identified 46 different proteins that were common to both data-sets. Next, we compared the phospho-proteins identified in the Signaling Explorer Antibody Array and MS-based phosphoproteomics study with those described previously in the context of either βarr-biased agonism or for another chemokine receptor. These previously published data sets include three different studies measuring the phospho-proteins upon stimulation of the angiotensin II subtype 1 receptor (AT1R) using a βarr-biased agonist SII (Christensen et al., 2010; Kendall et al., 2011; Xiao et al., 2010), and a recent study describing the phospho-proteome of another chemokine receptor, CCR2, in response to stimulation with CCL2 chemokine (Huang et al., 2020a). The notion for this comparison is twofold – first, to identify potentially conserved downstream signaling proteins involved in βarr-mediated signaling, and second, to assess the phospho-proteins that are not present in other data-sets and therefore, likely to be D6R-specific. This comparison was also performed by manual curation and analysis using our data-sets and previously published data-sets. This comparison identified not only a number of common proteins present in these studies but also several proteins that are unique to D6R activation (Figure 6C, Figure S11). These findings underline that some of the signaling downstream of D6R may be potentially similar to that identified for other GPCRs in the context of βarr-mediated pathways while there may also exist receptor-specific and previously unidentified pathways downstream of D6R. It should be noted here that SII elicits measurable Gαi and Gα12 signaling response (Namkung et al., 2018), and therefore, a part of the hits identified earlier may not be exclusively βarr-dependent.

### Publication Abstract
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), also known as seven transmembrane receptors (7TMRs), typically interact with two distinct signal-transducers, i.e., G proteins and &#x3b2;-arrestins (&#x3b2;arrs). Interestingly, there are some non-canonical 7TMRs that lack G protein coupling but interact with &#x3b2;arrs, although an understanding of their transducer coupling preference, downstream signaling, and structural mechanism remains elusive. Here, we characterize two such non-canonical 7TMRs, namely, the decoy D6 receptor (D6R) and the complement C5a receptor subtype 2 (C5aR2), in parallel with their canonical GPCR counterparts. We discover that D6R and C5aR2 efficiently couple to &#x3b2;arrs, exhibit distinct engagement of GPCR kinases (GRKs), and activate non-canonical downstream signaling pathways. We also observe that &#x3b2;arrs adopt distinct conformations for D6R and C5aR2, compared to their canonical GPCR counterparts, in response to common natural agonists. Our study establishes D6R and C5aR2 as &#x3b2;arr-coupled 7TMRs and provides key insights into their regulation and signaling with direct implication for biased agonism.

### Keywords
Complement c5a, Biased signaling, Β-arrestins, Gpcr kinases, Gpcrs, Β-arrestin-coupled receptors, Seven transmembrane receptors

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 208016, India
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Arun K. Shukla
Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 208016, India


