### Accession
PXD014872

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of Enriched Esophageal and Gut Tissues from the Human Blood Fluke Schistosoma mansoni

### Description
Schistosomes are blood-dwelling helminth parasites causing a debilitating disease in the tropics. Major challenges to control persist and vaccines would provide an additional tool, but their development has been problematic. During the self-cure response of Rhesus macaques, antibodies target proteins from the tegument, gut and esophagus, the last of which is the least investigated. We developed a dissection technique that permitted comparative proteomics on the schistosome esophagus and gut. A shotgun analysis applied to male heads identified 13 MEG proteins, eleven of which were uniquely located in the esophageal glands. Antigenic variation by alternative splicing of MEG proteoforms was confirmed together with a specialised machinery for protein glycosylation in the esophagus. Moreover some gastrodermal secretions were highly enriched in the gut, while others were more uniformly distributed, potentially as markers of lysosomal activity. Collectively, our findings provide a more rational, better-oriented selection of schistosome vaccine candidates in the context of a proven model of protective immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Adult S. mansoni worms obtained by portal perfusion of 45 days infected mice were fixed in RNAlater solution and subjected to manual micro dissection under a stereomicroscope. Briefly, the oral sucker was first remove followed by an incision along the line of the transverse gut to detach the oesophageal fragments (ESO). The posterior third of the male body (back end, or “BE”) was also excised, providing a reference proteome for relative quantification. Biological replicates consisting of independent mice infection, perfusion and worm dissection provided material for comparative ESO vs BE shotgun analyses in different LC-MS/MS platforms. Protein homogenates of ESO and BE samples were obtained after washing the dissected fragments in ice-cold PBS, pH 7.4, followed by sonication (5x 10 sec cycles at 30% amplitude). Total protein concentration was determined using Coomassie Plus (Bradford) assay kit by interpolation from a BSA standard curve. Sample aliquots equivalent to 20µg of protein were made up to 100µL by the addition of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Protein denaturation was induced by the addition of 20µL of RapiGest SF 1% w/v (Waters, UK) and heating at 80℃ for 10 min. Next, sample volume was adjusted to 180µL with AMBIC before reduction (addition of 10µL 60mM dithiothreitol, 60℃ for 10 min) and alkylation (addition of 10µL 180mM iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 30 min). MS-grade trypsin was added following an enzyme : substrate ratio of 1 : 50. Digestion was allowed to occur at 37℃ for 16h and trypsinolysis was terminated by addition of 1.5µL trifluoroacetic acid. Acidified samples (pH<2) were then incubated at 37℃ for 45 min to precipitate RapiGest SF which was later removed by centrifugation 13,000g for 15 min at 7℃. Supernatant was recovered for LC-MS analysis.  ESO and BE worm fragments were analysed using either a Q Exactive HF™ hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) or Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific), both coupled to Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), with the same column specifications. Briefly, 700ng of digested samples were resolved over a 90 or 95 min gradient and analysed in positive mode using the Q Exactive HF and Orbitrap Fusion instruments, respectively. Spectral acquisition on the Q Exactive HF was performed using Top16 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) or TopSpeed DDA mode with three seconds cycles on the Orbitrap Fusion. In the later MS platform, samples were analysed using either CID or HCD activation capabilities of the instrument. Product ions were detected using the Ion Trap at rapid scan rate. Alternatively, a set of ESO and BE samples was similarly prepared for geLC/MS-MS analysis using a Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
De novo sequencing-assisted database searching was performed using PEAKS Studio v8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada). Spectral data were searched against S. mansoni sequences deposited at GeneDB.org (downloaded at 17/10/2017) supplemented with protein sequences of esophageal hydrolases detected in a previous RNAseq experiment (10,875 sequences; 5,942,443 residues). Esophageal MEG proteins were individually searched using a database composed of the sequences deposited in GeneDB and NCBI plus putative proteoforms generated in silico by combinatorial exon permutation (2,269 sequences; 223,997 residues). Precursors and product ion mass error tolerances were set respectively to 15 ppm and 0.02 Da, for the Q Exactive HF, or 10 ppm and 0.35 Da, for the Fusion instrument. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (P1 = K/R, except if P1’= P) allowing up to one missed cleavage site. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and dynamic methionine oxidation were set as peptide modifications. The quality threshold for Peptide-scan match (PSM) was adjusted to keep the false discovery rate (FDR) ≤0.01. Relative label-free quantification for comparative ESO vs BE analysis was performed using Peaks Q enabling the exclusion of peptides with both modified and unmodified forms. Differentially abundant proteins with Benjamin–Hochberg adjusted p-values ≤0.01, fold difference ≥1.5 and at least two unique peptides comprised the subset of ESO- or BE-enriched components.

### Publication Abstract
Schistosomes are blood-dwelling helminth parasites that cause schistosomiasis, a debilitating disease resulting in inflammation and, in extreme cases, multiple organ damage. Major challenges to control the transmission persist, and the discovery of protective antigens remains of critical importance for vaccine development. Rhesus macaques can self-cure following schistosome infection, generating antibodies that target proteins from the tegument, gut, and esophagus, the last of which is the least investigated. We developed a dissection technique that permitted increased sensitivity in a comparative proteomics profiling of schistosome esophagus and gut. Proteome analysis of the male schistosome esophagus identified 13 proteins encoded by microexon genes (MEGs), 11 of which were uniquely located in the esophageal glands. Based on this and transcriptome information, a QconCAT was designed for the absolute quantification of selected targets. MEGs 12, 4.2, and 4.1 and venom allergen-like protein 7 were the most abundant, spanning over 245 million to 6 million copies per cell, while aspartyl protease, palmitoyl thioesterase, and galactosyl transferase were present at &lt;1 million copies. Antigenic variation by alternative splicing of MEG proteins was confirmed together with a specialized machinery for protein glycosylation/secretion in the esophagus. Moreover, some gastrodermal secretions were highly enriched in the gut, while others were more uniformly distributed throughout the parasite, potentially indicating lysosomal activity. Collectively, our findings provide a more rational, better-oriented selection of schistosome vaccine candidates in the context of a proven model of protective immunity.

### Keywords
Schistosoma mansoni, Gastrodermis, Quantitative proteomics, Esophageal gland, Microexon genes

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral researcher at Brazilian National Biosciences Laboratory (LNBio), CNPEM, Campinas, Brazil
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Enzimologia e Proteômica, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brazil

### Submitter
Leandro Neves

### Lab Head
Dr William de Castro Borges
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Enzimologia e Proteômica, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brazil


