### Accession
PXD038699

### Title
Spatial single-cell mass spectrometry defines zonation of the hepatocyte proteome

### Description
Single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry (MS) is emerging as a powerful and unbiased method for the characterization of biological heterogeneity. So far, it has been limited to cultured cells, whereas an expansion of the method to complex tissues would greatly enhance biological insights. Here we describe single-cell Deep Visual Proteomics (scDVP), a technology that integrates high-content imaging, laser microdissection and multiplexed MS. scDVP resolves the context-dependent, spatial proteome of murine hepatocytes at a current depth of 1,700 proteins from a slice of a cell. Half of the proteome was differentially regulated in a spatial manner, with protein levels changing dramatically in proximity to the central vein. We applied machine learning to proteome classes and images, which subsequently inferred the spatial proteome from imaging data alone. scDVP is applicable to healthy and diseased tissues and complements other spatial proteomics or spatial omics technologies.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were prepared semi-automated on a Bravo pipetting robot (Agilent). For this, plates were removed from the freezer and centrifuged. The wells were then washed on the robot with 28 µL of 100% acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) at 45°C for 20 minutes. Shapes were then re-suspended in 6 µL of 80mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5, Sigma) with 0.013% dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM, Sigma), and cooked for 30 minutes at 95°C in a PCR cycler. After addition of 1 µL of 80% acetonitrile, samples were incubated for another 30 minutes at 75°C, cooled briefly, and 1 µL with 4 ng LysC and 6 ng trypsin was added. We digested the samples for 18 hours, and added 1 µL of either medium (CD2O) or heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) to a final concentration of 0.15%. Without delay, either light (NaBH3CN) or heavy (NaBD3CN) cyanoborohydrate were added to 0.023M to get Δ4 and Δ8 dimethyl-labeled samples. The sealed plate was then incubated at room temperature for 1 hour, and the reaction was quenched to 0.13% ammonia, and acidified to 1% TFA.  C-18 tips (Evotip Pure, EvoSep, Denmark) were activated for 5 minutes in 1-propoanl, washed twice with 50 µL of buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), activation for 5 minutes in 1-propanol, and two washes with 50 µL buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Single-shape samples were then loaded automatically with the Agilent Bravo robot into 30 µL buffer in the tip that was spun through the C-18 disk for a few seconds only. For loading, 10 µL of reference peptides were pipetted first, followed by Δ4, and then Δ8 samples with the same tip. Wells were then rinsed with 15 µL buffer A that were also loaded onto the tip. After peptide binding, the disk was further washed once with 50 µL buffer A, and then overlayed with 150 µL buffer A. All centrifugation steps were performed at 700g for 1 minutes, expect sample loading for 2 minutes.  Samples were measured with the Evosep One LC system (EvoSep) coupled to a timsTOF SCP mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, US). The Whisper40 SPD (samples per day) method was used with the Aurora Elite CSI third generation 15 cm and 75 um ID (AUR3-15075C18-CS IonOpticks, Australia) at 50°C inside a nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics, US). The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in LC–MS-grade water (buffer A) and 99.9% ACN/0.1% FA (buffer B). The timsTOF SCP was operated in dia-PASEF mode with variable window widths. We used a py_diAID 17 optimized dia-PASEF method with 8 dia-PASEF scans with variable width and 2 TIMS ramps per dia-PASEF scan, covering an m/z from 250 to 1200 and an ion mobility range from 0.7 to 1.3 Vs cm-2, as previously used on the same gradient and similar input material amount. Further details see (mDIA, bioRxiv). The mass spectrometer was operated in high sensitivity mode, with an accumulation and ramp time at 100ms, capillary voltage set to 1400V and the collision energy as a linear ramp from 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
All 263 files were search together with DIA-NN 19 against the above-generated library, using a mass and MS1 mass accuracy of 15.0, scan windows of 9, and activated isotopologues, MBR, heuristic protein inference and no shared spectra, in single-pass mode. Proteins were inferred from genes. For library generation, ‘IDs, RT & IM profiling’ was set, ‘Robust LC’ as quantification strategy. Dimethyl labeling at N-termini and lysins was set as fixed modification at 28.0313Da, and Δ4 or Δ8 were spaced 4.0251 Da or 8.0444 Da from the reference Δ0. Additional settings were --original-mods --peak-translation --ms1-isotope-quant --report-lib-info.  Data analysis To determine the quantities of the precursors in the DIA-NN report.txt file, we utilized the Python-based RefQuant algorithm (ref. RefQuant determines the ratio between target- and reference channel for each individual fragment ion and MS1 isotope that is available. This gives a collection of ratios from which RefQuant estimates a likely overall ratio between target and reference. The ratio between target and reference was rescaled by the median reference intensity over all runs for the given precursor, thereby giving a meaningful intensity value for the target channel. The precursor table was then collapsed to protein groups using the iq package in Python.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry is emerging as a powerful and unbiased method for the characterization of biological heterogeneity. So far, it has been limited to cultured cells, whereas an expansion of the method to complex tissues would greatly enhance biological insights. Here we describe single-cell Deep Visual Proteomics (scDVP), a technology that integrates high-content imaging, laser microdissection and multiplexed mass spectrometry. scDVP resolves the context-dependent, spatial proteome of murine hepatocytes at a current depth of 1,700 proteins from a cell slice. Half of the proteome was differentially regulated in a spatial manner, with protein levels changing dramatically in proximity to the central vein. We applied machine learning to proteome classes and images, which subsequently inferred the spatial proteome from imaging data alone. scDVP is applicable to healthy and diseased tissues and complements other spatial proteomics and spatial omics technologies.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Hepatocytes, Liver, Machine learning, Tissue heterogeneity, Spatial omics

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


