### Accession
PXD016282

### Title
Prostate cancer cells, Phosphorylation, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Prostate cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer deaths for men in the U.SS. Global phosphorylation study on prostate cancer is still rare, in this study SILAC and TiO2 were used to quantify the phosphorylation in PC-3 cell and PC-3M cell. Global proteomics analysis was used to comparative analysis the protein level in the PC-3 cell and PC-3M cell.

### Sample Protocol
Prostate cancer cell was labeled by SILAC. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and in-solution digestion. After trypsin digestion peptide was desalted by C18 Sep-pack. Phosphorylated peptide was enriched by TiO2 tips. Before injected to Mass spectrometry peptide was desalted by C18 zip-tip. And enriched peptides was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw MS files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5, http://www.maxquant.org/) against a Homo sapiens database. In the parameter settings, oxidation and acetyl (protein N-term) and phosphorylation were chosen as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was chosen among the digest enzymes. The peptide sequences were searched including contamination. The protein FDR was set at 0.01. The number of threads was 10. For the data arrangement, “contamination +” and “reverse +” were removed from the raw file, and a protein “score” below 40 and Ksu “localization prob” below 75% were filtered from our results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Prostate cancer cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Yan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
Associate Professor


