### Accession
PXD024021

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of tomato genotypes with contrasting cadmium tolerance

### Description
A first insight into the effects of cadmium exposure on the phosphoproteome of tomato plants by performing a comparative analysis of tomato genotypes with contrasting cadmium tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide preparation Freeze dried tomato leaves were grinded in a Retsch mill with Zirkonia beads for 5 min at 30 Hz. The urea/DTT extraction buffer (8 M urea/5 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5/ protease inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma) (20 µL/mL)) was added to the finely ground plant material, and samples were mixed and incubated for 30 min at RT. After centrifugation for 10 min (10k x g) at RT, the supernatant was removed and transferred to a fresh tube. This procedure was repeated up to 3 times, until no visible pellet was retained.  Protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660 nm protein assay. Samples were alkylated using chloroacetamide (CAA) (550 mM stock, 14 mM final concentration) for 30 min at RT in the dark, after which an aliquot corresponding to 500 µg total protein was subjected to in-solution digestion. In brief, samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2, then 5 µg Lys-C (WAKO) was added. Samples were incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking, after which 700 µL 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and 5 µg trypsin were added. Samples were incubated o/n at 37 °C with shaking. Samples were acidified with 15 µL 50 % TFA and desalted using C18 SepPaks (1 cc cartridge, 100 mg (WAT023590)).  In brief, SepPaks were conditioned using methanol (1 mL), buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) (1 mL) and buffer A (0.1 % TFA) (2 mL). Samples were loaded by gravity flow, washed with buffer A (1 x 1 mL, 1 x 2 mL) and eluted with buffer B (2 x 400 µL). 40 µL of eluates were used for peptide measurement and concentrated as input control. For phosphopeptide enrichment by hydroxy acid-modified metal-oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) (adapted from Nakagami 2014) the remaining samples were evaporated to a sample volume of 50 µL and diluted with sample buffer (2 mL AcN, 820 µL lactic acid (LA), 2.5 µL TFA / 80 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA, 300 mg/ml LA, final concentrations) (282 µL). HAMMOC columns were prepared by loading a slurry of 3 mg/sample TiO2 beads (Titansphere TiO2 beads 5 µm (GL Science Inc, Japan, Cat. No.  5020-75010)) in 100 µL MeOH onto a C8 micro column and centrifugation for 5 min at 1500 g. The columns were washed with centrifugation at 1500 g for 5 min using 80 µL of solution B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) and 80 µL of solution C (300 mg/mL LA in solution B). To simplify the processing, samples tips were fitted onto a 96/500 µL deep well plate (Protein LoBind, (Eppendorf Cat. No.  0030504100). After washing, the columns were transferred to a 96/2000 µL deep well plate (Protein LoBind (Eppendorf Cat. No.  0030504100), samples were loaded onto the equilibrated columns and centrifuged for 10 min at 1000 g. The flow through was reloaded onto the columns and centrifugation was repeated. The columns were washed with centrifugation at 1500 g for 5 min using 80 µL of solution B and 80 µL of solution C. For the elution of the enriched phosphopeptides the columns were transferred to a fresh 96/500 µL deep well plate containing 100 µL/well of acidification buffer (20 % phosphoric acid). Peptides were eluted first with 50 µL elution buffer 1 (5 % NH4OH) and centrifugation for 5 min at 800 g, then with 50 µL of elution buffer 2 (10 % piperidine) and centrifugation for 5 min at 800 g. Next, the samples were desalted using StageTips with C18 Empore disk membranes (3 M) (Rappsilber et al. 2003), dried in a vacuum evaporator, and dissolved in 10 µL 2 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA.   LC-MS/MS data acquisition Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5 % to 95 % solvent B (0 min: 5 % B; 0-5 min -> 5 % B; 5-65 min -> 20 % B; 65-90 min ->35 % B; 90-100 min -> 55 %; 100-105 min ->95 %, 105-115 min ->95 %) (solvent A 0 % ACN, 0.1 % FA; solvent B 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 120 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30 s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed individually using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al. 2016). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Solanum lycopersicum (ITAG3.2_proteins.fasta;ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG3.2_release/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match between runs option was enabled. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1 % in both cases. Statistical analysis of the intensity values obtained for phosphopeptides (“modificationSpecificPeptides.txt” output file) was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified peptides were filtered for reverse and contaminant hits, then only those peptides with phospho (STY) modification were retained for downstream analysis. Intensity values were log2 transformed and after grouping samples by condition only those phosphopeptides were retained for the subsequent analysis that had three valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a p-value cutoff permutation-based FDR of 0.01. The Perseus output was exported and further processed in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cadmium-tolerance, Phosphoproteomics, Tomato, Crop engineering

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


