### Accession
PXD001270

### Title
Identification of immunodominant antigen among Brucella species (B. abortus and B. melitensis) using hyper immune serum from naturally infected hosts

### Description
In the present study, the whole cell protein extracts of B. abortus and B. melitensis were separated using SDS-PAGE and western blotting was carried out with the antiserum from naturally infected host animals (cow, buffalo, goat and sheep). The proteins bands that matched with western blot signals were excised, trypsin digested and subjected to MALDI identification.

### Sample Protocol
The whole cell protein extracts were prepared from B. abortus isolated from infected cow from Turkey and B. melitensis isolated from infected sheep from China. Three sets of The bacterial proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE and Western blotting was carried out using hyper immune serum collected from naturally infected host species (cattle, buffalo, sheep and goat). The blotting was carried out using three serum samples in each case and the corresponding bands were excised, trypsin digested and subjected to protein identification using MALDI TOF MS.

### Data Protocol
The spectra was acquired using the AutoXecute option of the Flex Analysis software version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany), spectra processing were processed using Flex analysis software  version 3.3 and protein identification was carried out using Biotools 3.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany) software integrated  MASCOT search engine. The.dat, .mgf, .xml and .myIDENTxml file were exported for data deposit.

### Publication Abstract
Brucella (B.) species lack classical virulence factors, but escape effectively the immune response of the host. The species Brucella abortus and Brucella melitensis infect predominantly cattle and small ruminants such as sheep or goats, respectively, but account also for most human cases. These two species share remarkably similar genomes but different proteomes have been demonstrated. This might be one of the reasons for their host specificity. A comprehensive identification of immunodominant proteins of these two species using antibodies present in the serum of naturally infected ruminants might provide insight on the mechanism of their infection in different hosts. In the present study, whole-cell protein extracts of B. abortus and B. melitensis were separated using SDS-PAGE and western blotting was performed using field sera from cows, buffaloes, sheep and goats. Protein bands that matched with western blot signals were excised, digested with trypsin and subjected to protein identification using MALDI-TOF MS. Identified proteins included heat shock proteins, enzymes, binding proteins and hypothetical proteins. Antibodies against the same set of antigen were found for all species investigated, except for superoxide dismutase of B. melitensis for which antibodies were demonstrated only in sheep serum. Brucellae appear to express these proteins mainly for their survival in the host system during infection.

### Keywords
Immunodominat proteins, Maldi tof ms, Brucella, Hyper immune serum, Western blotting

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infections Medicine, Freie Universitaet-Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag Str. 7 – 13, 14163 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infections Medicine, Freie Universitaet-Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag Str. 7 – 13, 14163 Berlin, Germany


