### Accession
PXD020544

### Title
PBRM1 loss in kidney cancer imbalances the proximal tubule master transcription factor hub to repress proximal tubule differentiation

### Description
PBRM1 is the 2nd-most frequently inactivated gene in clear cell renal cell cancer (RCC) but the oncogenic mechanisms, and hence methods for correction, are unclear. PBRM1 is a subunit of the PBAF coactivator complex that transcription factors use to reposition nucleosomes (‘open chromatin’) for gene activation. We therefore looked for transcription factors that recruit endogenous PBRM1 in kidney lineage/RCC cells, as a waypoint to identifying pathways impacted by PBRM1 loss. Unbiased immunoprecipitation/mass-spectrometry analyses of the endogenous PBRM1 interactome in kidney lineage cells revealed PAX8, a master transcription factor essential for proximal tubule epithelial fates, as the major transcription factor recruiting PBRM1/PBAF. The reverse analyses of the PAX8 interactome confirmed recruitment specifically of PBRM1/PBAF, and not the functionally similar BAF coactivator complex. More conspicuous in the PAX8 hub in RCC cells, however, were several corepressors, e.g. DNMT1, which oppose coactivators to repress instead of activate genes. Accordingly, key PAX8 target genes, e.g., GATA3, LHX1, WT1, and ~1000 other downstream kidney epithelial genes, but not PAX8 or PAX2, demonstrated loss of the histone lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) activation mark, increase in CpG methylation repression marks, and lower expression in RCC vs normal kidney cortex, with the greatest repression in cases with bi-allelic PBRM1 inactivation. PBRM1 re-introduction into RCC cells, or depletion of the corepressor DNMT1 using siRNA or a clinical drug decitabine, rebalanced composition and function of the PAX8 transcription factor hub to coactivators, to thereby activate terminal epithelial-fates in vitro and in vivo. In sum, PBRM1 loss in RCC cells skews coregulator composition of the PAX8 master transcription factor hub toward corepressors and repression instead of activation of the downstream terminal epithelial-program; this oncogenic action could be reversed by pharmacologic corepressor depletion/inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS Immunoprecipitation products were subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue (Gel Code Blue, Pierce Chemical). Gel slices were excised from the top to the bottom of the lane; proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, D0632, 10mM), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, I1149, 55mM), and digested in situ with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces 3 times using 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid/water. The dried tryptic peptide mixture was redissolved in 20 μL of 1% formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis. The LC-MS system, ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer interfaced with dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC with Dionex column (15 cm × 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 μm, 100 Å reversed- phase capillary chromatography column) were used for data collection. The extracts from trypsin digest (5 µL) were injected and the peptides eluted using acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Data Validation.  Mascot Daemon software (version 2.3.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to perform database searches, using the Extract_msn.exe macro provided with Xcalibur (version 2.0 SR2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peaklists. The following parameters were set for creation of the peaklists: parent ions in the mass range 400–4500, no grouping of MS/MS scans, and threshold at 1000. A peaklist was created for each analyzed fraction (i.e., gel slice), and individual Mascot (version 2.3.01) searches were performed for each fraction. The data were searched against Homo sapiens entries in Uniprot protein database (Feb 2018 release; 20,316 total sequences). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after Lys or Arg, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively, and the instrument setting was specified as “ESITrap.” To calculate the false discovery rate (FDR), the search was performed using the “decoy” option in Mascot. The spectral FDR and protein FDR are 0.35±0.17 % and 4.28±1.99 % respectively. A minimum Mascot ion score of 25 and peptide rank 1 was used for automatically accepting all peptide MS/MS spectra.  Label free relative protein quantitation (LFQ). Relative protein quantification was performed using spectral count-based LFQ. For each biological sample, data from the individual gel slices were combined. Statistical analysis was performed on all proteins identified with average spectral counts of ≥2. The spectral count data was normalized by total spectral counts of the targeted protein (PAX8 or PBRM1) in each sample to adjust for differences in overall protein levels among samples. Proteins were considered to have a significant difference in abundance if there was a difference of two fold or greater in normalized spectral counts between experiments and a p value ≤ 0.01 using a two-tailed t test. Spectral counts for all proteins and peptides identified are provided in supplementary material.

### Publication Abstract
PBRM1, a subunit of the PBAF coactivator complex that transcription factors use to activate target genes, is genetically inactivated in almost all clear cell renal cell cancers (RCCs). Using unbiased proteomic analyses, we find that PAX8, a master transcription factor driver of proximal tubule epithelial fates, recruits PBRM1/PBAF. Reverse analyses of the PAX8 interactome confirm recruitment specifically of PBRM1/PBAF and not functionally similar BAF. More conspicuous in the PAX8 hub in RCC cells, however, are corepressors, which functionally oppose coactivators. Accordingly, key PAX8 target genes are repressed in RCC versus normal kidneys, with the loss of histone lysine-27 acetylation, but intact lysine-4 trimethylation, activation marks. Re-introduction of PBRM1, or depletion of opposing corepressors using siRNA or drugs, redress coregulator imbalance and release RCC cells to terminal epithelial fates. These mechanisms thus explain RCC resemblance to the proximal tubule lineage but with suppression of the late-epithelial program that normally terminates lineage-precursor proliferation.

### Keywords
Pbrm1 pax8 differentiation

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Xiaorong Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaorong Gu
Cleveland Clinic


