### Accession
PXD008074

### Title
AKIR-1 protein-protein interactions in C. elegans

### Description
We combined transgenic AKIR-1::GFP C. elegans strain and label-free quantitative affinity purification to identify protein interaction partners of AKIR-1. An additonal pull-down experiment was performed to study AKIR-1 interactions under Drechmeria coniospora infection.

### Sample Protocol
Unsynchronized worms were lysed and split into either the anti-GFP agarose beads or the blocked control beads. Precipitated proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Samples were measured by the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.5.0) using Andromeda search engine. Spectral data were searched against a target-decoy database consisting of the forward and reverse sequences of WormPep release WS254 (28,071 entries), UniProt E. coli K-12 proteome release 2016_02 (4,314 entries) and a list of 245 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic gene expression requires the coordinated action of transcription factors, chromatin remodelling complexes and RNA polymerase. The conserved nuclear protein Akirin plays a central role in immune gene expression in insects and mammals, linking the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodelling complex with the transcription factor NF&#x3ba;B. Although nematodes lack NF&#x3ba;B, Akirin is also indispensable for the expression of defence genes in the epidermis of Caenorhabditis elegans following natural fungal infection. Through a combination of reverse genetics and biochemistry, we discovered that in C. elegans Akirin has conserved its role of bridging chromatin-remodellers and transcription factors, but that the identity of its functional partners is different since it forms a physical complex with NuRD proteins and the POU-class transcription factor CEH-18. In addition to providing a substantial step forward in our understanding of innate immune gene regulation in C. elegans, our results give insight into the molecular evolution of lineage-specific signalling pathways.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Akir-1, Ppi

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine


