### Accession
PXD007556

### Title
Protease specificity profiling in a pipette tip using “charge-synchronized” proteome-derived peptide libraries

### Description
About 2% of the genome of human and other organisms codes for proteases. An important step toward deciphering the biological function of a protease and designing inhibitors is the profiling of protease specificity. In this work we present a novel, label-free, proteomics-based protease specificity profiling method that only requires simple sample preparation steps. It uses proteome-derived peptide libraries and enriches the cleaved sequences using strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) material in a pipette tip. As a demonstration of the method’s versatility, we successfully determined the specificity of GluC, caspase-3, chymotrypsin and cathepsin G from several hundreds to almost 2000 cleavage events per proteases. Interestingly, we also found and confirmed a novel intrinsic preference of cathepsin G for Asn at the P1 subsite, explaining the reported cleavage position on the P. aeruginosa aeruginosa flagellin by human cathepsin G . Overall, this method is straightforward and requires so far the lowest investment in material and equipment for protease specificity profiling. Therefore, we think it will be applicable in any biochemistry laboratory and promote an increased understanding of protease specificity.

### Sample Protocol
Charge-based diagonal fractionation of peptides on a pipette tip) from charged-synchronized peptide library:  1- Generate a charged-synchronized proteome-derived peptide library  2- Separate into 2 fractions (Fraction A contains most 0 and +1 peptides; Fraction B +2 peptides)by ChaFRAtip  3- Perform digestion of each fraction with the protease of interest, which generates new daughter peptides with different charge state in each fraction  4- Separate new daughter peptides from uncleaved peptides in each fraction using ChaFRAtip (Fraction A2, B0, B1 and B3)  5- Subject them to MS for analysis

### Data Protocol
1- Combine all identified peptides in the MS data set of the 4 analyzed SCX2 fractions into a non-redundant list and attach the information about their corresponding elution fractions.  2- Sort the peptides into prime and non-prime  3- a)Remove from non-prime list: protein C-terminal peptides b) Remove from prime list: protein N-terminal peptides and full ArgC peptides  4- a) Remove from non-prime list:  peptides that have TNC equal to or higher than 2; remove from prime list: peptides that have TNC lower than 2 b) Remove from non-prime list: peptides eluted in fraction A2 or B3; remove from prime list: peptides eluted in fraction B0 and B1  5- Remove from prime list peptides having acetylated N-termini   6- Remove from both lists peptides with a length of less than 6 amino acids  7- Reconstitute cleavage sequences from the prime and non-prime list by searching the E. coli protein database and combine into a non-redundant list of sequences.

### Publication Abstract
About 2% of the genome of human and other organisms codes for proteases. An important step toward deciphering the biological function of a protease and designing inhibitors is the profiling of protease specificity. In this work we present a novel, label-free, proteomics-based protease specificity profiling method that only requires simple sample preparation steps. It uses proteome-derived peptide libraries and enriches the cleaved sequences using strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) material in a pipet tip. As a demonstration of the method's versatility, we successfully determined the specificity of GluC, caspase-3, chymotrypsin, MMP-1 and cathepsin G from several hundreds to almost 2000 cleavage events per protease. Interestingly, we also found a novel intrinsic preference of cathepsin G for Asn at the P1 subsite, which we confirmed using synthetic peptides. Overall, this method is straightforward and requires so far the lowest investment in material and equipment for protease specificity profiling. Therefore, we think it will be applicable in any biochemistry laboratory and promote an increased understanding of protease specificity.

### Keywords
Chafratip, Charged-synchronized peptide library, Protease specificity, Label-free

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Prof. Dr. Steven Verhelst Laboratory of Chemical Biology Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine KU Leuven - University of Leuven Herestraat 49, box 802 3000 Leuven Belgium

### Submitter
Minh Thi Nhat Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Steven L. Verhelst
Prof. Dr. Steven Verhelst Laboratory of Chemical Biology Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine KU Leuven - University of Leuven Herestraat 49, box 802 3000 Leuven Belgium


