### Accession
PXD038908

### Title
Resistance mechanism to Notch inhibition and combination therapy in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Description
Gain-of-function mutations in NOTCH1 are among the most frequent genetic alterations in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), making the Notch signaling pathway a promising therapeutic target for personalized medicine. Yet, a major limitation for long-term success of targeted therapy is relapse due to tumor heterogeneity or acquired resistance. Thus, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen to identify prospective resistance mechanisms to pharmacological NOTCH inhibitors and novel targeted combination therapies to efficiently combat T-ALL. Mutational loss of Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase regulatory subunit 1 (PIK3R1) causes resistance to Notch inhibition. PIK3R1 deficiency leads to increased PIK3/Akt signaling which regulates the spliceosome and cell cycle machinery, both at the transcriptional and post-translational level. Moreover, several therapeutic combinations have been identified, where simultaneous targeting of the cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) and NOTCH proved to be the most efficacious in T-ALL xenotransplantation models.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic digestion was performed with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 4 hours followed by a 6-fold dilution with 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (Sigma) to 1M GndCl . Samples were further digested with Trypsin gold (Promega) 1:40 overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were desalted using a 100mg SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters) and vacuum centrifuged. For TMT labeling, dried peptides from each sample (250μg) were first reconstituted in 30μl 100mM HEPES pH 8 and 12μl of TMT solution (66,6µg/μl in pure acetonitrile) was then added. TMT labelling was performed at room temperature for 1.5h and reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) for 15min. TMT-labeled samples were then pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. A single shot control LC-MS run was performed to ensure similar peptide mixing across each TMT channel to avoid the need of further excessive normalization. The combined samples were then desalted using a 500mg SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters) and vacuum centrifuged. For proteome analysis of TMT labelled samples, 5% of the pooled samples were fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent OFF-Gel 3100 system following the manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting fractions were desalted on SDBRPS StageTips16 and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were then enriched using the sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) strategy using two consecutive High Select TiO2 enrichments and a Fe-NTA enrichment (Thermo Scientific). Eluates were immediately acidified, combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Resulting phosphopeptides were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific). All fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at −20°C until the day of MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, each individual fraction was resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile; 0.1% Formic acid and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system on-line connected with a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer interfaced with FAIMS Pro.  A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18 ; 3μm-100Å ; 2cm x 75μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were performed at 250nl/min over a 150min. biphasic gradients on a 50cm long in-house packed capillary column (75μm ID; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch). Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using 3 seconds cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 (at 200m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 37.5% using an isolation window of 0.7m/z. Fragmented ions scans were acquired with a resolution of 50’000 (at 200m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 120s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda17 and MS Fragger18 in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against the Uniprot Human reference proteome (77027 canonical and isoform Sequences - Last Modified 21/01/29). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Precursor tolerance and ion fragment tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT tags (K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications whereas oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y)  were considered as a variable. Proteome Discoverer node ptmRS was used for analysis and mapping of peptide/protein phosphorylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
Gain-of-function mutations in NOTCH1 are among the most frequent genetic alterations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), highlighting the Notch signaling pathway as a promising therapeutic target for personalized medicine. Yet, a major limitation for long-term success of targeted therapy is relapse due to tumor heterogeneity or acquired resistance. Thus, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen to identify prospective resistance mechanisms to pharmacological NOTCH inhibitors and novel targeted combination therapies to efficiently combat T-ALL. Mutational loss of phosphoinositide-3-kinase regulatory subunit 1 (PIK3R1) causes resistance to Notch inhibition. PIK3R1 deficiency leads to increased PI3K/AKT signaling, which regulates cell cycle and the spliceosome machinery, both at the transcriptional and posttranslational level. Moreover, several therapeutic combinations have been identified, in which simultaneous targeting of the cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) and NOTCH proved to be the most efficacious in T-ALL xenotransplantation models.

### Keywords
Notch1, Combination therapies, Pik3r1, T-all, Resistance mechanisms

### Affiliations
PCF
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Freddy Radtke
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


