### Accession
PXD008173

### Title
Proteomic profiling in mouse kidneys post-UUO

### Description
Increased export of transglutaminase-2 (TG2) by tubular epithelial cells (TECs) into the surrounding interstitium modifies the extracellular homeostatic balance leading to fibrotic membrane expansion. Although silencing of extracellular TG2 ameliorates progressive kidney scarring in animal models of chronic kidney disease, the pathway through which TG2 is secreted from TECs and contributes to disease progression has not been elucidated. In this study, we developed a global proteomic approach to identify binding partners of TG2 responsible for TG2 externalization in kidneys subjected to unilateral ureteric obstruction, using TG2-knockout kidneys as negative controls. We report a robust and unbiased analysis of the membrane interactome of TG2 in fibrotic kidneys relative to the entire proteome post-UUO detected by SWATH-mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
TG2-IP:  10% (w/v) kidney homogenates were prepared from WT and TG2-KO kidneys, UUO and sham operated, by mechanical homogenization performed on ice using an Ultra Turrax T25 homogenizer (Merck, UK) in homogenization buffer [0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM EDTA, pH 7.4] containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, UK). The whole homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 min at 4°C to remove larger particulates, then membranes were separated from the cytosolic fraction by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 30 min as previously described12. The pellet (crude membrane fraction) was re-suspended in immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) NP40 detergent solution, 5% (v/v) glycerol, pH 7.4] containing protease inhibitor cocktail. TG2 with associated proteins was immunoprecipitated from the membrane fraction using the Pierce crosslink magnetic IP kit (Thermo Scientific, UK), by protein A/G magnetic beads to which anti-TG2 antibody (IA12, University of Sheffield) was crosslinked using disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS). Incubations of membrane lysates with the antibody-coated beads was performed for 15 h at 4°C in constant rotation.  TG2-associated proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion directly on the beads after washing the beads three times with 50 mM ammonium acetate and incubating for 15 h with 200 ng/µL of proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma, UK) in 50 mM ammonium acetate. Kidney lysate:  UUO and sham operated kidney halves were ground in liquid nitrogen and a 10% (w/v) tissue homogenate was prepared in lysis buffer containing 9.5 M urea, 2% (w/v) DTT, 1% (w/v) N-octyl-β-glucopyranoside (OGP) and protease inhibitors (Sigma, UK), with sonication. Equal amounts of total protein extracts (50 µg) were diluted in 50 mM tri-ethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing a final concentration of 0.02% (w/v) ProteaseMAX™ surfactant (Promega, UK). Proteins were subjected to reduction (5 mM DTT at 56°C for 20 min) and alkylation (15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min), then trypsin digested overnight at 37°C with 0.02 mg/mL MS grade trypsin (Promega, UK) and 0.01% (w/v) ProteaseMAX™ surfactant in a thermomixer. Samples were vacuum concentrated to dryness and resuspended in 20 µL of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
TG2-IP SWATH-MS data were extracted against a spectral library generated from multiple information dependent acquisition MS analyses searched together using ProteinPilot 4.5 Beta searched against Swissprot Mouse protein fasta (January 2014 release), limited to proteins/peptides at 1 % FDR, excluding modified peptides.  The library was aligned to the SWATH files using iRT peptides and extracted in Peakview 2 using the SWATH microapp (Sciex).  Kidney lysate SWATH-MS data were processed using the OneOmics cloud processing software (Sciex) against a spectral library generated from 5 information dependent analysis (IDA) MS runs searched together in Protein Pilot 5.0 against Swissprot Mouse protein fasta (March 2016) limited to proteins/peptides at 1% FDR excluding modified peptides. The spectral library was aligned against the SWATH data using PeakView 2.1 SWATH microapp (Sciex) before extraction in OneOmics.

### Publication Abstract
Increased export of transglutaminase-2 (TG2) by tubular epithelial cells (TECs) into the surrounding interstitium modifies the extracellular homeostatic balance, leading to fibrotic membrane expansion. Although silencing of extracellular TG2 ameliorates progressive kidney scarring in animal models of CKD, the pathway through which TG2 is secreted from TECs and contributes to disease progression has not been elucidated. In this study, we developed a global proteomic approach to identify binding partners of TG2 responsible for TG2 externalization in kidneys subjected to unilateral ureteric obstruction (UUO) using TG2 knockout kidneys as negative controls. We report a robust and unbiased analysis of the membrane interactome of TG2 in fibrotic kidneys relative to the entire proteome after UUO, detected by SWATH mass spectrometry. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008173. Clusters of exosomal proteins in the TG2 interactome supported the hypothesis that TG2 is secreted by extracellular membrane vesicles during fibrosis progression. In established TEC lines, we found TG2 in vesicles of both endosomal (exosomes) and plasma membrane origin (microvesicles/ectosomes), and TGF-<i>&#x3b2;</i>1 stimulated TG2 secretion. Knockout of syndecan-4 (SDC4) greatly impaired TG2 exosomal secretion. TG2 coprecipitated with SDC4 from exosome lysate but not ectosome lysate. <i>Ex vivo</i>, EGFP-tagged TG2 accumulated in globular elements (blebs) protruding/retracting from the plasma membrane of primary cortical TECs, and SDC4 knockout impaired bleb formation, affecting TG2 release. Through this combined <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> approach, we have dissected the pathway through which TG2 is secreted from TECs in CKD.

### Keywords
Mouse, Swath, 6600, Chronic kidney disease, Transglutaminase-2, Kidney

### Affiliations
Nottingham Trent University
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, UK

### Submitter
David Boocock

### Lab Head
Dr David Boocock
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, UK


