### Accession
PXD031514

### Title
Arabidopsis whole seedling LC-MS/MS

### Description
Pollen grains are coated with a pollen wall which protects the microspore from various biotic and abiotic stresses, as well as facilitates male-female interaction. During pollen wall development, many compounds are transported from the tapetum to the developing pollen wall via tapetum-specific membrane transporters, and male sterility is often observed when membrane transporter’s function or localization is altered. Here, we show that mutating AP1/2β1 and AP1/2β2, two homologous genes of AP1/2β which encodes a large subunit shared by adaptor protein 1 (AP-1) and adaptor protein 2 (AP-2) complexes in Arabidopsis, impair pollen exine formation and cause reduced pollen germination rate and slowed pollen tube growth. However, the shared theory of AP1/2β is not proved in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Liquid (0.5× MS)-cultured transgenic plants (Pro35S:GFP, ProAP1/2β1:AP1/2β1-YFP and ProAP1/2β2:AP1/2β2-YFP, hereafter named 35S-GFP, β1-YFP and β2-YFP) were ground in liquid nitrogen and incubated in extraction buffer (50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 10% glycerol, complete protease inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet/40 mL extraction buffer). After vortex for severe minutes, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 30 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was then incubated with anti-GFP agarose beads (Chromo Tek) for 6 h at 4 °C with gentle shaking. The beads were then collected and washed at least five times with extraction buffer. Protein complexes adsorbed on the beads were boiled with 2× SDS loading buffer for 10 min.     Enzymatic “in-Gel” Digestion The protein complex solution was separated on SDS-PAGE gels and needed gel pieces were stained with coomassie brilliant blue for 0.5 h and then were destained with decolorizing liquid (40% methanol with 10% acetic acid) until clear bands were observed. Decolorized Gel strips were cut into small cubes and were collected into microcentrifuge tubes. The gel cubes were dehydrated with acetonitrile (ACN) and then were incubated in 100 μL TCEP (10 mM, diluted with 25 mM NH4HCO3) for reduction under 56 °C for 1 h. Chill down the tubes to room temperature, 100 μL IAA (40 mM, diluted with 25 mM NH4HCO3) was added for alkylation in darkness for 45 min. The gel cubes were completely dehydrated in 100 μL NH4HCO3, 50% ACN and 100% ACN for three times and subsequently evacuated for 10 min. Hereafter, add enough trypsin buffer (0.01 mg/mL trypsin, diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3) to cover the dry gel cubes and place at 4 ℃ for 10 min to fully saturate them. Put the tubes with gel cubes in a thermostat and incubate samples overnight at 37 ℃ for protein digestion. Spin down gel cubes using a microcentrifuge and withdraw the supernatant to new tubes. Add 100 μL extraction buffer (1:1 (vol/vol), 5% trifluoroacetic acid/ 50% ACN) to tubes with gel cubes and incubate for 15 min for further extracting peptide digestion products. Withdraw the digestion solution into the previous new tubes. The mixed solutions desalted using C18 column and were collected into a PCR tube, dry down in a vacuum centrifuge. Finally, the tryptic peptides were redissolved in 15 μL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) for liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis.  LC MS/MS Approximately 4 μL peptide samples were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1200 system in a data-dependent mode. Briefly, samples were injected into a capillary analytic column (75 µm inner diameter) packed with C18 particles (2 µm diameter). The mobile phases for the LC include buffer A1 (0.1% FA) and buffer B1 (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). The peptides were separated using a 90 min non-linear gradient consisting of buffer B1 (5–35%) for 60 min, buffer B1 (35–80%) for 20 min, and buffer B1 (100%) for 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The electrospray voltage and current were set as 2.2 kV and 100 A, respectively. The full scan of the m/z scan range was 100-2000.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Raw MS/MS data were used to search against Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot (taxonomy 3702) database (52619 total entries). Protein annotations, difference of identification, and spectral area-based label-free quantification (LFQ) were done with Proteomics Discovery 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm. The output data contain Input group samples without GFP beads immunoprecipitation and Co-IP group samples immunoprecipitated by GFP beads from three biological replicates. All data (including LFQ data) filtered by 1% FDR high confidence proteins with at least one identified unique peptide. The interacting proteins of AP1/2β were determined by three rounds of screening as follows: 1. Taking the positive complement of Input group and Co-IP group with Co-IP/Input ratio significantly upregulated proteins (P-value＜0.05) as the positive binding protein subsets. 2. Taking the union of three biological replicates (proteins obtained from 1) for 35S-GFP, named dataset “I”; and taking the intersection of three biological replicates (proteins obtained from 1) for β1/2-YFP, named datasets “II”. 3. Taking the union of pairwise intersection of three biological replicates in CO-IP group by screening β1/2-YFP/35S-GFP ratio significantly upregulated proteins (P-value＜0.05), the positive protein subsets named “III”. The final interacting proteins of AP1/2β consist of positive complement of (I) and (II), positive complement of (I) and (III) and intersection of (II) and (III).

### Publication Abstract
AP-1 and AP-2 adaptor protein (AP) complexes mediate clathrin-dependent trafficking at the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and the plasma membrane, respectively. Whereas AP-1 is required for trafficking to plasma membrane and vacuoles, AP-2 mediates endocytosis. These AP complexes consist of four subunits (adaptins): two large subunits (&#x3b2;1 and &#x3b3; for AP-1 and &#x3b2;2 and &#x3b1; for AP-2), a medium subunit &#x3bc;, and a small subunit &#x3c3;. In general, adaptins are unique to each AP complex, with the exception of &#x3b2; subunits that are shared by AP-1 and AP-2 in some invertebrates. Here, we show that the two putative Arabidopsis thaliana AP1/2&#x3b2; adaptins co-assemble with both AP-1 and AP-2 subunits and regulate exocytosis and endocytosis in root cells, consistent with their dual localization at the TGN and plasma membrane. Deletion of both &#x3b2; adaptins is lethal in plants. We identified a critical role of &#x3b2; adaptins in pollen wall formation and reproduction, involving the regulation of membrane trafficking in the tapetum and pollen germination. In tapetal cells, &#x3b2; adaptins localize almost exclusively to the TGN and mediate exocytosis of the plasma membrane transporters such as ATP-binding cassette (ABC)G9 and ABCG16. This study highlights the essential role of AP1/2&#x3b2; adaptins in plants and their specialized roles in specific cell types.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences，Lanzhou University
College of life science, Shaoxing University, Shaoxing,China

### Submitter
Chan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chao Wang
College of life science, Shaoxing University, Shaoxing,China


