### Accession
PXD023090

### Title
Proteogenomic pathogenesis and classification of acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia is a clinically and genetically heterogenous disease characterized by bone marrow infiltration with immature leukemic blasts that cause bone marrow failure. Patient age, comorbidities and genomic disease characteristics have a profound impact on patient outcome. Here, we present an integrated Multi-Omics analysis of protein and gene expression as well as cytogenetics and mutations to capture the rewiring of intracellular protein networks that is most likely caused by genomic aberrations. Because protein networks are downstream of genomic aberrations, we hypothesized that our Multi-Omics approach may add to the current AML classification by identifying proteomic AML subtypes with specific clinical and molecular features that could identify therapeutic vulnerabilities and aid in the identification of predictive biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Primary AML samples were washed twice with PBS followed by cell number counting. One million cells were lysed in 30 µl of NP-40 buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, protease inhibitor cocktail) and protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. Subsequently, 40 µg of protein from each sample were mixed with 40 µg of protein from a SILAC reference sample. The SILAC standard consisted of equal protein amounts from 3 different AML cell lines (KG1, NB4, MV4-11), which had been subjected to SILAC with 13C6 L-arginine and D4 L-lysine before protein extraction with NP-40 buffer. The mixed sample was incubated with LDS sample buffer and reducing agent (NuPAGE, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the instructions of the manufacturer and subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The separated proteins were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and the whole gel lane was excised as 23 individual bands, followed by in-gel protein digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientifc) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-ESI source (Nanospray Flex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first trapped on a precolumn and then separated on an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 200 x 0.075 mm; self-packed) with a 90 min linear gradient of 2-40% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) versus solvent A (0.1% FA). Eluting peptides were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition using a top 15 MS/MS method with a survey scan resolution setting of 70,000 FWHM and an MS/MS resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM at m/z 200, respectively. The 15 most abundant ions within the m/z 350-1600 range were selected for HCD with an NCE setting of 28% and an isolation width of m/z 2.0, excluding singly charged ions and charge states >4. AGC target values and maximum ion injection times for MS and MS/MS were set to 1x106 in 60 ms and 2x105 in 60 ms, respectively. Selected precursor mass-to-charge ratio values were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 15 s. MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.2) open software environment utilizing Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt reference proteome database (version 2014 containing 88993 entries) including variable modifications oxidation & acetylation at N-terminus and Carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. Enzyme digestion specificity was set to Trypsin and maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. Parent peptide mass tolerance and fragment peptide mass tolerance up to 4.5-20ppm were allowed. A cut-off 1% FRD was applied first at the peptide level and second at the protein level. We required a minimum of 7 amino acids for peptide identification. Each super SILAC labelled AML samples measured in 23 fraction (23 raw files) were combined as one sample. In the absence of sequence spectrum, peptide identification was transferred through enabling match between run. If proteins could not be distinguished on the basis of unique peptides, they were merged by MaxQuant as one protein group. For the relative quantification of SILAC pair’s a minimum ratio count of 1 was set in Maxquant as a default setting. Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm and ‘match-between-runs’ was enabled. For stringent filtering a minimum peptide ratio count of 2 and alteast one razor peptide for protein identification was enabled. Further protein groups found as common contaminants, reverse hits and site modification were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Supersilac, Aml, Proteome

### Affiliations
Director,  Dept of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Matthias Mann
Director,  Dept of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


