### Accession
PXD022983

### Title
Longitudinal landscape of urinary EV proteome reveals stable protein expression patterns within and between individuals

### Description
Urinary extracellular vesicles (EVs) are an attractive source for the detection of disease biomarkers. Mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics is increasingly used for urinary EV proteome profiling and protein biomarker discovery. However, little is known about the consistency and stability of urinary EV proteins within individuals over time and between different individuals. In this study we profiled the urinary EV proteome of 8 healthy individuals over 6 months at 9 timepoints (total 72 samples) using DIA-MS. We identified a total of 1802 proteins with high correlation amongst all samples. While a minor fraction (10%) of the total urinary EV proteome was shown to play a role in determining personal expression patterns, most of the urinary EV proteins was found to be stable with >90% of the proteins detected in more than 1 person at all timepoints. The variability of urinary EV proteome between different individuals was shown to be significantly higher than personal variation as a result of a small subset (<20%) of proteins. The core interaction network of proteins identified in all individuals revealed EV proteins involved in signaling and localization and sub-clusters enriched for glycolytic activity, protein synthesis, and immune function. Gender-specific expression patterns were detected in the urinary EV proteome, mostly related to hormonal and reproduction pathways. In summary, our findings indicate that the urinary EV proteome is stable in longitudinal samples of healthy subjects, underscoring its potential as a reliable source for protein biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
DDA DDA Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot FASTA file downloaded Feb 2019. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 4.5 and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered with both the peptides and proteins filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications.   DIA DIA raw files were searched in Spectronaut version 13.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). The MaxQuant msms.txt file from the DDA search result was imported into Spectronaut to generate a project-specific spectral library with parsing rule: UniProt FASTA and decoy method: mutated. Modifications were the same as for the MaxQuant DDA search. Identifications were filtered to a Q-value of 1% which is equivalent to an FDR of 1% in the DDA experiments. The search result was exported at the fragment ion level for MaxLFQ protein quantification (Pham, Henneman, and Jimenez 2020).

### Data Protocol
DDA DDA Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot FASTA file downloaded Feb 2019. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 4.5 and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered with both the peptides and proteins filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications.   DIA DIA raw files were searched in Spectronaut version 13.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). The MaxQuant msms.txt file from the DDA search result was imported into Spectronaut to generate a project-specific spectral library with parsing rule: UniProt FASTA and decoy method: mutated. Modifications were the same as for the MaxQuant DDA search. Identifications were filtered to a Q-value of 1% which is equivalent to an FDR of 1% in the DDA experiments. The search result was exported at the fragment ion level for MaxLFQ protein quantification (Pham, Henneman, and Jimenez 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The protein content of urinary extracellular vesicles (EVs) is considered to be an attractive non-invasive biomarker source. However, little is known about the consistency and variability of urinary EV proteins within and between individuals over a longer time-period. Here, we evaluated the stability of the urinary EV proteomes of 8 healthy individuals at 9 timepoints over 6&#xa0;months using data-independent-acquisition mass spectrometry. The 1802 identified proteins had a high correlation amongst all samples, with 40% of the proteome detected in every sample and 90% detected in more than 1 individual at all timepoints. Unsupervised analysis of top 10% most variable proteins yielded person-specific profiles. The core EV-protein-interaction network of 516 proteins detected in all measured samples revealed sub-clusters involved in the biological processes of G-protein signaling, cytoskeletal transport, cellular energy metabolism and immunity. Furthermore, gender-specific expression patterns were detected in the urinary EV proteome. Our findings indicate that the urinary EV proteome is stable in longitudinal samples of healthy subjects over a prolonged time-period, further underscoring its potential for reliable non-invasive diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers.

### Keywords
Urine, Stability, Variability, Dia-ms, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


