### Accession
PXD032327

### Title
Proteomic changes associated with maternal dietary low ω6:ω3 ratio in piglets supplemented with seaweed Part I: Serum proteomes

### Description
This study examines whether maternal low ω6:ω3 ratio diet and offspring seaweed (SW) supplementation can improve offspring immunity and performance by elucidating the effects on piglet serum proteome. A total of 16 sows were given either a standard (CR, 13:1) or low ω6:ω3 ratio diet (LR, 4:1) during pregnancy and lactation and their male weaned piglets were supplemented with SW powder (4 g/kg, SW) or not (CT) in a 21-day post-weaning (PW) diet. Four PW piglet groups were then identified based on dam and piglet treatment, namely CRCT, CRSW, LRCT, and LRSW (n = 10 each). Piglet serum collected at weaning and d21 PW were analyzed (n = 5 each) using TMT-based quantitative proteomics and validated by appropriate assays.

### Sample Protocol
The feeding trial on piglets was conducted at the Animal Production Research and Teaching Centre, University of Milan (Lodi, Italy). The study protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of Milan (OPBA 67/2018) and the Italian Ministry of Health (authorization n. 168/2019 PR). The experimental design, growth performance, and blood oxidative status results were detailly described [35].  Briefly, a total of 40 male weaned piglets were designated from different mothers within a group, amongst two maternal dietary treatments containing either a control ratio of ω6:ω3 PUFAs (CR, 13:1 during gestation and 10:1 during lactation) or a low ratio of ω6:ω3 PUFAs (LR, 4:1, during gestation and lactation). Piglets were weaned at day 26 (± 1.76) of age with an average body weight of 6.46 kg (± 0.15) (mean ± SE). Piglets were fed a meal-based commercial diet (Supplementary Table S1) and supplemented with or without 4g seaweed powder (A. nodosum; Prodotti Arca S.r.l, Monza, Italy) per kg of feed, namely SW and CT groups, respectively. Four groups (n = 10 each) were formed: CRCT; CRSW; LRCT; and LRSW.  Blood samples were collected from the jugular vein from each piglet on weaning (d0) and day 21 post-weaning (d21 PW) using BD Vacutainer tubes (10 ml, REF 367896, BD-Plymouth, PL678P, UK). Blood samples were left to clot for a minimum of 60 min at room temperature, centrifuged (15 min; 3000× g; room temperature), and subsequently kept at −80 °C until analysis.  Total protein concentration of the serum samples was measured by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate, Bio-Rad Laboratories GmbH, Müchen, Germany) using bovine serum albumin as standard.  The proteomic profiling of serum samples was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelling quantitative approach as described earlier [36]. For each sample, 37 µg protein was digested with trypsin using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) [37] with 10kDa molecular weight cut-off filters. Digesting proteins into peptides was executed overnight using 1g of trypsin (20 ug/mL, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) resuspended in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) buffer, at 1:37 w/w, at 37°C. The remaining peptides were collected using 10% ACN (Acetonitrile) in water. Trypsin activity was inhibited by acidification with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, CF3COOH) before entirely drying at 45°C under a high vacuum.  Next, the peptides pellets obtained were diluted using 0.1 M TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) before being tagged using a freshly prepared TMT10plex Label Reagent set followed manufacturers instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). All TMT-modified peptide samples were combined in equal amounts into a new microcentrifuge tube, aliquoted, SpeedVac lyophilized, and kept at -80°C before tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Besides, an equal quantity of peptides from every sample was pooled and labelled by a TMT tag before adding to each TMT multiplexed sample as an internal standard (or linker) between multiple TMT sets. Five TMT10plex experiments were performed for a total of 40 samples (5 animals per group x 4 groups x 2 time points).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were processed in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The UniProtKB database was searched to identify and quantify proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm against Sus scrofa FASTA files (104,940 sequences; downloaded on 18/02/2021). Precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da were applied. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with the option of two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl (C) was stated as the fixed modification. The dynamic modifications contain oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and TMT six-plex (K, peptide N-terminus) were specified. The peptides were identified using the Percolator algorithm based on the search results against a decoy database. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% on the peptide level. At least two peptides and 5% FDR were required to report confidently identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seaweed, Hemostasis, Weaning, Acute phase proteins, Pig proteome, Ω6:ω3 fatty acids, Apolipoproteins, Immunity

### Affiliations
Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, Polyomics Facility, University of Glasgow
University of Milan/University of Glasgow

### Submitter
Thi Xuan Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Burchmore
Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, Polyomics Facility, University of Glasgow


