### Accession
PXD024917

### Title
Absolute quantification of tumor antigens using embedded MHC-I isotopologue calibrants

### Description
SureQuant-MHC utilizes a series of isotopologues and internal standard-triggered targeted mass spectrometry to generate an embedded multipoint calibration curve to determine the endogenous pMHC concentrations for a panel of 18 antigen targets. We apply this methiod to profile changes in pMHC expression levels in melanoma cell lines treated with binimetinib, a MEK inhibitr, and traslate the approach to profiling antigen levels in human tumor punch biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide MHCs were purified by immunoprecipitation, acid elution, and molecular weight cut-off filtration and analyzed with targeted and discovery mass spectrometry. Additional details can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Targeted analyses were analyzed using Skyline, and discovery analyses were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5. Additional details can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Absolute quantification measurements (copies per cell) of peptide major histocompatibility complex (pMHC) antigens are necessary to inform targeted immunotherapy drug design; however, existing methods for absolute quantification have critical limitations. Here, we present a platform termed SureQuant-IsoMHC, utilizing a series of pMHC isotopologues and internal standard-triggered targeted mass spectrometry to generate an embedded multipoint calibration curve to determine endogenous pMHC concentrations for a panel of 18 tumor antigens. We apply SureQuant-IsoMHC to measure changes in expression of our target panel in a melanoma cell line treated with a MEK inhibitor and translate this approach to estimate antigen concentrations in melanoma tumor biopsies.

### Keywords
Surequant, Lc-ms/ms, Mhc

### Affiliations
MIT
Department of Biological Engineering

### Submitter
Lauren Stopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Department of Biological Engineering


