### Accession
PXD018321

### Title
Quantification of H3K27 methylation using heavy peptides as standards

### Description
To demonstrate the usability of our SIL peptides (JPT GmbH)on an MS application, 4 standard peptides were synthesized at 95% purity and each spiked at an amount 133 fmol into protein extracts of wild type HEK cells and EZH2-knockout cells, respectively. The spiked peptides in this experiment are histone H3 K27-containing heavy-arginine versions of the peptide ARKSAPATGGVKKPH-R, where K27 was synthetically modified to carry either no methylation, or one or two or three (me3) methyl groups, respectively. Previously to trypsination, the HEK samples were spiked with the 4 SIL peptides. Because the standards have 10 Da greater mass given by the heavy R*, they can be distinguished from their light natural versions in the MS1 spectra. Furthermore, the standards were each spiked at a concentration of 133 fmol and thus, their MS intensities were used to normalize the intensities of the endogenous peptides and quantify them in absolute terms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were obtained from wild type and EZH2 knockout HEK cells by performing a double acidic extraction protocol. The resulting protein pellets were treated with 2.5% propionic anhydride (Sigma) in ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5, for 30min at room temperature. After that, trypsination was performed overnight and stop by acidification. The resulting peptides were clean using C18 columns, the eluent vacuum dried and resuspended in MS loading buffer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra were analyzed with the Skyline software (version 19.1). The first 3 isotopomers of each peptide were extracted for quantification. Light versions of the peptides were normalized and absolutely quantified based on the intensity of the heavy standards. The percentage of each K27 methylation state was calculated by dividing its absolute amount over the sum of absolute amounts of the unmodified and modified versions of K27.  Statistical comparisons between samples were performed using the non-parametric, two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. P-values < 0.05 were used as thresholds to assess statistical significance for changes in the knockout cells with respect to the wild type cells.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted proteomics depends on the availability of stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptide standards, which for absolute protein quantification need to be absolutely quantified. In the present study, three new approaches for absolute quantification of SIL peptides are developed. All approaches rely on a quantification tag (Qtag) with a specific UV absorption. The Qtag is attached to the peptide during synthesis and is removed by tryptic digestion under standard proteomics workflow conditions. While one quantification method (method A) is designed to allow the fast and economic production of absolutely quantified SIL peptides, two other methods (methods B and C) are developed to enable the straightforward re-quantification of SIL peptides after reconstitution to control and monitor known problems related to peptide solubility, precipitation, and adhesion to vials. All methods yield consistent results when compared to each other and when compared to quantification by amino acid analysis. The precise quantitation methods are used to characterize the in vivo specificity of the H3 specific histone methyltransferase EZH2.

### Keywords
Human, Hek cells, Histones modifications

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center, LMU Munich
EpiQMAx GmbH

### Submitter
Victor Solis

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Biomedical Center, LMU Munich


