### Accession
PXD021334

### Title
Identify the binding protein of a 41-bp DNA sequence harboring rs2431697

### Description
we performed DNA-affinity precipitation assay (DAPA) followed by mass spectrometry to identify the possible candidates that specifically bind to the 41-bp nucleotide sequence containing rs2431697 using U-937 cell nuclear extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were obtained from U-937 cells. 200 μg of nuclear extracts were mixed with 50 pmol of specific or non-specific 5’-biotinylated DNA probes in 400 μL of Buffer D (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10% glycerol, 50 mM KCl, 0.2mM EDTA, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 100 μg/mL Sheared Salmon sperm DNA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 0.25% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail and incubated on ice for 45 min. 50 μL of Dynabeads™ M-280 Streptavidin (11205D, Thermo Fisher) was then added to each reaction and rotated for 2 hours at 4 °C. The beads-DNA probe-proteins complexes were subjected to three washes with 500 μL Buffer D. Proteins were dissociated from the beads by the addition of 2 x Laemmli sample buffer (161-0737, Bio-Rad) and boiled at 95 °C for 10 min. The boiled protein samples underwent SDS-page, and the gels were stained with Coomassie dye. The whole lane was cut  into pieces and digested by trypsin for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides of two control groups and two experiment groups were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, U-937, Dapa, Rs2431697

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Shanghai jiaotong university

### Submitter
Guojun Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Nan Shen
Shanghai Institute of Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


