### Accession
PXD033898

### Title
Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles suggests Collectin10 as potential biomarker in relapsing head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common cancer worldwide. Developing new therapies has been ongoing for many decades, however, the 5-year overall survival rate remains comparably low and has not improved significantly. Treatment failure in HNSCC patients is common, especially in recurrences, and results in a poorer prognosis. Therefore, a better understanding of the disease is crucial to detect HNSCC recurrences at an early stage. HNSCC-associated extracellular vesicles (EVs), have been shown to suppress the immune system and thereby promote tumor progression. However, it is still unclear which pathways play a pivotal role in relapse or in remission. Contamination-free plasma EVs were purified using the EXÖBead® technology and EVs proteins underwent holistic proteome profiling by high-resolution mass spectrometry. COLEC10 appears to be the most regulated EVs protein and therefore has been chosen for further analysis and validation. Furthermore PanEV+ COLEC10+ and PanEV+ CD45Neg COLEC10+ of plasma EVs-EXÖBead complexes also showed a higher expression in relapsed patients compared to remission. Gene ontology analyses suggested that the relapse-upregulated proteins are significantly enriched in pathways for collagen trimer and chain formation, the complement system activation and in the tumor necrosis factor like domain superfamily related pathway. The remission-upregulated proteins were significantly enriched in early endosome or lysosomal membrane formation, membrane stability, mRNA stability and in ubiquitin protein ligase binding. According to common tissue RNA-seq database elevated COLEC10 gene has been associated with shorter survival in female patient and observed from different clinical cohort. Our results indicate that increased protein expression in EVs of patients with recurrent disease might contribute to disease progression with COLEC10 as potential biomarker in HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma EV preparations were dissolved 1x Laemmli-Buffer . In‐gel trypsin digestion of all plasma EV samples was performed according to standard procedures (Shevchenko et al., 2006 ). Briefly, the samples were run on a Nu-PAGE™ 4%–12% Bis‐Tris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for about 1 cm. Subsequently, the still not size‐separated single protein band per sample was cut, reduced (50mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (55mm chloroacetamide) and digested overnight with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade, Promega). The peptides obtained were dried to completeness and re-suspended in 25 μL of buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). 5 μL of sample were injected per MS measurement. LC-MS/MS measurements were carried out on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific, Bremen). Injected peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at 300 nL/min flow rate. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60k using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec (full proteome).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4 ) with its built‐in search engine Andromeda . MS2 spectra were searched against the human protein database from Uniprot (UP000005640, downloaded 04.05.2020) supplemented with common contaminants (built‐in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation at the protein N‐terminus was specified as variable modifications. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match level and protein level employing a target‐decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Label-Free Quantification (LFQ ) intensities were used for protein quantification with at least 2 peptides per protein identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Relapse, Hnscc, Remission, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


