### Accession
PXD043360

### Title
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron OMV, TM and WC comparsion of delta BT4720, delta BT_4721,  delta BT_4720_4721 and WT

### Description
Proteomic comparsion of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron OMV, TM and WC of delta BT4720, delta BT_4721,  delta BT_4720_4721 and WT

### Sample Protocol
Acetone precipitated protein samples were solubilized in 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES by boiling them for 10 min at 95 °C. The protein concentrations were assessed by an bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 200g of each biological replicate prepared for digestion using Micro S-traps (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 10mM DTT for 10 mins at 95°C and then alkylated with 40mM IAA in the dark for 1 hour. Samples were acidified to 1.2% phosphoric acid and diluted with seven volumes of S-trap wash buffer (90% methanol, 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide pH 7.1) before being loaded onto S-traps and washed 3 times with 400l of S-trap wash buffer. Samples were then digested with 2 g of Trypsin (a 1:100 protease/protein ratio) in 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide overnight at 37 °C before being collected by centrifugation with washes of 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide, followed by 0.2% formic acid followed by 0.2% formic acid / 50% acetonitrile. Samples were dried down and further cleaned up using C18 Stage 1,2 tips to ensure the removal of any particulate matter.   Prepared C18 purified peptides from each sample were re-suspended in Buffer A* (2% acetonitrile, 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid) and separated using a two-column chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20-mm by 75-m trap and a PepMap C18 500-mm by 75-m analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 l/min for 5 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 at 300 nl/minute via the analytical columns using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLCs (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 95-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 65 min, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 min, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 min, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 min before being held at 2% B for another 8 min. The 480 Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode collecting a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z and a resolution of 120k) was acquired every 3 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (stepped NCE 28;32;40%, maximal injection time of 80 ms and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
Identification and LFQ analysis were accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0) using the Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 proteome (Uniprot: UP000001414) allowing for oxidation on Methionine. The LFQ and “Match Between Run” options were enabled to allow comparison between samples. The resulting data files were processed using Perseus (v1.4.0.6) to compare the growth conditions using student t-tests as well as Pearson correlation analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Omv

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States of America

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States of America


