### Accession
PXD005258

### Title
Retinal proteomic profiling in the course of experimental glaucoma

### Description
Intraocular pressure was elevated through episkleral vein occlusion by thermic cauterization of SD rats. Animals were further sacrificed after different periods of elevated IOP and the retinal proteins were investigated for alterations regarding the relative protein level in this experimental model of glaucoma.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, retinal tissue from the rodents was explanted and dissociated using liquid nitrogen and a mortar. Samples from different eyes and animals were collected and treated separately with lysis buffer containing 0.5% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside. Furthermore, the tissue was processed with an ultrasonic bath and ultrasonic wand for efficient cell breakdown. To separate the proteins and facilitate a downstream MS analysis, 80 µg of protein lysate per individual retina sample was added to one gel lane of a NuPage Novex 12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel and SDS-PAGE was performed accordingly. Every gel lane was cut into 17 pieces, destained and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin over night. C-18 ZipTips were used to clean the samples and separate the peptides from salts and other byproducts. Mass spectra were obtained using a LTQ OrbitrapXL. The full-scan mass spectra (m/z 300–2000) were acquired with a resolution of 30.000

### Data Protocol
Subsequently, mass spectra were utilized in terms of protein identification and quantification using Maxquant. Fixed protein modifications were set to oxidation and acetylation. The match tolerance in mass precision for MS/ MS was adjusted to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da. The false discovery rate for proteins and peptides were set at 0.01, the minimum peptide length was 6 amino acids. Only unique peptide sequences were used for the quantification process.

### Publication Abstract
Purpose of this study was to investigate firstly specific proteomic changes within the retina in the course of an animal glaucoma model and to identify secondly new approaches for neuroprotective, therapeutic options in glaucoma by addressing those specific changes. Intraocular pressure was elevated through cauterization of episcleral veins in adult Sprague Dawley rats. Molecular and morphological changes were surveyed using mass spectrometry, optical coherence tomography as well as immunohistochemical cross section- and flat mount stainings. By quantifying more than 1500 retinal proteins, it was found that the HspB5 protein and numerous beta-crystallins showed a uniform and unique shifting expression pattern as a result of different periods of elevated IOP exposure. Crystallins showed a significant downregulation (p&lt;0.05) after 3 weeks of elevated IOP and an upregulation after 7 weeks. Counteracting those typical changes, an intravitreal injection of &#x3b2;-crystallin B2 at the time of IOP elevation was found to reduce retinal ganglion cell loss (p&lt;0.05), decrease of the retinal nerve fiber layer (p&lt;0.05) and impairment of the optic nerve. Ultimately, proteomic data revealed that &#x3b2;-crystallin B2 might influence calcium-depended cell signaling pathways with severe effect on apoptosis and gene regulation. In this context especially annexin A5, calcium-transporting ATPase 1 and various histone proteins seem to play a major role.

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Crystallins, Proteomics, Ocular hypertension, Retina

### Affiliations
Experimental Ophthalmology Mainz
Experimental Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology, Mainz, Rheinland-Pfalz, Germany

### Submitter
Fabian Anders

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Verena Prokosch
Experimental Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology, Mainz, Rheinland-Pfalz, Germany


