### Accession
PXD005815

### Title
Phospho-proteome of obese mice brains

### Description
This study aims to investigate changes in phospho-proteomic levels of mice brain. The focus of the study is the phospho-proteome because phoshorylation is one of the key post-translational modification, which regulates many biological processes. In particular we wanted to inspect the effects of two different kinds of diet (hyperglycemic diet and high-fat diet) compaired with a conventional chow diet. We have found interesting changes in the phosphorylation state of several proteins involved in nervous system development as well as vesicle trafficking and cytoskeleton remodelling.We hope that our study can contribute to elucidating the impact that obesity could have on the brain phospho-proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Mice brains have been collected, heated to kill phosphatases, pulverized and the powder had been used for in-gel protein digestion. Peptides have been phospho-enriched using TiO2.  Phospho-peptides have been run in DDA mode in LTQ Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using ProteoWizard. MGF files were searched in UniprotKD against the Mus Musculus (Mouse) w.rev.seq database. Raw intensities have been Loess-G normalized, anti-loged and intensities have been used for data analysis. t-test within paired groups has been done.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is closely associated to several diseases such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hepatic steatosis, airway disease, neurodegeneration, biliary diseases and certain cancers. It is, therefore, of importance to assess the role of nutrition in disease prevention as well as its effect in the course of such pathologies. In the present study, we addressed the impact of the exposure to different obesogenic diets in the mice brains phosphoproteome. To analyze if the obesity could be able to modify the protein pattern expression of brain neurons, obesity was induced in two different groups of mice. One group of mice was fed with hyperglycemic diet (HGD) and the other one was fed with high-fat diet (HFD), both for 12 weeks. A control group of lean mice was fed with a standard diet (SD). Metabolic parameters were measured before sacrifice, and brains were harvested for label-free phosphoproteomic analysis. Mice brains were analyzed to find differences, if any, in protein phosphorylation. Interestingly, the changes were independent of the obesogenic diet as no changes were detected between the two obese groups. Dephosphorylation of proteins involved in neuronal development (among others SYNGAP1 and PPP1R9B), in vesicle trafficking (for example SNAP91 and AMPH) and in cytoskeletal functions (for example, CLASP2 and GSK3B) was identified, while increased phosphorylation was detected for microtubule proteins (such as MAP2 and MAPT). Phospho site analysis of the mouse brain proteome reveals important changes that point to a connection between diet-induced obesity and impairment of neuronal functions and signaling.

### Keywords
Cns development, Obesity, Mice brains, Diet, Phospho-proteome

### Affiliations
Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Valentina Siino

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Lund University, Sweden


