### Accession
PXD001695

### Title
A double-barrel LC-MS/MS system to quantify 96 interactomes per day

### Description
The field of proteomics has evolved hand-in-hand with technological advances in LC-MS/MS systems, now enabling the analysis of very deep proteomes in a reasonable time. However, most applications do not deal with full cell or tissue proteomes, but rather with restricted sub-proteomes relevant for the research context at hand or resulting from extensive fractionation. At the same time, investigation of many conditions or perturbations puts a strain on measurement capacity. Here we develop a high throughput workflow capable of dealing with large numbers of low or medium complexity samples and specifically aim at the analysis of 96-well plates in a single day (15 min per sample). We combine parallel sample processing with a modified liquid chromatography platform driving two analytical columns in tandem, which are coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF). The modified LC platform eliminates idle-time between measurements and the very high sequencing speed of the Q Exactive HF dramatically reduces required measurement time. We apply the pipeline to the yeast chromatin remodeling landscape, and demonstrate quantification of 96 pull-downs of chromatin complexes in about one day. This is achieved with only 500 µg input material, enabling yeast cultivation in a 96-well format. Our system retrieved known complex-members and the high throughput allowed probing with many bait proteins. Even alternative complex compositions were detectable in these very short gradients. Thus, sample throughput, sensitivity and LC/MS-MS duty cycle are improved several-fold compared to established workflows. The pipeline can be extended to different types of interaction studies and to other medium complexity proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Yeast lysates – GFP-tagged yeast strains from the S. cerevisiae GFP Clone Collection, the parental strain BY4741 and the control strain pHis3-GFP were cultured in YPD liquid medium in 96-deep well plates (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) at standard conditions. We used 32 distinct yeast strains in biological triplicates resulting in 96 experimental samples. Yeast cells were grown until they reached an OD600nm of around 1, followed by harvesting culture volumes equaling 2 ODs per well. Yeast cell pellets were dissolved in 300 µl lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 1% IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich, Schnelldorf, Germany), complete protease inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 1% benzonase (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)), transferred into FastPrep tubes (MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany) containing 1 mm silica spheres (lysing matrix C, MP Biomedicals) and lysed in a FastPrep24 instrument (MP Biomedicals) for 6×1 minute at maximum speed. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,100×g for 10 minutes at 4°C.   Affinity purification – Each well of a GFP-multiTrap plate (ChromoTek, Martinsried, Germany) was washed three times with 200 µl wash buffer 1 (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and then incubated with the cleared yeast cell lysate (500 µg total protein extract) with gentle shaking at 100 rpm for 60 minutes at 4°C. Next, each well was washed twice with 200 µl wash buffer 2 (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.25% IGEPAL CA-630) and four times with 200 µl wash buffer 1 before incubation with 25 µl elution buffer (2 M urea, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT, 100 ng sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA)) at room temperature for 90 minutes. Subsequently,  the resulting peptides were alkylated with 25 µl alkylation buffer (2 M Urea, 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM IAA) and finally washed once with 50 µl urea buffer (2 M Urea, 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) for 10 minutes, respectively. The supernatants from the elution, alkylation and washing step were collected after each step and combined in a clean 96-well plate. This plate was incubated overnight at room temperature to ensure a complete digest. The next morning the digest was stopped by addition of 10 µl 10% TFA per well. The acidified peptides were purified on StageTips containing two layers of SDB-RPS (Empore 2241, 3M, Neuss, Germany) material to desalt and purify the peptides. Samples were eluted from the StageTips with 60 µl elution buffer (80% ACN, 1% ammonium hydroxide) and evaporated in a SpeedVac concentrator for 30 minutes. The remaining peptide solution was filled up with buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) to a final volume of 4 µl.

### Data Protocol
All data was analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow version 1.4.3.14. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation was set to 1% for protein, peptide spectrum match and site decoy fraction level. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of a maximum of 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were identified using the UniprotKB Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (based on 2014-07 release; 6643 entries) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arginine and Lysine, also allowing cleavage before proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Both Match-Between-Runs (MBR), with a maximum time difference of 30 sec, and Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) with standard settings, were enabled. Additional meta-data stored in the RAW files (e.g. ion inject time, noise level, etc.) was extracted using MSFileReader (Thermo Scientific) with in-house developed tools.

### Publication Abstract
The field of proteomics has evolved hand-in-hand with technological advances in LC-MS/MS systems, now enabling the analysis of very deep proteomes in a reasonable time. However, most applications do not deal with full cell or tissue proteomes but rather with restricted subproteomes relevant for the research context at hand or resulting from extensive fractionation. At the same time, investigation of many conditions or perturbations puts a strain on measurement capacity. Here, we develop a high-throughput workflow capable of dealing with large numbers of low or medium complexity samples and specifically aim at the analysis of 96-well plates in a single day (15 min per sample). We combine parallel sample processing with a modified liquid chromatography platform driving two analytical columns in tandem, which are coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF). The modified LC platform eliminates idle time between measurements, and the high sequencing speed of the Q Exactive HF reduces required measurement time. We apply the pipeline to the yeast chromatin remodeling landscape and demonstrate quantification of 96 pull-downs of chromatin complexes in about 1 day. This is achieved with only 500 &#x3bc;g input material, enabling yeast cultivation in a 96-well format. Our system retrieved known complex-members and the high throughput allowed probing with many bait proteins. Even alternative complex compositions were detectable in these very short gradients. Thus, sample throughput, sensitivity and LC/MS-MS duty cycle are improved severalfold compared with established workflows. The pipeline can be extended to different types of interaction studies and to other medium complexity proteomes.

### Keywords
Saccharomyces cerevisiae; interactomics; chromatography; method development; high throughput analysis

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany


