### Accession
PXD019473

### Title
BAG5 functionally interacts with the autophagy adaptor protein p62

### Description
Molecular chaperones are critical to maintaining intracellular proteostasis and have been shown to have a protective role against alpha-synuclein mediated toxicity. Co-chaperone proteins regulate the activity of molecular chaperones and connect the chaperone network to protein degradation and cell death pathways. Bcl-2 associated athanogene 5 (BAG5) is a co-chaperone that modulates proteostasis by inhibiting the activity of Hsp70 and several E3 ubiquitin ligases, resulting in enhanced neurodegeneration in models of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Here we identify a novel interaction between BAG5 and p62/sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1), suggesting that BAG5 may bridge the chaperone network to autophagy-mediated protein degradation. The interaction was discovered using affinity purifaction followed by mass spectrometry to identify BAG5 interacting proteins and was validated by subsequent in vitro immunoprecipitation studies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for analysis by suspending immunoprecipitation samples in 50mM NH4HCO3. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to final concentration of 10mM and samples were heated at 60°C for 30 minutes. After the samples returned to room temperature, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10mM and samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 minutes. Iodoacetamide was inactivated by adding DTT to a final concentration of 40mM. Trypsin was then added to the sample to a protease:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and digestion took place overnight at 37°C. Samples were analyzed on a linear ion trap-Orbitrap hybrid analyzer (LTQ-Orbitrap, ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) outfitted with a nanospray source and EASY-nLC split-free nano-LC system (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a 75μm x 50cm PepMax RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2μm C18 beads (ThermoFisher San, Jose CA) at a constant pressure of 800 BAR. Peptides were eluted over 60 min at a rate of 250 nl/min using a 0 to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were introduced by nano electrospray into an LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher). The instrument method consisted of one MS full scan (400–1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, an automatic gain control target of 1e6 with a maximum ion injection of 100 ms, one microscan, and a resolution of 240,000. Ten data-dependent MS/MS scans were performed in the linear ion trap using the ten most intense ions at 35% normalized collision energy. The MS and MS/MS scans were obtained in parallel fashion. In MS/MS mode automatic gain control targets were 30,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. A minimum ion intensity of 1000 was required to trigger an MS/MS spectrum. Normalized Collision Energy was set at 35. The dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count with a repeat duration of 30s and exclusion duration of 15s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Xcalibur version 2.2. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON Canada; version 8.0 (2016-06-21)) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Data was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from PEAKS Studio were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 5 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular chaperones are critical to maintaining intracellular proteostasis and have been shown to have a protective role against alpha-synuclein-mediated toxicity. Co-chaperone proteins regulate the activity of molecular chaperones and connect the chaperone network to protein degradation and cell death pathways. Bcl-2 associated athanogene 5 (BAG5) is a co-chaperone that modulates proteostasis by inhibiting the activity of Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) and several E3 ubiquitin ligases, resulting in enhanced neurodegeneration in models of Parkinson's disease (PD). Here we identify a novel interaction between BAG5 and p62/sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1), suggesting that BAG5 may bridge the chaperone network to autophagy-mediated protein degradation. We found that BAG5 enhanced the formation of pathogenic alpha-synuclein oligomers and regulated the levels and subcellular distribution of p62. These results extend the role of BAG5 in alpha-synuclein processing and intracellular proteostasis.

### Keywords
Bag5, Proteostasis, Bcl-2 associated athanogene, Chaperones, P62, Sequestosome-1, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Genetics & Development, Krembil Research Institute. Toronto, Canada.
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Erik Friesen

### Lab Head
Dr Suneil Kalia
Genetics & Development, Krembil Research Institute. Toronto, Canada.


