### Accession
PXD038114

### Title
Mass spectrometry imaging of ancient teeth proteomes

### Description
In order to research the variation in protein distribution in teeth, proteins were extracted from archaeological (15-18th century, Netherlands) and modern teeth and identified using LC-MS/MS. Of the recovered proteins we then visualised the distribution of collagen type I (both the alpha-1 and -2 chains), alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein, haemoglobin subunit alpha and myosin light polypeptide 6 using MALDI-MSI. We found distinct differences in the spatial distributions of different proteins as well as between some peptides of the same protein. The reason for these differences in protein spatial distribution remain unclear, yet this study highlights the ability of MALDI-MSI for visualisng the spatial distribution of proteins in archaeological biomineralised tissues. Therefore MALDI-MSI might prove a useful tool to improve our understanding of protein preservation as well as aid in deciding sampling strategies.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS protein extraction was performed according to 'Method 4' of Schroeter et al. (2016). Dentine samples were taken from the root of the teeth and demineralsied in 0.6 M HCl at 4°C. The samples were then incubated overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 65°C and afterwards dried down in a speed vacuum. Samples were resolubilised in 8 M urea and reduced and alkylated with 100 mM DTT and 300 mM IAA respectively. Proteins were then digested using trypsin and the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips. LC-MS/MS was performed using a mClass nanoflow UPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. For MALDI-MSI peptide extraction was performed according to a protocol adapted from Fujino et al. 2016. Whole teeth were demineralised in 0.6 M HCl at 4°C for up to three weeks. The demineralised teeth were neutralised using phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated overnight in a 30% sucrose in PBS solution. They were then embedded in a 3% carboxymethylcellulose solution and frozen. Thin sections were cut using a cryostat with a carbide steel blade at a 13 μm thickness. Thin sections were then immersed in a 70% and a 90% EtOH solution as well as briefly in 100% chloroform. Trypsin was added to the thin sections using a HTX-TM sprayer and a CHCA matrix was applied using the same sprayer. Mass spectra from the thin sections were acquired using a Synapt G2 Si.

### Data Protocol
MetaMorpheus (0.0.320) was used to search the raw spectral LC-MS/MS data against the Uniprot human proteome (UP000005640) and the in-built MetaMorpheus common contaminant database. MetaMorpheus' G-PTM-D task was performed prior to the search task to select fixed and variable modifications. Criteria for protein identification required the presence of at least two peptides as well as a q-value of 0.01. Any protein identified in the blanks was excluded from further analysis. The MALDI-MSI data was processed in HDI for the mass range of 700-5000 m/z with a m/z window of 0.04 Da. After initial processing all samples were reprocessed using a peak target list based on the results of sample 16 to remove intersample variation in peak bins. The MALDI-MSI data was normalised using the mass correction, intra-sample normalisation and inter-sample normalisation steps of BASIS, an open source python script by Veselkov et al. (2018). Peaks for protein visualisation were then selected based on the peptides identified in the LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diagenesis, Teeth, Maldi-msi, Palaeoproteomics, Protein distribution

### Affiliations
BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York
University of York

### Submitter
Jan Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Hendy
BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York


