### Accession
PXD004052

### Title
PR1-14A002

### Description
In quantitative proteomic assay, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) combined with 2D LC-MS/MS is emerging as a powerful methodology in the search for disease specific targets and biomarkers using cell lines, tissues, body fluids and so on. In this study, 5325 distinct proteins (unused≥1.3, which means a  confidence≥95%) were identified using iTRAQ-based proteomic technology. In total, using a strict cutoff value of 1.5-fold for expressed variation, we found 482 proteins differentially expressed (Pvalue≤0.01) in sample N4 compared to N2. Furthermore, we adopted function annotation analysis of all identified proteins and function enrichment analysis of all differentially expressed proteins to explore more meaningful proteins and pathways.

### Sample Protocol
1 Protein Extraction Prepared samples were first ground to dry powder with liquid nitrogen. The dry powder was dissolved with 200μl TEAB dissolution buffer, and broken by the ultrasonic wave for 15 min , and then after centrifugation at 12000 r/min for 20 min ,the supernatant subsided by adding 4-fold volume cold acetone containing 10 mM DTT for about 2 hours. After centrifugation at 12000 r/min for 20 min at 4 °C, the precipitate was collected and mixed with 800 μl cold acetone at 56 °C to break proteins’ disulfide bonds. Again centrifugation at 12000r/min for 20 min at 4 °C and dired, the dired precipitate was collected and dissolved with 100 μl TEAB dissolution buffer and then stored at -80 °C for later use. 2 Digestion and Desalting Total protein concentration was measured using the Bradford method1. For each sample, 100 μg of protein was dissolved to 100 μl in a dissolution buffer, and then diluted with 500 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3. After reduced and alkylated, 2 μg trypsin was added and then incubated overnight at 37 °C for protein digestion. After protein digestion, equal volume of 0.1% FA was added for acidize. Peptides were purified on Strata –X C18 pillar which was first activated with methanol and then balanced by adding 1 ml 0.1%FA for three times, washed with 0.1%FA+5%ACN twice, and eluted with 1 ml 0.1%FA+80% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried with vacuum concentration meter. The dried peptides power was redissolved with 20 μl 0.5 M TEAB for peptides labeling. 3 iTRAQ Labeling and Fractionation Samples were labeled with iTRAQ Reagent-8 plex Multiplex Kit (AB Sciex U.K. Limited) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples and labeled marker were showed in table 2.1. All of the labeled samples were mixed with equal amount. Next, the labeled samples were fractionated using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo DINOEX Ultimate 3000 BioRS) using a Durashell C18(5 um，100  Å，4.6x250 mm). At last, 12 fractions were collected. Table 1  Relationships between iTRAQ label marker and sample. label 113 114 115 116 117 118 sample N2-1 N2-2 N2-3 N4-1 N4-2 N4-3  4 LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on an AB SCIEX nanoLC-MS/MS (Triple TOF 5600 plus) system. Samples were chromatographed using a 90min gradient from 2–30% (buffer A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, buffer B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) after direct injection onto a 20 μm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed to 12 cm with Magic C18 AQ 3 µm 120 Å stationary phase. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 350–1,500 m/z for 250 ms. The 20 most intense precursors with charge state 2–5 were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50–2,000 m/z for 100 ms; precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software v4.5 for data analysis. For protein identification, the Paragon algorithm2 which was integrated into ProteinPilot was employed against Uniprot Sus scrofa database(33958 items, update in Oct. 2014) for database searching. The parameters were set as follows: the instrument was TripleTOF 5600, iTRAQ quantification, cysteine modified with Lodoacetic acid; biological modifications were selected as ID focus, trypsin digestion, the Quantitate, Bias Correction and Background Correction was checked for protein quantification and normalization. For false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate FDR using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the ProteinPilot Software) algorithm. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide and unused value more than 1.3 were considered for further analysis. Among the identified peptides, some of them were excluded from the quantitative analysis for one of the following reasons. (Ⅰ) The peaks corresponding to the iTRAQ labels were not detected. (Ⅱ) The peptides were identified with low identification confidence. (Ⅲ) The peptides were claimed by more than one protein. (Ⅳ) The S/N (signal-to-noise ratio) for any peptide ratio was too low. (Ⅴ) Peptides with a combined feature probability < 30%, because of semitryptic peptides, peptides missing an iTRAQ reagent label, peptides with low probability modifications and peptides with large delta masses.  For biological replicates or technology replicates experiment，the average fold-change induced by treatment relative to the control after normalized was defined as -fold changes. Statistical significance of the difference in the levels of expression of proteins between samples to be compared was determined by student’s t-test(two-tailed and unpaired)， the final Pvalue was displayed. For protein abundance ratios measured using iTRAQ, we took a 1.5- fold change and Pvaule less than 0.01 as the threshold to identify significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sus scrofa ;proteinpilot software v4.5;tripletof 5600+

### Affiliations
State Key Lab of Animal Nutrition, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University
College of Animal Science and Technology in China Agriculture University

### Submitter
Jingdong Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Jingdong Yin
College of Animal Science and Technology in China Agriculture University


