### Accession
PXD026279

### Title
Proteomic signatures of diffuse and intestinal subtypes of gastric cancer

### Description
Gastric cancer is a leading cause of death from cancer globally. Gastric cancer is classified into intestinal, diffuse and indeterminate subtypes based on histology according to the Laurén classification. The intestinal and diffuse subtypes, although different in histology, demographics and outcomes, are still treated in the same fashion. This study was designed to discover proteomic signatures of diffuse and intestinal subtypes. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics using tandem mass tags (TMT)-based multiplexed analysis was used to identify proteins in tumor tissues from patients with diffuse or intestinal gastric cancer with adjacent normal tissue control. A total of 7,804 or 5,166 proteins were identified from intestinal or diffuse subtype, respectively. This quantitative mass spectrometric analysis defined a proteomic signature of differential expression across the two subtypes, which included gremlin1 (GREM1), bcl-2-associated athanogene 2 (BAG2), olfactomedin 4 (OLFM4), thyroid hormone receptor interacting protein 6 (TRIP6) and melanoma-associated antigen 9 (MAGE-A9) proteins. Although GREM1, BAG2, OLFM4, TRIP6 and MAGE-A9 have all been previously implicated in tumor progression and metastasis, they have not been linked to intestinal or diffuse subtypes of gastric cancer. Using immunohistochemical labelling of a tissue microarray comprising of 132 cases of gastric cancer, we validated the proteomic signature obtained by mass spectrometry in the discovery cohort. Our findings should help investigate the pathogenesis of these gastric cancer subtypes and potentially lead to strategies for early diagnosis and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The representative tumor tissue and adjacent normal tissue were selected by a pathologist, harvested and frozen at -80°C until further use. Five samples of tumor tissues along with their respective adjacent normal tissue (control) was taken from each of the diffuse and intestinal subtypes. Each experiment was carried out separately for the intestinal and diffuse subtypes.  The fresh frozen tissue samples were homogenized individually in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Protein from these tissues was extracted in urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate) heated at 95ºC for 5 minutes. This was followed by probe sonication using a Sonifer cell disruptor (Branson 150). The lysates were subjected to centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant from each tissue lysate was collected and protein estimation was carried out by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce; Waltham, MA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein samples were normalized based on protein amounts, as verified by SDS-PAGE. Protein lysates from each sample (500 µg) were reduced and alkylated using 10  mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 20 minutes and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark, respectively. The proteins were precipitated using ice cold acetone. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in a solution of 6 M urea in 50 mM Triethyl Ammonium Bicarbonate (TEAB) and used for in-solution digestion. In-solution digestion was carried out with 500 µg of protein from each sample. Digestion of the samples was carried out using Promega Lys-C (sequencing grade) in the ratio of 1:100 (enzyme: protein) and samples were incubated at room temperature for 4 hours followed by digestion with Promega Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin in the ratio of 1:20 (enzyme: protein) at 37⁰C overnight at 1000 rpm in a thermomixer. The samples were then acidified with an aqueous solution of 1% formic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Eluted samples were dried in a speed vacuum at 35ºC. The dried samples were reconstituted in 110 µl of 100 mM TEAB.  Resulting peptides from the diffuse and intestinal subtypes and their adjacent normal tissue were labeled using 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labels as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for each subtype. The TMT-labeling reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine prior to pooling the samples. The pooled samples were dried in a speed vacuum at 35ºC. The pooled TMT-labeled samples were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase chromatography (bRPLC) into 96 fractions which were then concatenated into 12 fractions and dried in a speed vacuum.  These 12 fractions were desalted using C18 stage tips (Fisher Scientific, MA) prior to analysis on the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used to perform MS/MS spectra searches against the Human RefSeq protein database (Version 92) using SEQUEST-HT search algorithms. The workflow that was used for the searches included spectrum selector, SEQUEST search nodes and peptide validator. The search parameters involved were carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), TMT 10-plex (+229.163 Da) modification at N-terminus of peptide and C-terminus of lysine were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) was set as a dynamic modification. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. An FDR of 1% was applied as a cut-off value for reporting identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Gastric cancer is a leading cause of death from cancer globally. Gastric cancer is classified into intestinal, diffuse and indeterminate subtypes based on histology according to the Laur&#xe9;n classification. The intestinal and diffuse subtypes, although different in histology, demographics and outcomes, are still treated in the same fashion. This study was designed to discover proteomic signatures of diffuse and intestinal subtypes. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics using tandem mass tags (TMT)-based multiplexed analysis was used to identify proteins in tumor tissues from patients with diffuse or intestinal gastric cancer with adjacent normal tissue control. A total of 7448 or 4846 proteins were identified from intestinal or diffuse subtype, respectively. This quantitative mass spectrometric analysis defined a proteomic signature of differential expression across the two subtypes, which included gremlin1 (<i>GREM1</i>), bcl-2-associated athanogene 2 (<i>BAG2</i>), olfactomedin 4 (<i>OLFM4</i>), thyroid hormone receptor interacting protein 6 (<i>TRIP6</i>) and melanoma-associated antigen 9 (<i>MAGE-A9</i>) proteins. Although GREM1, BAG2, OLFM4, TRIP6 and MAGE-A9 have all been previously implicated in tumor progression and metastasis, they have not been linked to intestinal or diffuse subtypes of gastric cancer. Using immunohistochemical labelling of a tissue microarray comprising of 124 cases of gastric cancer, we validated the proteomic signature obtained by mass spectrometry in the discovery cohort. Our findings should help investigate the pathogenesis of these gastric cancer subtypes and potentially lead to strategies for early diagnosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Intestinal gastric cancer, Signet ring cell carcinoma, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Diffuse gastric cancer, Gastric cancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


