### Accession
PXD036290

### Title
Turning spherical cells into kinking helices in wall-less bacteria

### Description
In bacteria, cell shape is determined and maintained through a complex interplay between the peptidoglycan cell wall and cytoplasmic filaments made of polymerized MreB filaments. Spiroplasma species, of the Mollicutes class, challenge this general understanding because they are characterized by a helical cell shape and kink-based motility without a cell wall. This specificity is thought to rely on 5 MreB isoformsand a specific fibril protein. In this study, comninations of these 5 MreBs and the fibril from S. citri were expressed in another Mollicute, Mycoplamsa capricolum. The abundance of these proteins were compared in S.citri at different stages of growth, as well as in Mcap transformants.

### Sample Protocol
Mycoplasma and Spiroplasma cells were harvested by centrifugation at 10000 x g, 20 min and washed twice in Dulbecco's PBS or with a solution containing 8mM HEPES and 280 mM sucrose respectively. Protein concentration was determined using the DC Protein Assay from Biorad. 20 µg of proteins were loaded on a SDS-PAGE stacking gel (7%) and concentrated by performing a short electrophoresis. After Coomassie Blue staining, for each sample, the band was excised, washed with water and immersed in a reductive solution (DTT 5mM). Cysteines were then irreversibly alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Following washing and drying steps , gel bands were submitted to protein digestion, for 3 hours @ 37°c in ammonium bicarbonate buffeer (10 mM pH 8), following the addition of trypsin at a final protease to protein ration of 1:25. Peptides were then extracted with 50% CH3CN, followed by 0.1% TFA and finally 100% CH3CN. The collected samples were then dried. All LC-MS² experiments were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (ThermoScientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC II system (ThermoScientific). one microliter of sample (200 ng) wa injected onto an enrichement column (C18 Acclaim PepMap100, ThermoScientific). The separation was was performed with an analytical column needle (NTCC-360/internaldiameter : 100 µM ; particle : size 5 µm; lenght : 153 mm; NikkyoTechnos, Tokyo, Japan). The mobile phase consisted of H2O/0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and CH3CN/FA0.1%. Tryptic peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a three-step linear gradient: from 2 to 40% B over 76 min, from 40 to 100% B in 4 min and 10 min at 100% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with capillary voltage and source temperature set at 1.8 kV and 275 °C, respectively. The samples were analyzed using CID (collision induced dissociation) method. The first scan (MS spectra) was recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer (r = 60,000) with the mass range m/z 400–1800. Then, the 20 most intense ions were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) experiments. Singly charged species were excluded for MS2 experiments. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 30 s, with a repeat count of 2, a repeat duration of 30 s and an exclusion mass width of ±5 ppm. Fragmentation occurred in the linear ion trap analyzer with collision energy of 35. All measurements in the Orbitrap analyzer were performed with on-the-fly internal recalibration (lock mass) at m/z 445.12002 (polydimethylcyclosiloxane).

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed with Mascot (version 2.8.0) algorithm against “GCF_000012765.1_ASM1276v1_protein” (801 entries) retrieved from NCBI and containing the protein sequences encoded in M. capricolum subsp. capricolum genome, and a multifasta containing S. citri GII-3 and plasmid-encoded protein sequences. The following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for one mis-cleavage; carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) were specified as variable modifications; precursor mass range was set between 350 and 5000 Da, with a precursor mass tolerance and a fragment ion tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.35 Da respectively. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm53 and only « high confidence » peptides were retained corresponding to 1% false discovery rate. A minimum of 2 PSMs and 2 unique peptides were required to consider protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial cell shape is generally determined through an interplay between the peptidoglycan cell wall and cytoplasmic filaments made of polymerized MreB. Indeed, some bacteria (e.g., Mycoplasma) that lack both a cell wall and mreB genes consist of non-motile cells that are spherical or pleomorphic. However, other members of the same class Mollicutes (e.g., Spiroplasma, also lacking a cell wall) display a helical cell shape and kink-based motility, which is thought to rely on the presence of five MreB isoforms and a specific fibril protein. Here, we show that heterologous expression of Spiroplasma fibril and MreB proteins confers helical shape and kinking ability to Mycoplasma capricolum cells. Isoform MreB5 is sufficient to confer helicity and kink propagation to mycoplasma cells. Cryoelectron microscopy confirms the association of cytoplasmic MreB filaments with the plasma membrane, suggesting a direct effect on membrane curvature. However, in our experiments, the heterologous expression of MreBs and fibril did not result in efficient motility in culture broth, indicating that additional, unknown Spiroplasma components are required for swimming.

### Keywords
Mycoplasma capricolum, Kinking helical cell, Mreb, Spiroplasma citri, Cytoskeleton, Fibril

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Normandie Univ., UNIROUEN, INSA Rouen, CNRS, Polymers, Biopolymers, Surfaces Laboratory, 76000 Rouen, France  University of Rouen Normandy, INSERM US 51, CNRS UAR 2026, HeRacLeS-PISSARO, Normandie Université, 76000 Rouen, France

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Normandie Univ., UNIROUEN, INSA Rouen, CNRS, Polymers, Biopolymers, Surfaces Laboratory, 76000 Rouen, France  University of Rouen Normandy, INSERM US 51, CNRS UAR 2026, HeRacLeS-PISSARO, Normandie Université, 76000 Rouen, France


