### Accession
PXD039476

### Title
Dietary restriction of cysteine and methionine sensitizes gliomas to ferroptosis and induces alterations in energetic metabolism

### Description
Ferroptosis is mediated by lipid peroxidation of phospholipids containing polyunsaturated fatty acyl moieties. Glutathione, the key cellular antioxidant capable of inhibiting lipid peroxidation via the activity of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX-4), is generated directly from the sulfur-containing amino acid cysteine, and indirectly from methionine via the transsulfuration pathway. Herein we show that cysteine and methionine deprivation (CMD) can synergize with the GPX4 inhibitor RSL3 to increase ferroptotic cell death and lipid peroxidation in both murine and human glioma cell lines and in ex vivo organotypic slice cultures. We also show that a cysteine-depleted, methionine-restricted diet can improve therapeutic response to RSL3 and prolong survival in a syngeneic orthotopic murine glioma model. Finally, this CMD diet leads to profound in vivo metabolomic, proteomic and lipidomic alterations, highlighting the potential for improving the efficacy of ferroptotic therapies in glioma treatment with a non-invasive dietary modification.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue from mice with MG3 tumors placed on CMD or control diets was fixed at end-stage in 4% PFA and paraffin embedded. 5μM sections were made from blocks; tissue cores were scraped off slides and transferred to 1.5mL eppendorf tubes. Tissue was suspended in 50uL of 5% SDS/300mM Tris pH 8.5 and sonicated/boiled in a water bath. Samples were centrifuged then sonication/boiling was repeated. Lysate was centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 min and collected in a new Eppendorf tube. Cleared lysate was precipitated using the “salt method”. Pellets were resuspended in SDC lysis buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA and 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5) and boiled for 10 min at 45°C, 1400 rpm to denature, reduce, and alkylate cysteine, followed by sonication in a water bath. Protein digestion was processed overnight by adding LysC and trypsin at 37° C and 1400 rpm. Peptides were acidified by adding 1% TFA and vortexing followed by  StageTip clean-up via SDB-RPS. Peptides were loaded on one 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Peptides were washed two times with 200 µL 1% TFA 99% ethyl acetate followed by 200 µL 0.2% TFA/5%ACN in centrifuge at 3000 rpm, followed by elution with 60 µL of 1% Ammonia, 50% ACN into eppendorf tubes and dried at 60°C in a SpeedVac centrifuge. Peptides were resuspended in 7 µL of 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and injected on Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using the DIA method48 for peptide MS/MS analysis. The UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 50 cm x 75 μm ID column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo) were used to separate fractionated peptides with a 5-30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B for 5 min and re-equilibrated with 98% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 100% HPLC-grade water) for 40 min. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 350-1200 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 x 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, 26 m/z DIA segments were acquired from 200-2000 m/z at 60K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 x 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 118 ms. HCD fragmentation was applied with 27% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed with directDIA 2.0 (Deep learning augmented spectrum-centric DIA analysis ) in Spectronaut Pulsar X, a mass spectrometer vendor independent software from Biognosys. The default settings were used for targeted analysis of DIA data in Spectronaut except the decoy generation was set to mutated. The false discovery rate (FDR) will be estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1% at peptide precursor level and at 1% at protein level. Results obtained from Spectronaut were further analyzed using the Spectronaut statistical package. Significantly changed protein abundance was determined by unpaired t-test with a threshold for significance of p < 0.20 (permutation-based FDR correction) and 0.58 log2FC. Sample CMD1 was not included in the final analysis as histology demonstrated primarily olfactory bulb tissue with minimal evidence of tumor.

### Publication Abstract
Ferroptosis is mediated by lipid peroxidation of phospholipids containing polyunsaturated fatty acyl moieties. Glutathione, the key cellular antioxidant capable of inhibiting lipid peroxidation via the activity of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX-4), is generated directly from the sulfur-containing amino acid cysteine, and indirectly from methionine via the transsulfuration pathway. Herein we show that cysteine and methionine deprivation (CMD) can synergize with the GPX4 inhibitor RSL3 to increase ferroptotic cell death and lipid peroxidation in both murine and human glioma cell lines and in ex vivo organotypic slice cultures. We also show that a cysteine-depleted, methionine-restricted diet can improve therapeutic response to RSL3 and prolong survival in a syngeneic orthotopic murine glioma model. Finally, this CMD diet leads to profound in vivo metabolomic, proteomic and lipidomic alterations, highlighting the potential for improving the efficacy of ferroptotic therapies in glioma treatment with a non-invasive dietary modification.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Glioma, Methionine, Ferroptosis, Metabolism, Glutathione

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA

### Submitter
Angeliki Mela

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Canoll
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA


