### Accession
PXD019127

### Title
PhosR enables processing and functional analysis of phosphoproteomic data

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics has transformed our ability to profile phosphorylation-based signalling in tissues and cells on a global scale. To infer the action of kinases and signalling pathways in phosphoproteomic experiments, we present PhosR, a set of tools and methodologies implemented in a suite of R packages for the comprehensive analysis of phosphoproteomic data. By applying to both published and new phosphoproteomic datasets, we illustrate PhosR in data imputation and normalisation using a novel set of ‘stably phosphorylated sites’ and in functional analysis for inferring kinase activities and signalling pathways. In particular, we introduce a ‘signalome’ construction method for identifying a collection of signalling modules that allow us to summarise and visualise the interaction of kinases and their collective action on signal transduction. Together, our data and findings demonstrate the utility of PhosR in processing and generating novel biological knowledge from MS-based phosphoproteomic data.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled proteins were trypsinised and fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography and phosphopetides were enriched and analysed by LC-MS/MS. More information is provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW data were processed using MaxQuant and analysed using R. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Signalome, Preprecessing, Batch correction, Kinase-substrate relationship, Imputation, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Taiyun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Pengyi Yang
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Sydney


