### Accession
PXD035458

### Title
Cyanophage MarR-type transcription factor regulates host RNase E expression

### Description
The marine picocyanobacterium Prochlorococcus contributes significantly to global primary production, and its abundance and diversity is shaped in part by viral infection. Here, we identified a cyanophage-encoded MarR-type transcription factor that induces gene expression of host Prochlorococcus MED4 endoribonuclease (RNase) E during phage infection. The increase in rne transcript levels relies on the phage (p)MarR-mediated activation of an alternative promoter that gives rise to a truncated, yet, enzymatically fully functional RNase E isoform. In this study, we demonstrate that pMarR binds to an atypical activator site downstream of the transcriptional start site and that binding is enhanced in the presence of Ca2+ ions. Furthermore, we show that dimeric pMaR interacts with the α subunit of RNA polymerase, and we identified amino acid residues S66, R67 and G106, which are important for Ca2+ binding, DNA binding and dimerization of pMarR, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Prochlorococcus MED4 cell lysate was incubated with the bait protein (MarR-6xHis or MarR-6xHis G106A)on column and protein complexes were eluted with a gradient of washing buffer (5 mM Imidazole, 50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM NaN3) and elution buffer (400 mM Imidazole, 50 mM NaH2PO4, 140 mM NaCl). Elution fractions were collected in 2-mL Eppendorf® tubes and visualized on a 12% PAA (40% acrylamide:bisacrylamide (37.5:1)) gel by staining with Coomassie blue.  Protein samples from the fractions 14, 15, 20 and 21 were precipitated with chloroform/methanol according to Wessel and Flügge (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Precipitated proteins were digested in solution using LysC and Trypsin and desalted according to Hammel et al. (Hammel et al., 2018). Peptides were analyzed on a nanoLC-MS/MS system (eksigent 425 HPLC coupled to a TripleTOF 6600, AB Sciex) in data dependent mode as described (Hammel et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantitation of proteins from MS data was carried out using MaxQuant Software package v1.6.0.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The protein library used for peptide spectrum matching was generated from the NCBI reference sequence (NC_005072.1) and supplemented with sequences for pmarR WT and mutant versions as well as a set of 245 common contaminants included in the MaxQuant package. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were considered as peptide modifications. Maximal missed cleavages were set to 3 and peptide length to 6 amino acids, the maximal peptide mass to 5600 Da. Thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were set by a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Intensity results for the combined fractions were normalized to the bait protein MarR and ranked for their abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The marine picocyanobacterium <i>Prochlorococcus</i> contributes significantly to global primary production, and its abundance and diversity is shaped in part by viral infection. Here, we identified a cyanophage-encoded MarR-type transcription factor that induces the gene expression of host <i>Prochlorococcus</i> MED4 endoribonuclease (RNase) E during phage infection. The increase in <i>rne</i> transcript levels relies on the phage (p)MarR-mediated activation of an alternative promoter that gives rise to a truncated yet enzymatically fully functional RNase E isoform. In this study, we demonstrate that pMarR binds to an atypical activator site downstream of the transcriptional start site and that binding is enhanced in the presence of Ca<sup>2+</sup> ions. Furthermore, we show that dimeric pMarR interacts with the &#x3b1; subunit of RNA polymerase, and we identified amino acid residues S66, R67, and G106, which are important for Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding, DNA binding, and dimerization of pMarR, respectively.

### Keywords
Marr, Protein interaction, Cyanophage

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
Genetics & Experimental Bioinformatics University of Freiburg Institute of Biology III Schänzlestraße 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany

### Submitter
Frederik Sommer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Claudia Steglich
Genetics & Experimental Bioinformatics University of Freiburg Institute of Biology III Schänzlestraße 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany


