### Accession
PXD043691

### Title
Clinical and molecular delineation of classical-like Ehlers–Danlos syndrome through a comprehensive next-generation sequencing-based screening system

### Description
Classical-like Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (clEDS) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by complete absence of tenascin-X resulting from biallelic variation in TNXB. Accurate detection of TNXB variants is challenging because of the presence of the pseudogene TNXA, which can undergo non-allelic homologous recombination. Therefore, we designed a genetic screening system that is performed using similar operations to other next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel analyses and can be applied to accurately detect TNXB variants and the recombination of TNXA-derived sequences into TNXB. We also analyzed the levels of serum form of TNX (sTNX) by Western bot and LC/MS/MS. Using this system, we identified biallelic TNXB variants in nine unrelated clEDS patients. This report is the first to apply an NGS-based screening for TNXB variants and represents the third largest cohort of clEDS.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve abundant protein depleted serum samples were denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. The digested samples were separated using a six-step fractionation by strong cation exchange (SCX) cartridge. The SCX fraction spiked with the stable isotope-labeled peptide was analyzed by nano-LC/MS/MS (Access Max triple quadrupole mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The SRM/MRM method for unlabeled and stable isotope-labeled AVAVSGLDPAR peptides derived from serum form of tenascin-X (sTNX) was created by Pinpoint 1.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Product ions were y-ions. The AVAVSGLDPAR peptides were analyzed by nano-LC/MS/MS. A standard curve was prepared by spiking serial dilutions of the unlabeled peptide and same amount of the stable isotope-labeled peptide. SRM/MRM data were analyzed using Pinpoint 1.1 software. Quantification values were calculated from the ratios of total peak areas of all transitions for unlabeled peptide to those for the stable isotope-labeled peptide. The calibration curve was fitted to a 1/x weighted linear regression model. To obtain ng/ml sTNX concentration, the molecular weight of sTNX and a conversion factor 1000 was applied to the fmol/l peptide concentrations, which were corrected by the sample volume corresponding to 50g protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Classical-like ehlers–danlos syndrome, Ngs, Lc/ms/ms, Tenascin-x

### Affiliations
Shinshu University
Department of Legal Medicine, Shimane University

### Submitter
Kazuo Yamada

### Lab Head
Dr Tomomi Yamaguchi
Shinshu University


