### Accession
PXD009048

### Title
Bloodstream infection N-glycoproteomics

### Description
Here we have performed targeted quantitative N-glycoproteomics from plasma samples of patients with confirmed positive blood culture together with age and sex matched febrile controls with negative blood culture reports. Three hundred and sixty eight potential N-glycopeptides were quantified by mass spectrometry and 149 were further selected for identification. Twenty four N-glycopeptides were identified with high confidence together with elucidation of the peptide sequence, N-glycosylation site, glycan composition and proposed glycan structures. these N-glycopeptides can be used as potential biomarkers of bloodstream infection.

### Sample Protocol
PLasma samples were processed by removal of albumin and trypsin digestion of albumin-depleted plasma total proteins. Lectin affinity chromatographyw as used for enriching the N-glycopeptides. POtential N-Glycopeptides were analyzed by LC-HDMSE and quantified label-free utilizing Progenesis-QI for Proteomics software. Subsquent to quantification, statistically different (t-test) potnetial N-glycopeptides were selected for identification byLC-MS/MS (Fast-DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
Ion abundances for potential N-glycopeptides from LC-HDMSE runs, were calculated in Progenesis-QI for Proteomics software. Fragementation of selected N-glycopeptides from DDA LC-MS/MS runs yielded spectra that were deconvoluted in MassLynx software and saved as .pkl files. these files were searched in GlycopepitdeID software which gave the output of 24 reliably identified and scored N-glycopeptides with peptide sequence, N-glycan composition and proposed N-glycan structures.

### Publication Abstract
Bloodstream infections are associated with high morbidity and mortality with rates varying from 10-25% and higher. Appropriate and timely onset of antibiotic therapy influences the prognosis of these patients. It requires the diagnostic accuracy which is not afforded by current gold standards such as blood culture. Moreover, the time from blood sampling to blood culture results is a key determinant of reducing mortality. No established biomarkers exist which can differentiate bloodstream infections from other systemic inflammatory conditions. This calls for studies on biomarkers potential of molecular profiling of plasma as it is affected most by the molecular changes accompanying bloodstream infections. N-glycosylation is a post-translational modification which is very sensitive to changes in physiology. Here we have performed targeted quantitative N-glycoproteomics from plasma samples of patients with confirmed positive blood culture together with age and sex matched febrile controls with negative blood culture reports. Three hundred and sixty eight potential N-glycopeptides were quantified by mass spectrometry and 149 were further selected for identification. Twenty four N-glycopeptides were identified with high confidence together with elucidation of the peptide sequence, N-glycosylation site, glycan composition and proposed glycan structures. Principal component analysis, orthogonal projections to latent structures-discriminant analysis (S-Plot) and self-organizing maps clustering among other statistical methods were employed to analyze the data. These methods gave us clear separation of the two patient classes. We propose high-confidence N-glycopeptides which have the power to separate the bloodstream infections from blood culture negative febrile patients and shed light on host response during bacteremia. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009048.

### Keywords
Human plasma, Bloodstream infection, Sepsis, N-glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation laboratory, Haartmaninkatu 3, PO Box 21, FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland. And HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Finland.

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation laboratory, Haartmaninkatu 3, PO Box 21, FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland. And HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Finland.


