### Accession
PXD046709

### Title
EPAC1 enhances energy expenditure by selectively inducing brown and beige adipose tissue growth

### Description
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a central thermogenic organ that enhances energy expenditure (EE) and cardiometabolic health. However, regulators that specifically increase the number of thermogenic adipocytes are still an unmet need. Here, we show by phosphoproteomics that cAMP activates distinct signaling pathways in brown progenitors, with the cAMP-EPAC1 axis enhancing proliferation and differentiation of thermogenic but not white adipocytes. Further analysis revealed that a specific subpopulation of preadipocytes that are PDGFRα-positive express EPAC1. In vivo, pharmacological activation of EPAC1 enhances BAT growth and browning of white fat, leading to increased EE and reduced diet-induced adiposity. In contrast, mice lacking EPAC1 in PDGFRα-positive preadipocytes show the opposite phenotype. Importantly, EPAC1 activation enhances proliferation and differentiation of human brown adipocytes and human brown fat organoids. Interestingly, a coding variant in EPAC1 that positively correlates with BMI abolishes norepinephrine-induced proliferation of brown adipocytes. Thus, EPAC1 might be an attractive target to enhance thermogenic adipocyte number and EE to combat metabolic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptides were enriched starting with 1 mg of protein input using the Easyphos workflow (Humphrey et al., 2018) and subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Phopshopeptides were loaded onto a 50-cm column, maintained at 60 °C, with a 75 µM inner diameter. This column was packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 ReproSil particles from Dr. Maisch GmbH. The separation of peptides was achieved through a 120-minute gradient by reversed-phase chromatography with a binary buffer system comprising 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). The acquisition followed a data-dependent cycle with a 1-second time interval, a maximum injection time of 80 ms, a scan range of 300–1650 Th, and an AGC target of 300%, without the use of FAIMS. Sequencing of peptides was achieved through higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 and a window of 1.4 Th. Survey scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, and for HCD spectra, the resolution was set to 15,000, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was configured for 40 seconds, and an apex trigger was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant version 2.0.1.0, with the "match between runs" feature enabled. The setting for "max. missed cleavages" was set to 2, and default settings were employed unless otherwise specified. ANOVA and two-sided unpaired Student’s t-tests were used to filter significantly changed phosphopeptides after width adjustment to correct for protein amount and imputation of missing values by random numbers drawn from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8 with Perseus software version. For unsupervised hierarchical clusterings z-scored z-scored intensity values were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown adipocyte, Epac

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Diabetes Center Munich
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Helmholtz Diabetes Center Munich


