### Accession
PXD013192

### Title
HEK NICD AP-MS - Notch signaling is a core patterning module for vascular morphogenesis, which co-determines the sprouting behaviour of endothelial cells (ECs)

### Description
Notch signaling is a core patterning module for vascular morphogenesis, which co-determines the sprouting behaviour of endothelial cells (ECs). Tight quantitative and temporal control of Notch activity is essential for vascular development, yet the details of Notch regulation in ECs are incompletely understood. We found that ubiquitin-specific peptidase 10 (USP10) interacted with the NOTCH1 intracellular domain (NICD1) to slow the ubiquitin-dependent turnover of this short-lived form of the activated NOTCH1 receptor. Accordingly, inactivation of USP10 reduced NICD1 abundance and stability, and diminished Notch-induced target gene expression in ECs. In mice, loss of endothelial Usp10 increased vessel sprouting and partially restored the patterning defects caused by ectopic expression of NICD1. Thus, USP10 functions as an NICD1 deubiquitinase, which fine-tunes endothelial Notch responses during angiogenic sprouting.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-based interactome studies For stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) experiments, HEK293T cells were cultured for two weeks in growth medium (SILAC DMEM (#E15-086, PAA), 10% dialysed fetal calf serum, penicillin (100 units/ml), streptomycin (100 μg/ml), gentamycin (100 μg/ml)) containing naturally occurring (Arg-0/Lys-0) amino acids, or the heavy isotopic variants Arg-6/Lys-4 (Silantes GmbH). The unlabeled (‘light’) cells were transfected with empty vector while the ‘heavy’ labelled cells were transfected with plasmid expressing NICD1-V5. At 24 h post-transfection, cells were lysed in IPLS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL pH7.5, 120 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA and 0,5% Nonidet P-40) freshly supplemented with 1× EDTA-Free Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. Samples were cleared by centrifugation and protein concentrations determined by the Bradford procedure. The labeled cell lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio. The samples were pre-cleared with A/G agarose beads (Santa Cruz) for 1 h at 4°C prior to immunoprecipitation (IP). Samples were incubated with anti-V5 agarose affinity gel (Sigma, #A7345) overnight at 4°C. Beads were then washed five times in lysis buffer and enzymatic digestion of the immunoprecipitated proteins was performed as previously described (4). Briefly, the immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by boiling the beads in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer containing 50 mM DTT at 70°C for 10 min. The eluate was separated by one-dimensional SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Each gel lane was divided into seven parts and further diced into 1 mm2 cubes. The gel pieces were washed several times before the proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min) and alkylated (55 mM IAA, 30 min, room temperature in the dark). After a few more washes, 40 μl of 12 ng/μl trypsin (Sigma) was added to the gel pieces and allowed to incubate on ice for 30 min. 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonate buffer was then added to cover all gel pieces and keep them wet during enzymatic cleavage overnight at 37°C. The generated peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using an increasing content of acetonitrile and concentrated in a speed vac. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were primed using the STAGE tip technique

### Data Protocol
Peptides were eluted from C18 tips with 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness and resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). The Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment comprises an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-spray electroionisation source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 μm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary buffer system: (A) 0.1% formic acid and (B) 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The content of buffer B was raised from 6% to 38% within 40 min and followed by an increase to 63% within 5 min. Then, within 5 min buffer B fraction was raised to 95% and held there for 5 min after which it was decreased to 5% within 2 min and held there for 3 min before the next sample was loaded on the column. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. Using a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 35,000 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5, an isolation window of 1.8 Th and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant and the implemented Andromeda search engine (7). MS/MS spectra were correlated against the human Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database including a list of common contaminants. We used 7 ppm and 4.5 ppm MS/MS tolerances for first and main search respectively. The FDR at the peptide-spectrummatch and the protein level was controlled by the implemented decoy algorithm using the revert database to 1%. “Match-between runs” and “Re-quantify” algorithms were activated and used by default settings. N-term acetylation and oxidation at methionine residues were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification. Log2 SILAC ratios were normalised prior to further processing by median subtraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nicd, Hek

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), 50931 Cologne, Germany.

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), 50931 Cologne, Germany.


