### Accession
PXD026264

### Title
CST interacts with the cohesin complex and promotes chromosome cohesion

### Description
Sister chromatid cohesion (SCC), the pairing of sister chromatids following DNA replication until mitosis, is established by loading of the cohesin complex on newly replicated chromatids. Cohesin must then be maintained until mitosis to prevent segregation defects and aneuploidy. However, how SCC is established and maintained until mitosis remains incompletely understood and emerging evidence suggests that replication stress may lead to premature SCC loss. Here, we report that the single-stranded DNA-binding protein CTC1-STN1-TEN1 (CST) aids in SCC. CST primarily functions in telomere length regulation but also has known roles in replication restart and DNA repair. Following depletion of CST subunits, we observed an increase in the complete loss of SCC. Additionally, we determined that CST associates with the cohesin complex. Unexpectedly, we did not find evidence of altered cohesion or mitotic progression in the absence of CST; however, we did find that treatment with various replication inhibitors increased the association between CST and cohesin. Since replication stress was recently shown to induce SCC loss, we hypothesized that CST may be required to maintain or remodel SCC following DNA replication fork stalling. In agreement with this idea, SCC loss was greatly increased in CST-depleted cells following exogenous replication stress. Based on our findings, we propose that CST aids in the maintenance of SCC at stalled replication forks to prevent premature cohesion loss.

### Sample Protocol
Three replicate affinity-purifications were performed for CST1 or a negative control for non-specific binding.  Eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE, Coomassie stained, and each lane was cut into three bands. Gel pieces were de-stained and proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) at 55°C, and alkylated in 25 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark.  The protein was digested with trypsin (Sigma) (100 ng) overnight at 37°C.  Digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%, and peptides were extracted from the gel and dried.    Peptides were loaded onto a trap column and separated with a 75 µm x 30 cm analytical column (packed in house, C18-Reprosil-AQ Pur RP 1.9 µm particles, Dr. Maisch, GmbH) at 60°C using a gradient from 5% B to 40% B in 180 min (Solvent A: 0.2% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile; Solvent B: 2% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) on a U3000 nano LC system. The flow rate was 180 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) in data dependent mode with one FTMS survey scan, mass range of m/z 400-1700 Th, followed by collisional dissociation of the ten most intense ions and detection in the ion trap. The automatic gain control target value was 10 6 ions for the survey MS scan, the resolution was 60,000 at m/z 400 Th. Ions with a +1 charge were excluded from selection. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, duration of 30 sec, exclusion list size of 50, and exclusion duration of 180 sec. Data were only acquired during the gradient omitting the wash and recalibration time.  Chromatography mode was enabled with an expected peak width of 30 sec and a minimum threshold of 1000.   Three blanks were run between each sample to avoid carry over.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.16 against a Human Uniprot protein database (downloaded on 030918 containing 71722 sequences) including common contaminants.  The false discovery rate, determined using a reversed database strategy, was set at 0.01 at the protein and peptide level.  Fully tryptic peptides with a minimum of 7 residues were required including cleavage between lysine and proline.  Two missed cleavages and two modifications were permitted.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in triplicate for each condition and searched together matching between runs with a 0.7 min window. The fast LFQ feature was disabled.  The first search was performed with a 25 ppm mass tolerance, after recalibration a 4.5 ppm tolerance was used for the main search.  At least two peptides were required for protein quantification with at least one unique peptide. Parameters included static modification of cysteine with carbamidomethyl, variable N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation.  Intensity measurements were quantified and normalized by the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm (2).:  Normalized LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and a Welch’s t test was performed on the three replicates per condition using the Perseus platform 4). Data were filtered for at least 2 quantitative measurements in at least one group. Data were filtered for at least 2 quantitative measurements in the CST1 IP group. The protein groups text file was processed in Perseus (Version 1.6.2.1) (3) and matches to the reversed database, contaminants, and proteins only identified by modified peptides were removed.  Identified proteins were required to have at least one unique peptide.  The normalized LFQ intensities were log2 transformed.  The data were filtered to retain proteins quantified in one of the three biological replicates of the experimental immunoprecipitation.  Missing values were replaced by random values imputed from a normal distribution using a width of 0.6, downshift of 1.5, and the total matrix of 3 control and 3 experimental immunoprecipitations.    To identify enriched proteins of lower abundance that were identified in the CST1 immunoprecipitated samples, the missing values (primarily in the control immunoprecipitations) were imputed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromosome cohesion, Stn1, Ten1, Cst, Fork stalling, Dna replication, Cohesin, Ctc1

### Affiliations
University of South Carolina Department of Biological Sciences
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Stewart, PhD
University of South Carolina Department of Biological Sciences


