### Accession
PXD014681

### Title
PALB2 acetylation by KAT2A/B (GCN5/PCAF) in vitro

### Description
PArtner and Localizer of BRCA2 (PALB2) is essential to maintain genome stability in human cells. Upon DNA damage by double DNA strand breaks, PALB2 is required to repair DNA by homologous recombination. In undamaged conditions, PALB2 protects coding regions, by preventing DNA stress due to collisions between transcription and replication machineries. PALB2 associates with chromatin, which is essential to fulfill its function in genome stability maintenance, however molecular mechanisms regulating PALB2 chromatin association remain unknown. In our previous published study describing the KAT2A/B(GCN5/PCAF)-acetylome (Fournier et al., Nat.Comm. 2016, doi: 10.1038/ncomms13227) we have identified PALB2 as an acetylated protein target of the acetyltransferases KAT2A (GCN5) and KAT2B (PCAF) in vivo. KAT2A/B-acetylated sites of PALB2 were mapped within its DNA/Chromatin association domain. In this current study, we have conducted in vitro acetyltransferase (AT) assays, by mixing purified recombinant GST-tagged PALB2 full-length (FL) and PALB2 fragment P2.2 which associates with DNA/chromatin (from residues 295-610), with Flag-PCAF, Flag-GCN5 and Flag-GCN5 catalytic mutant (mut), followed by proteomics analysis to map PALB2 acetylated  lysines by KAT2A(GCN5) and KAT2B(PCAF) in vitro. PALB2 FL and P2.2 alone, or PALB2 FL and P2.2 mixed with GCN5 catalytic mutant, were used as negative controls.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from in vitro AT assays were denaturated in 8 M urea dissolved into 50 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB), reduced with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Roche) for 2 h at 37 °C, followed by trypsin digestion for 16 h at 37 °C. Before the trypsin digestion, the urea concentration was diluted down to 2M into 50 mM TEAB and calcium chloride was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. The digestion steps were performed in a Thermomixer compact (Eppendorf) shaking at 650rpms. Trypsin digestion was stopped by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Digest samples were centrifuged for 30 min at 4 °C to remove aggregates.  Peptide mixtures were further desalted using hand-made C18 tips, as follows: the C18 tip was first washed twice with 100 % acetonitrile after 5 min centrifugation at 2000 rpms at room temperature. Peptides were further loaded onto the C18 tip by centrifugation at 4000 rpms at room temperature. After two washing steps into 0.1 % TFA solution, desalted peptides were eluted into 50 % acetonitrile/0.1 % TFA solution and dried using a SpeedVac before LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were re-suspended in 10% formic acid. They were separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and electrosprayed directly into a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1 % Formic Acid in water) at a pressure of 500 bar. The peptides were separated on, an in- house packed analytical column (75 µm i.d. packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr.Maisch GmbH) using a linear gradient (length: 120 min , 7 % to 28 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile), flow rate: 200 nL/min). The raw data was acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-2000 m/z, resolution 70000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms). After the MS scans, the 20 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30 % of normalised collision energy. HCD spectra were also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST HT within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288), against a non-redundant protein sequence database for Homo sapiens containing 23052 protein sequence entries (Uniprot, release 2015-26-03). During database searches, acetylation (N-terminus and lysines, K), Oxidation (Methionine, M) were set at variable modifications while carbamidomethylation (Cysteine, C) was set as fixed modification. Three missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and 0.05 Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The tumour suppressor PALB2 stimulates RAD51-mediated homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA damage, whilst its steady-state association with active genes protects these loci from replication stress. Here, we report that the lysine acetyltransferases 2A and 2B (KAT2A/2B, also called GCN5/PCAF), two well-known transcriptional regulators, acetylate a cluster of seven lysine residues (7K-patch) within the PALB2 chromatin association motif (ChAM) and, in this way, regulate context-dependent PALB2 binding to chromatin. In unperturbed cells, the 7K-patch is targeted for KAT2A/2B-mediated acetylation, which in turn enhances the direct association of PALB2 with nucleosomes. Importantly, DNA damage triggers a rapid deacetylation of ChAM and increases the overall mobility of PALB2. Distinct missense mutations of the 7K-patch render the mode of PALB2 chromatin binding, making it either unstably chromatin-bound (7Q) or randomly bound with a reduced capacity for mobilisation (7R). Significantly, both of these mutations confer a deficiency in RAD51 foci formation and increase DNA damage in S phase, leading to the reduction of overall cell survival. Thus, our study reveals that acetylation of the ChAM 7K-patch acts as a molecular switch to enable dynamic PALB2 shuttling for HR repair while protecting active genes during DNA replication.

### Keywords
Dna repair, Acetylation

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks Road, Oxford OX13RE, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marjorie Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr Fumiko Esashi
University of Oxford, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks Road, Oxford OX13RE, UK


