### Accession
PXD002141

### Title
A surface biotinylation strategy for reproducible plasma membrane protein purification and tracking of genetic and drug-induced alterations

### Description
In the past years several protocols for the proteomic profiling of plasma membrane proteins have been described. Nevertheless, comparative analyses have mainly focused on different variations of one approach [1-3]. To pave the way to high-performance differential plasma membrane proteomics, we compared sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation, aminooxy-biotinylation and surface coating with silica beads to isolate plasma membrane proteins for subsequent analysis by one-dimensional gel-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Absolute and relative numbers of plasma membrane proteins and reproducibility parameters on a qualitative and quantitative level were assessed. Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation outperformed aminooxy-biotinylation and surface coating using silica beads for most of the monitored criteria. We further simplified this procedure by introducing a competitive biotin elution strategy, for which the average plasma membrane annotated protein fraction amounted to 54 % (347 proteins). Moreover, purified non-plasma membrane annotated proteins and plasma membrane annotated proteins displayed similarly high reproducibility suggesting specific co-purification. In fact, the non-plasma membrane annotated data was extremely enriched for direct interactors of purified plasma membrane proteins. Computational analysis using additional databases and prediction tools revealed that in total over 90 % of the purified proteins were associated with the plasma membrane. The modified sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation protocol was validated by tracking changes in the plasma membrane proteome composition induced by genetic alteration and drug treatment. GPI-anchored proteins were depleted in plasma membrane purifications from cells deficient in the GPI transamidase component PIGS; and treatment of cells with tunicamycin significantly reduced the abundance of N-glycoproteins in surface purifications. Altogether, this study introduces an improved, filter-free sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation protocol and demonstrates it to be a specific, effective and reproducible method to isolate proteins associated with the plasma membrane, thus enabling future large-scale comparative cell surface mappings.

### Sample Protocol
Details about specific sample preparation for the different protocol types can be found in the Experimental procedures section of the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed with msconvert (ProteoWizard Library v2.1.2708) and searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (v2013.01, 37,398 sequences) with the search engines Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, U.K.) and Phenyx (v2.5.14, GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland)[25]. A maximum of one missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed for the aminooxy-biotin and the silica beads approach, whilst a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage sites was enabled for the sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin method. Initial searches were performed with relatively broad mass tolerances via a Perl script on both precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, Mascot only). All precursor and fragment ion masses were recalibrated based on high-confidence peptide identifications and subsequently subjected to a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm, ±0.3 Da). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, whilst oxidation of methionine residues was selected as a variable modification. For the sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin experiments, the biotin moiety conjugated to lysine residues and protein N-termini was added as a variable modification. Release of N-linked glycopeptides by PNGaseF treatment deamidates asparagine residues to aspartic acid. This was set as additional variable modification as required. False positive detection rates (FDR) of <1% and <0.1% were determined for proteins and peptides, respectively, by applying the same procedure against a reversed database. UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Gene Ontology cellular component (GO.CC) annotations of the identified proteins were retrieved via BioMart [26].

### Publication Abstract
Plasma membrane (PM) proteins contribute to the identity of a cell, mediate contact and communication, and account for more than two-thirds of known drug targets.1-8 In the past years, several protocols for the proteomic profiling of PM proteins have been described. Nevertheless, comparative analyses have mainly focused on different variations of one approach.9-11 We compared sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation, aminooxy-biotinylation, and surface coating with silica beads to isolate PM proteins for subsequent analysis by one-dimensional gel-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Absolute and relative numbers of PM proteins and reproducibility parameters on a qualitative and quantitative level were assessed. Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation outperformed aminooxy-biotinylation and surface coating using silica beads for most of the monitored criteria. We further simplified this procedure by a competitive biotin elution strategy achieving an average PM annotated protein fraction of 54% (347 proteins). Computational analysis using additional databases and prediction tools revealed that in total over 90% of the purified proteins were associated with the PM, mostly as interactors. The modified sulfo-NHS-SS-biotinylation protocol was validated by tracking changes in the plasma membrane proteome composition induced by genetic alteration and drug treatment. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins were depleted in PM purifications from cells deficient in the GPI transamidase component PIGS, and treatment of cells with tunicamycin significantly reduced the abundance of N-glycoproteins in surface purifications.

### Keywords
Cell surface proteomics, Kbm7, Mcp, Technical paper

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Katrin Hörmann

### Lab Head
Dr Keiryn L. Bennett
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences


