### Accession
PXD006712

### Title
Cas9 of bacterial pathogens induces DNA damage and apoptosis of human  cells

### Description
CRISPR-Cas is an RNA-based defense system that enables prokaryotes to recognize invading  foreign DNA by cognate crRNA guides and destroy it by CRISPR-associated Cas nucleases 1,2 .  Elucidation of the interference mechanism of the Streptococcus pyogenes Type II CRISPR-  Cas9 system has allowed for the successful repurposing of SpCas9 as a generic genome  editing tool, with great promise for human gene therapy 3 . However, especially for therapeutic  applications, some caution seems appropriate, because Cas9 systems from some human  pathogens may induce a cytotoxic response via an unknown mechanism 4 . Here we show that  when released in human cells, Cas9 nucleases from the pathogenic bacteria Campylobacter  jejuni and S. pyogenes have the potential to cause severe DNA damage. In the absence of a  CRISPR RNA guide, native Cas9 nucleases from both pathogens enter the host nucleus,  where their presence leads to promiscuous double stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) and  induction of cell death. DSB induction can be reduced to background levels either by  saturation of CjCas9 and SpCas9 with crRNA guides or by inactivating their nuclease  activity. Our results demonstrate that guide-free Cas9 of bacterial pathogens might play an  important role in pathogenicity. Furthermore, we propose that saturating Cas9 with  appropriate guide RNAs is crucial for efficient and safe therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from HEK293T were separated on an SDS-PAGE gel. Gel was cut into slices, slices were in-gel digested with trypsin. Each samples was analyzed by LC-MS on a Fusion Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Mascot search against a merged  database of human and campylobacter jejuni (Release Oct 2015). Variable modifications: phospho (STY) and oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusion protein, Campylobacter jejuni

### Affiliations
Erasmus University Medical center
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus University Medical center


