### Accession
PXD010528

### Title
Data in support of serum proteomics of Laparoscopic Gastric Plication

### Description
Laparoscopic Gastric Plication (LGP) is a relatively new bariatric surgery procedure unique by not removing any part of the stomach. To bring new insights into the underlying molecular mechanism, we here present the first hypothesis-free analysis of the impact of LGP on the inflammatory and metabolic state as reflected by the serum proteome. A label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics approach was used to compare the serum proteome of 16 obese individuals before surgery with the serum of same individuals 1 to 2 months (timepoint T1) and 4 to 5 months (timepoint T2) post-surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Study cohort and serum samples A total of 16 healthy obese subjects (5-male, 11-female) with a BMI between 33 and 48 kg/m2 and an age between 22 and 48 years were included for LGP surgery in this study. People, who had cancer and any infectious disease were excluded from this study. This study was approved by the local ethical authorities (IR.SBU.ICBS.97/1019). Whole blood samples were collected after overnight fasting at three timepoints: Pre-surgery, 1 to 2 months post-surgery (timepoint T1) and 4 to 5 months post-surgery (timepoint T2). It should be noted that 7 subjects were excluded from analysis due to unavailability at timepoint T2. Blood collection tubes were incubated at room temperature for 40 min, then centrifuged at 3000 g for 10 min at 4°C.  The serum was collected, and stored in aliquots at -80°C.  Proteomics-sample preparation Initially, all samples were randomized. Serum samples were depleted of the 6 most abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, antitrypsin, transferrin, and haptoglobin) using the Agilent Multiple Affinity Removal column (4.6 mm ID × 50 mm) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). Filter-aided sample preparation protein digestion protocol was used to prepare samples for LC-MS according to Bennike et.al.19 Briefly explained, the protein concentrations of flow through fractions were measured using the absorbance at 280 nm (A280) using a NanoDrop 1000 UV−vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). 200 ug of samples were transferred to YM-10 kDa spin filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA), and centrifuged at 14.000 g for 15 min at 4°C. A volume of 400 µl digestion buffer (0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) was added. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min at 37°C. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g, 400 µl of digestion buffer was added followed by centrifugation. Protein digestion was carried out with 2 µg sequencing-grade-modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) diluted in 50 µL digestion buffer followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The peptide material was recovered by centrifugation followed by phase separation, by adding 3:1 (v/v) ethyl acetate:sample volume and acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1%. Subsequently, the tube was vortexed, centrifuged at 14,000 g for 1 min. The peptide-rich aqueous phase was collected, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and stored at -80°C until time of analysis. LC-MS/MS sample analysis Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were analyzed using a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup with a NanoRSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The system was coupled online with a new Objective PicoTip 360-20-10 emitter for nanospray ionization to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). All samples were analyzed in a random order in triplicates. For each injection, 5 µg peptide material, as determined by A280, was loaded onto a 2 cm C18 trapping column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18). Peptides separation was performed on a 75-cm C18 reversed-phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18). Both columns were kept at 60°C. The peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 98% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 2% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Solvent B was increased to 8% on a 5-min ramp gradient, and subsequently to 30% on a 45-min ramp gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using a Top15 data-dependent MS/MS scan method. A full MS scan in the 375-1500 m/z range was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 2 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 5 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1, and searched against the Uniprot human reference FASTA database (August 2017). Label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) algorithm was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1. Standard setting in MaxQuant was applied, including carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, and acetylation of protein N-terminals, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. A maximum of two tryptic missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) of identified proteins and peptides was set to a maximum of 1%, using a target-decoy fragment spectra search strategy. Hereby, high confidence identifications were ensured. The “match between runs” feature was activated to allow the transfer of peptide identifications from one run to another, based on accurate retention time and mass. Data Processing The output from MaxQuant was further filtered and processed in Perseus version 1.6.0.2. Initially, all reverse database hits and proteins only identified by site were removed from further analysis. To ensure high quality quantitative data, additional filtering was performed for the 1% FDR filtered data; 1) At least two peptides unique to a protein were required for a protein quantitation 2) The unique peptides were required to be quantifiable in at least 70% of the samples. A principle component analysis (PCA) was performed in MATLAB (R2018a) software to further investigate replicate outliers. For this purpose, missing values were imputed with values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8) to simulate signals from low abundant proteins, using standard parameters in Perseus. There were no replicate outliers. Triplicate measurements of each sample were averaged in Perseus, and the samples were grouped according to timepoints: 16 samples pre-surgery, 16 samples at timepoint T1 post-surgery and 9 samples at timepoint T2 post-surgery. Proteins with a statistically significant abundance difference at any two timepoints were identified using paired two sample t-test. To correct for multiple hypothesis testing, we applied permutation-based FDR control in Perseus using standard parameters (parameters: FDR: 0.05, s0=0.1 and 250 randomizations). RAW data file structure is patientnumber_timepoint_replicate and maxQuant searchoutput txt folder zipped ínto one file.

### Publication Abstract
Laparoscopic Gastric Plication (LGP) is a relatively new bariatric surgical procedure which no part of the stomach is removed. It is not clearly understood how LGP leads to fatty tissue reduction. We aimed to investigate the impact of LGP on serum proteome and understand molecular mechanisms of LGP-induced weight loss post-surgery. A Prospective observational study of 16 obese individuals who underwent LGP was performed. A Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics approach was used to compare serum proteome of subjects before surgery with serum of the same individuals 1 to 2&#x202f;months post-surgery (T1) and 4 to 5&#x202f;months post-surgery (T2). The proteome analysis revealed that 48 proteins were differentially regulated between pre-surgery and T1, and seven proteins between pre-surgery and T2 of which six proteins were shared between the two timepoints. Among differentially regulated proteins, four proteins (SRGN, FETUB, LCP1 and CFP) have not previously been described in the context of BMI/weight loss. Despite few differences following LGP, most regulated serum proteins are in accordance with alternative weight loss procedures. Pathway analysis revealed changes to lipid- and inflammatory pathways, including PPAR&#x3b1;/RXR&#x3b1;, LXR/RXR and FXR/RXR activation, especially at T1. At T2, the pathways related to inflammation and immune system are most affected. SIGNIFICANCE: Among the available clinical therapies for morbid obesity, bariatric surgery is considered as the most effective approach to achieve long-term weight loss, alongside a significant improvement in metabolic syndrome. However, very little is known about the underlying mechanism associated with significant weight loss post-surgery. Understanding such mechanisms could lead to development of safer non-surgical weight loss approaches. We here present the first analysis of the impact of LGP on the serum proteome, to bring new insights into the underlying molecular mechanism. Our findings indicate that LGP has a comprehensive systemic effect based on the blood serum proteome profile which might account for accelerated reduction of fat mass after surgery, thus, food restriction is not the only reason for weight loss following this unique surgical approach. As secretory regions of the stomach are preserved in LGP and it is associated with minimal physiological and anatomical changes, the findings are of high importance in the field of bariatric surgery and weight loss.

### Keywords
Serum laparoscopic gastric plication

### Affiliations
laboratory for medical massspectrometry
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
laboratory for medical massspectrometry


