### Accession
PXD023277

### Title
The host  targets of SARS-CoV-2 protein NSP5

### Description
To identity the host targets of the SARS-CoV-2 protease NSP5, SILAC-based quantitative proteomics was performed in comparing the binding partners of wildtype or catalytically-inactive C145A mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in medium containing [13C6, 15N2]- lysine (+8 Da) and [13C6]-arginine (+6 Da) for stable isotope labeling with amino acid in cell culture. Protein lysates from cells with wildtype or C145A mutant were mixed at 1:1 ratio (by mass). 30 ug of the resulted lysate mixture were resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel was cut into 11 slices for crude fractionation. The gels were reduced and alkylated by dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively. The resulted proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin/Lys-C at an emzyme to protein ration of 1:100. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces sequentially with solution containing 5% acetic acid/water and  2.5 acetic acid in an equi-volume mixture of acetonitrile and water. Resulted pepdites were desalted with OMIX C18 zip tips.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant, Version 1.5.2.8, was used to analyze the LC-MS and MS/MS data for protein identification and quantification.(Cox and Mann, 2008) The database we used for search was human IPI database, version 3.68, which contained 87,061 protein entries. The maximum number of miss-cleavages for trypsin was two per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The tolerances in mass accuracy were 20 ppm for both MS and MS/MS. The maximum false discovery rates (FDRs) were set at 0.01 at both peptide and protein levels, and the minimum required peptide length was 6 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Silac, Nsp5, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Yen-Yu Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside


