### Accession
PXD012769

### Title
Dissection of the cellular function of the ZBED6 transcription factor in mouse myoblast cells, ZBED6-KO Medium

### Description
The transcription factor ZBED6 acts as a repressor of Igf2 and affects directly or indirectly the transcriptional regulation of thousands of genes. Here, we use gene editing in mouse C2C12 myoblasts and show that ZBED6 regulates Igf2 exclusively through its binding site 5′-GGCTCG-3′ in intron 1 of Igf2. Deletion of this motif (Igf2ΔGGCT) or complete ablation of Zbed6 leads to ~20-fold up-regulation of IGF2 protein. Quantitative proteomics revealed an activation of Ras signaling pathway in both Zbed6-/- and Igf2ΔGGCT myoblasts, and a significant enrichment of mitochondrial membrane proteins among proteins showing altered expression in Zbed6-/- myoblasts. Both Zbed6-/- and Igf2ΔGGCT myoblasts showed a faster growth rate and developed myotube hypertrophy. These cells exhibited an increased O2 consumption rate, due to IGF2 up-regulation. Transcriptome analysis revealed ~30% overlap between differentially expressed genes in Zbed6-/- and Igf2ΔGGCT myotubes, with an enrichment of up-regulated genes involved in muscle development. In contrast, ZBED6-overexpression in myoblasts led to cell apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, reduced mitochondrial activities and ceased myoblast differentiation. The similarities in growth and differentiation phenotypes observed in Zbed6-/- and Igf2ΔGGCT myoblasts demonstrates that ZBED6 affects mitochondrial activity and myogenesis largely through its regulation of IGF2 expression. This study suggests that the interaction between ZBED6-Igf2 may be a therapeutic target for human diseases where anabolism is impaired.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) for SILAC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS, MWCO 10 kDa; Thermo Fisher Scientific), 100 U/mL penicillin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.25 μg/mL amphotericin B (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and light isotopic labels L-arginine-HCl and L-lysine-2 HCl or heavy isotopic labels 13C6, 15N4 L-arginine-HCl (Arg-10) and 13C6, 15N2 L-lysine-2 HCl (Lys-8) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were kept in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37°C. To avoid contamination of light amino acids, sub-culturing was performed using Cell dissociation buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instead of trypsin. Isotopic incorporation was checked using a script in R as previously described (Stöhrand Tebbe, 2011) after approximately five cell divisions to confirm complete (>95%) labeling. Arginine-to-proline conversion was assessed by calculating the percentage of heavy proline (Pro-6) containing peptides among all identified peptides, and kept at <5%. Confluent (~80%) cells were washed five times in PBS, and incubated 12 h in serum-free medium. Medium was collected, centrifuged and filtered through a 0.2 μm filter. Protein concentration was measured with a Coomassie (Bradford) assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were harvested and lysates prepared using M-PER mammalian protein extraction reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and protein concentration was measured using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Heavy and light cell lysates or media (40 μg each of cell lysate, 170 μg each of medium) were mixed 1:1. Mixed media were subsequently concentrated through spin columns with a cutoff of 3 kDa (Vivaspin, Sartorius). Mixed proteins were separated on a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast gel (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Each gel lane was cut into ten separate pieces, and proteins were reduced in-gel with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3, thereafter alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3, and finally digested with 17 ng/μl sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 using a slightly modified in-gel digestion protocol (Shevchenko et al., 1996). The produced peptides were eluted from the gel pieces using 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (ThermoSavant SPD SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific), and finally dissolved in 1% (v/v) FA. The experiments were run in at least triplicates, of which at least one was reciprocal (reverse labeling). Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Peptide samples were desalted using Stage Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific nLC-1000 with a two-column setup; an Acclaim PepMap 100 (2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) pre-column was connected in front of an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 reversed phase column (50 cm x 75 μm, 2 μm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated to 35°C, running solvent A (H2O and 0.1% (v/v) FA). A gradient of 2–40% solvent B (acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) FA) was run at 250 nL/min over a period of 3 h. The eluted peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, operated at a Top Speed data-dependent acquisition scan mode, ion-transfer tube temperature of 275°C, and a spray voltage of 2.4 kV. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 400 – 2000) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, and analyzed in the Orbitrap with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Ions with an intensity above 5.0e3 were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a collision energy of 30%. The linear ion trap AGC target was set at 1.0e4 with a maximum injection time of 40 ms, and data was collected at centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s after the first MS1 of the peptide. The system was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63.3, Thermo Scientific). Instrument quality control was monitored using the Promega 6x5 LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix (Promega) before and after each MS experiment run, and analyzed using PReMiS software (version 1.0.5.1, Promega).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of raw files was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.5) and the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016), with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification and Arg-10, Lys-8, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. First search peptide MS1 Orbitrap tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Iontrap MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The re-quantify option was enabled to get ratios where only one isotope pattern was found. Match between runs was also enabled, to identify peptides where only MS1 data was available. Minimum label ratio count was set to 1, and the advanced ratio estimation option was enabled. Peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus proteome database (UP000000589, version 2017-08-28) with a maximum of two trypsin miscleavages per peptide. The contaminants database of MaxQuant was also utilized. A decoy search was made against the reversed database, where the peptide and protein false discovery rates were both set to 1%. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides of at least 7 amino acids in length were considered reliable. The peptide output from MaxQuant was filtered by removing reverse database hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site (PTMs). Intensity values were first normalized using variance stabilization method, adjusted for batch effect and fitted to linear model (Huber et al., 2002; Ritchie et al., 2015). The empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics and their associated P-values were used to calculate the significance of DE proteins (Smyth, 2004). The P-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedures (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Igf2, Silac, Zbed6, Myogenesis

### Affiliations
Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Mårten Larsson

### Lab Head
Dr Leif Andersson
Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.


