### Accession
PXD004932

### Title
Characterization of the tomato fruit pericarp proteome

### Description
In this work, we present an extended characterization of the proteome of the tomato pericarp in its ripe red stage. An extensive fractionation of peptides through high pH reverse phase was performed associated to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Sciex Triple-TOF 6600.

### Sample Protocol
Red ripe tomatoes variety Roterno were commercially purchased and the proteins were extracted using the fractionation method described by Kamiyoshihara et al, 2010. The tomato pericarp extracts were ultracentrifuged at 100,000g for 1h to obtain two fractions, a soluble protein fraction (corresponding to the supernatant) and a microsomal fraction (corresponding to the pellet) (Figure 1A). 800µg of proteins from each fractions were reduced and alkylated, and digested with trypsin using in gel digestion.The resulting peptides were fractionated using an High pH reverse phase chromatography and 10ug of 30 fractions were injected on a Sciex Triple-TOF 6600 equipped with an EASY-Spray source.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw and wiff files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) with mass tolerances of 4.5ppm for precursors and 20ppm for fragments and 0.006Da for precursors and 50ppm for fragments for the Q-exactive and the Triple-TOF 6600 platforms respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7. Trypsin/P was used as digestion enzyme. The Solanum Lycopersicum UniProt fasta database (December 2015, 40,069 sequences) was used for the search. Other criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetyl (protein N terminus) as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The identifications were filtered to obtain a FDR of 1% at the peptide and the protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Since the genome of Solanum lycopersicum L. was published in 2012, some studies have explored its proteome although with a limited depth. In this work, we present an extended characterization of the proteome of the tomato pericarp at its ripe red stage. Fractionation of tryptic peptides generated from pericarp proteins by off-line high-pH reverse-phase phase chromatography in combination with LC-MS/MS analysis on a Fisher Scientific Q Exactive and a Sciex Triple-TOF 6600 resulted in the identification of 8588 proteins with a 1% FDR both at the peptide and protein levels. Proteins were mapped through GO and KEGG databases and a large number of the identified proteins were associated with cytoplasmic organelles and metabolic pathways categories. These results constitute one of the most extensive proteome datasets of tomato so far and provide an experimental confirmation of the existence of a high number of theoretically predicted proteins. All MS data are available in the ProteomeXchange repository with the dataset identifiers PXD004947 and PXD004932.

### Keywords
Tomato; solanum lycopersicum; pericarp; mass-spectrometry; triple-tof 6600

### Affiliations
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, United Kingdom.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Bertrand Fabre

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn S. Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, United Kingdom.


