### Accession
PXD012277

### Title
Proteome of HEK293T cells upon P2YR6 overexpression

### Description
Defense against virus infections relies on rapid and massive engagement of cellular proteins with antiviral properties. Germline-encoded pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) sense the presence of pathogens and initiate a signaling cascade leading to the induction of antiviral cytokines, including type-I interferons. IFN-alpha/beta bind to the IFN receptor (IFNAR), initiating signaling that culminates in the expression of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). In sum, viral infection triggers the expression of several hundred proteins covering a wide range of biological activities. Among these proteins are PRRs (e.g. RIG-I, MDA5, TLRs), signaling molecules (e.g. MYD88, MAVS), transcription factors (e.g. IRFs, STATs) and proteins with direct antiviral functions (e.g. MX proteins, IFITs), as well as negative regulators of immune responses (e.g. SOCS proteins, DAPK1) that prevent overshooting of immune reactions. ISGs are thus a heterogeneous group of proteins that serve different purposes related to direct antiviral defense and immune regulation.

### Sample Protocol
After depletion doxycycline-induced expression of P2RY6 in HEK FlpIn TREX, the total cellular proteome was measured and compared to the proteome of control cells. For each replicate, 106 cells were used. Cells were washed with PBS, lysed in 200 µl SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 55 mM IAA, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5) and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were sonicated until a homogeneous suspension was achieved (20 min at 4°C; Bioruptor). Protein concentration was determined by DC Protein Assay (BioRad) and protein concentration was adjusted accordingly to a final concentration of 1µg/µl with SDS lysis buffer. Per replicate, 200 µg of protein was precipitated using pre-chilled acetone (-20°C) at a final concentration of 80% acetone (v/v) and incubated for 3h at -20 °C. Precipitates were pelleted and washed once with 80% acetone. Pellets were air dried at RT and re-solubilized by adding 80 µl Thiourea-Buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea (U/T) in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) followed by subsequent sonication until a homogeneous suspension was achieved (10 min at 4°C; Bioruptor). For protein digestion, 25% of the re-solubilized protein mixture was used and digested with LysC and Trypsin as described above. After peptide clean up on C18 stage tips, purified peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm reverse-phase analytical column (75 µm column diameter; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin; Dr.Maisch) and separated using a 120 min (P2RY6 ) or 180 min (LGALS3BP) gradient (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) (120 min Gradient: 5% to 30% (90 min), 30% - 95% (20 min), wash out at 95% for 5 min, readjustment to 5% in 5 min; 180 min Gradient: 5% to 30% (150 min), 30% - 95% (20 min), wash out at 95% for 5 min, readjustment to 5% in 5 min) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using the EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separated peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS instrument was set to a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with repeating cycles of one MS1 full scan (300–1,600 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at an ion target of 3*106, followed by 15 MS2 scans of the highest abundant isolated and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmented peptide precursors (15,000 at 200 m/z). For MS2 scans, collection of isolated peptide precursors in the C-Trap was limited by a ion target of 1*105 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms to ensure high quality MS2 spectra and the dynamically adaption to the sample complexity. In-line repeated isolation and fragmentation of the same peptide precursor was eliminated by dynamic exclusion for 20 sec. Isolation window of the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z and HCD was set to NCE to 27 % and underfill ratio of 20 %.

### Data Protocol
Identified spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant as described for AE-LC-MS/MS experiments. The analysis of proteins differentially regulated between HeLa-FlpIn TREX ANXA2R and control (IFIT3) cells was performed in R (version 3.5.1, Rstudio v 1.1.456) using a generalized random effects linear model (in R formula notation): log_2⁡〖(intensity)〗∝doxycycline*time*cellline. The significance of ANXA2R induction contribution and the significance of difference between ANXA2R and IFIT3 induction contribution were estimated by the general linear hypothesis test using the glht function from multcomp R package (version 1.4-8)38. A proteins was considered specifically regulated, if it was both significantly regulated by ANXA2R induction (estimate k2 in Supplementary table 7) and this effect was significantly different than upon IFIT3 induction (estimate k1 in Supplementary table 7) (two-sided p-values were adjusted using Benjamini-Yekutieli method39 with p-value=0.001 significance cut-off). For visualization purposes, zero p-values were replaced with 0.5 of minimal finite p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) form the backbone of the innate immune system and are important for limiting intra- and intercellular viral replication and spread. We conducted a mass-spectrometry-based survey to understand the fundamental organization of the innate immune system and to explore the molecular functions of individual ISGs. We identified interactions between 104 ISGs and 1,401 cellular binding partners engaging in 2,734 high-confidence interactions. 90% of these interactions are unreported so far, and our survey therefore illuminates a far wider activity spectrum of ISGs than is currently known. Integration of the resulting ISG-interaction network with published datasets and functional studies allowed us to identify regulators of immunity and processes related to the immune system. Given the extraordinary robustness of the innate immune system, this ISG network may serve as a blueprint for therapeutic targeting of cellular systems to efficiently fight viral infections.

### Keywords
Qexactive, P2yr6, Lfq, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology
Institute of Virology - Viral Immunopathology, Faculty of Medicine, Technical University Munich

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Institute of Virology - Viral Immunopathology, Faculty of Medicine, Technical University Munich


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: not available
- disease: not available
- cell type: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive HF
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl

