### Accession
PXD015809

### Title
First Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine Malonylation in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Lysine malonylation (Kmal) is a new posttranslational modification (PTM), which has been reported in several prokaryotic and eukaryotic species. Although Kmal can regulate many and diverse biological processes in various organisms, knowledge about this important PTM in the apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii is limited. In this study, we performed the first global profiling of malonylated proteins in T. gondii tachyzoites using affinity enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis. Three experiments performed in tandem revealed 331, 367, 373 Kmal sites on 227, 252, 241 malonylated proteins, respectively. Computational analysis showed the identified malonylated proteins to be localized in various subcellular compartments and involved in many cellular functions, particularly mitochondrial function and oxidation of fatty acids. Additionally, two conserved Kmal motifs with a strong bias for cysteine were detected. Taken together, these findings provide the first report of Kmal profile in T. gondii and should be an important resource for studying the physiological roles of Kmal in this parasite.

### Sample Protocol
3.1. Parasite Culture Tachyzoites of T. gondii RH strain were maintained by serial passage in human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) monolayers, which were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FBS, Gibco, USA), 1% antibiotics (penicillin-streptomycin solution). T. gondii tachyzoites and HFF monolayers were cultivated in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator at 37℃. 3.2. Protein Extraction from T. gondii Samples were sonicated three times in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease inhibitor cocktail and for PTM experiments, deacetylase inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM trichostatin A (TSA) and 50 mM nicotinamide [NAM]), and the remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Finally, the supernatant was discarded and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit. 3.3. Trypsin Digestion The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min at 25 ℃ away from light. The proteins were diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 until the urea concentration became < 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 3.4. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated using a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Thereafter, the separated peptides were combined into 6 fractions as described previously [44].  3.5. Affinity Enrichment  The tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed anti-malonyl-K antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking (Zhang et al., 2016). Then, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) and were cleaned using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Billerica, USA) (Merck Millipore, Billerica, USA). 3.6. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The gradient included an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, followed by 8 min from 23% to 35%, and reaching to 80% in 3 min and holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to an ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. A data-dependent procedure was performed, selecting the 20 most intense ions for MS/MS with 30s dynamic exclusion at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
3.7. Database Search The MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against T. gondii database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was speciﬁed as ﬁxed modiﬁcation. Methionine oxidation, and lysine malonylation were speciﬁed as variable modiﬁcations. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as >0.75. Label-free quantiﬁcation was performed using the Maxquant LFQ algorithm [45], by comparing the abundance of the same peptides across runs, with both ion intensities and spectral counts used for this purpose. 3.8. Gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway analysis GO annotation was carried out using ToxoDB and UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, the identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt IDs and then mapped to GO IDs. If the identified malonylated proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan software were used to annotate protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Also, an online service tool, KAAS, was used to annotate protein’s KEGG database description. Then, the annotation result was mapped to the KEGG pathway database using KEGG mapper.  3.9. Domain annotation The protein domains were annotated by using InterProScan software and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) based on protein sequence alignment. 3.10. Subcellular localization Subcellular localization was predicted using WOLF PSORT (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html).  3.11. Motif analysis  The sequence models contained amino acids at specific positions of the malonyl-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the Kmal sites) in all protein sequences were analyzed by MoMo software (motif-x algorithm). The T. gondii protein sequences from the UniProt database was used as background database parameter, and other parameters were set as default. 3.12. GO/KEGG/Domain enrichment analysis A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed for the enrichment analysis of the differentially malonylated proteins against all identified proteins. The GO terms with p values < 0.05 were considered as significant. 3.13. Protein-Protein interaction (PPI) network All differentially abundant malonylated proteins were searched against the STRING database for PPI. The ﬁltering scores was set as ≥ 0.7. The PPI network was visualized by Cytoscape (version 3.5.0).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine malonylation (Kmal) is a new post-translational modification (PTM), which has been reported in several prokaryotic and eukaryotic species. Although Kmal can regulate many and diverse biological processes in various organisms, knowledge about this important PTM in the apicomplexan parasite <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is limited. In this study, we performed the first global profiling of malonylated proteins in <i>T. gondii</i> tachyzoites using affinity enrichment and Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Three experiments performed in tandem revealed 294, 345, 352 Kmal sites on 203, 236, 230 malonylated proteins, respectively. Computational analysis showed the identified malonylated proteins to be localized in various subcellular compartments and involved in many cellular functions, particularly mitochondrial function. Additionally, one conserved Kmal motif with a strong bias for cysteine was detected. Taken together, these findings provide the first report of Kmal profile in <i>T. gondii</i> and should be an important resource for studying the physiological roles of Kmal in this parasite.

### Keywords
Lysine malonylation, Post-translational; modifications, Toxoplasma gondii, Malonylome

### Affiliations
 State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China

### Submitter
Lan-Be Nie

### Lab Head
Dr Xing-Quan Zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


