### Accession
PXD010720

### Title
Characterization of extracellular enzymes involved in natural decomposition of conifer wood

### Description
The conifer needle endophyte, Phialocephala scopiformis, was cultivated in media containing ground Pinus contorta wood as sole carbon source. After five and seven days growth, concentrated extracellular fluids were subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Sample Protocol
P. scopiformis DAOMC 229536 was grown on P. contorta ground wood as the sole carbon source. Extracellular proteins were extracted by ppt with 10% (final) trichloroacetic acid followed by methanol/chloroform/water secondary clean up and concentration. Proteins were digested with trypsin/LysC, resolved under nanoLC chromatography and ultimately analyzed on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against Phialocephala scopiformis protein database containing 18,573 entries plus a list of common lab contaminants and decoy sequences to establish False Discovery Rate (37,222 total entries) using in-house Mascot search engine. Scaffold was used for spectral based quantification and to validate MS/MS peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The conifer needle endophyte Phialocephala scopiformis DAOMC 229536 was cultivated in medium containing ground Pinus contorta wood as the sole carbon source. Mass spectrometry analyses identified 590 proteins. The expression of extracellular hydrolases and oxidoreductases indicates a capacity to degrade wood. The results clearly demonstrate the latent saprophytic potential of P. scopiformis.

### Keywords
Extracellula, Pinus contorta, Lc-ms/ms, Phialocephala scopiformis, Wood decomposition

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, Forest Products Laboratory, USDA

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Cullen
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, Forest Products Laboratory, USDA


