### Accession
PXD009273

### Title
Multi-omic measurements of heterogeneity in HeLa cells across laboratories

### Description
We collected 14 stock Hela aliquots from 13 different laboratories across the globe and cultured them in the same conditions. We extensively profiled the genome-wide copy numbers, mRNAs, proteins, protein turnover rates by genomics techniques and the highly reproducible and accurate proteomic method, SWATH mass spectrometry. The cell lines were also phenotyped with respect to the ability of transfected Let7 mimics to modulate Salmonella infection. We discovered significant heterogeneity between Hela variants especially differences between the CCL2 and Kyoto lines collected from different sites. In addition, we observed progressive divergence within a specific cell line over 50 successive passages. By associating proteotype and phenotype we identified molecular patterns that varied between cell lines and explained varying responses to Salmonella infection across the cells. The results furthermore quantify how the cells respond to genomic variability across the transcriptome and proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells and cell pellets were harvested from shipped tubes, centrally cultured conditions, Let7d treated and control experiments, and pSILAC experiment were suspended in 10M urea lysis buffer and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), ultrasonically lysed at 4°C for 2 minutes by two rounds using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology). The mixtures were centrifuged at 18,000 g for 1 hour to remove the insoluble material. The supernatant protein amount was quantified by Bio-Rad protein assay. Protein samples were reduced by 10mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 37°C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. All the samples were further diluted by 1:6 (v/v) with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and were digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:25 overnight at 37°C. The 96-well plate format based digestion protocol was used to increase the experimental reproducibility as described. The amount of the purified peptides was determined using Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific) and 1 μg peptides were injected in each LC-MS run.

### Data Protocol
With the exception of pSILAC experiment derived data set, all the other SWATH-MS data sets were analyzed and identified by OpenSWATH software searching against a previously established SWATH assay library which contains mass spectrometric assays for 10,000 human proteins. Profile-mode .wiff files were centroided and converted to mzML format using the AB Sciex Data Converter v.1.3 and converted to mzXML format using MSConvert v.3.04.238 before OpenSWATH analysis. OpenSWATH firstly identified the peak groups from all individual SWATH maps with statistical control and then aligned between SWATH maps using a novel TRIC (TRansfer of Identification Confidence) 47. For large-scale targeted proteomics, protein FDR control needs specific attention and should be equally important compared to shotgun proteomics 40, 45. Therefore, to pursue a strict statistical quality control of peptide and protein- level identification, we used the newly developed PyProphet extended version. For pSILAC, the centroid converted mzML files from shotgun analysis of the first time point samples in pSILAC experiment were searched against different engines including using the iPortal platform to establish the sample specific library for pSILAC data. Published nine Hela runs included in the Pan-Human Library were also used to generate this library. OpenSWATH analysis was run with target FDR of 1% and extension FDR of 5% (quality cutoff to still consider a feature for alignment) and aligned by TRIC, whereas requantificated data points were discarded for protein turnover calculation.

### Publication Abstract
Reproducibility in research can be compromised by both biological and technical variation, but most of the focus is on removing the latter. Here we investigate the effects of biological variation in HeLa cell lines using a systems-wide approach. We determine the degree of molecular and phenotypic variability across 14 stock HeLa samples from 13 international laboratories. We cultured cells in uniform conditions and profiled genome-wide copy numbers, mRNAs, proteins and protein turnover rates in each cell line. We discovered substantial heterogeneity between HeLa variants, especially between lines of the CCL2 and Kyoto varieties, and observed progressive divergence within a specific cell line over 50 successive passages. Genomic variability has a complex, nonlinear effect on transcriptome, proteome and protein turnover profiles, and proteotype patterns explain the varying phenotypic response of different cell lines to Salmonella infection. These findings have implications for the interpretation and reproducibility of research results obtained from human cultured cells.

### Keywords
Hela cells, Reproducibility, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


