### Accession
PXD024993

### Title
Structured elements drive circular RNA translation and expand the human proteome, part1

### Description
The human genome encodes tens of thousands circular RNAs (circRNAs) whose levels correlate with many disease states. While studies have focused on the non-coding functions of circRNAs, emerging evidence suggests that a handful of circRNAs encode proteins. Translation canonically starts by recognition of mRNA 5’cap and scanning to the start codon; how circRNA translation initiates remains unclear. Here, we developed a high-throughput screen to systematically identify and quantify RNA sequences that can direct circRNA translation. We identify and validate over 17,000 circRNA internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) and reveal that 18S rRNA complementarity and a structured RNA element on the IRES are important for facilitating circRNA cap-independent translation. With genomic and peptidomic analyses of the IRES, we identified nearly 1,000 putative endogenous protein-coding circRNAs and hundreds of translational units encoded by these circRNAs. We further characterized circFGFR1p, a protein encoded by circFGFR1, functions as a negative regulator of FGFR1 to suppress cell growth under stress conditions. The circRNA proteome may be important links among circRNA, biological control, and disease.

### Sample Protocol
A 15-cm plate of BJ cells were lysed in 1 mL Pierce™ IP Lysis Buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) on ice for 10 min. The lysate was then sonicated with Bioruptor UCD-200 at high intensity for 15 min (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off) at 4°C and pre-cleared in 50 μL Pierce™ Protein A/G Magnetic Beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) at room temperature for 30 min. 7 uL of custom circFGFR1p antibodies (ThermoFisher Scientific; antigen peptide: GQFEKEDRAHCGVSMEMW) or normal rabbit IgG (Sigma-Aldrich) was added and incubated at 4°C overnight. We then added 70 uL Pierce™ Protein A/G Magnetic Beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) and incubate at 4°C for 2-3 h. The samples were washed four times in Pierce™ IP Lysis Buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) and once in PBS. Samples were eluted in sample buffer and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (ThermoFisher Scientific). Bands with 30-45 kDa were extracted according to the protein marker and sent to Vincent Coates Foundation Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Stanford University

### Data Protocol
The .RAW data files were processed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) for peptide identification. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving C-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm. The contaminant database containing 245 frequently observed contaminants such as human keratins, bovine serum proteins, and protease was included for the PSM. Proteolysis with Trypsin/LysC was assumed to be semi-specific allowing for N-ragged cleavage with up to two missed cleavage sites. Precursor and fragment mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm. Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford School of Medicine

### Submitter
Chun-Kan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Howard Y. Chang
Stanford School of Medicine


