### Accession
PXD021096

### Title
Human Neutrophils Phosphoproteome in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

### Description
This study used proteomic, biomechanical, and functional analyses to further define neutrophil heterogeneity in the context of SLE. Mass spectrometry proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses were performed in healthy control normal density neutrophils (NDNs), SLE NDNs and in autologous SLE LDGs.  Proteomic and phosphoproteomic differences were detected when comparing control to SLE neutrophils and when comparing SLE NDNs to SLE LDGs.

### Sample Protocol
Ice cold lysis buffer with 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA), 0.1M tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA),, and 1X HALTTM protease and phospho-protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) (200µL) was added to each cell pellet and cells were mechanically lysed for 10 minutes. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C, the supernatant was removed, and the protein was stored at -70°C.  TMT-11plex labeling, for each TMT set, high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed on an offline Agilent 1200 series HPLC.  The initial 12 fractions were combined into 6 fractions and sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) phosphopeptide enrichment was performed.  All fractions were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Analysis: Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific), with Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) search node.  All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database released 2019_11 with Homo sapiens taxonomy (20,316 sequences) and concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences The following search parameters were set with fixed modifications carbamidomethylation of Cys, TMT 11-plex modification of lysines and peptide N-terminus; variable modification of methionine oxidation.  For SPS-MS3 the precursor and fragment ion tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively.  Up to two-missed tryptic cleavages were permitted.  Percolator algorithm (v.3.02.1, University of Washington) was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide spectrum matches (PSM), set to a q-value <0.05 [71-74].  Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously [75]. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled to internal standard channels to reduce multibatch variability [76]. The p-values were calculated for the reported quantitative ratios using ANOVA testing. Data from the phosphopeptide enrichment were processed and quantified similarly except an additional variable modification of phosphate on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues was included as a Sequest search parameter.  Quantitative values were based at the peptide group level for site specific phosphorylation quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Neutrophils, Tmt

### Affiliations
NIH/NHLBI Proteomics Core Facility
NIH/NHLBI Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Angel Aponte

### Lab Head
Dr Angel Aponte
NIH/NHLBI Proteomics Core Facility


