### Accession
PXD014186

### Title
Phenotypic Proteomic Profiling Reveals Convergent Kinase Targets for Circadian Clock Modulators

### Description
Determining the mechanisms of action of drug molecules that modulate circadian rhythms is critical to develop novel compounds to treat clock disorders. Here we employed Phenotypic Proteomic Profiling (PPP) integrating multipronged proteomics approaches including global proteome, phosphoproteome, kinome mapping, and proteome-wide profiling of thermal stability (TPP) to systematically determine convergent molecular targets of four circadian period lengthening compounds (Longdaysin, Roscovitine, Purvalanol A, and SP600125) in human cells. We demonstrate convergent changes in phosphorylation level and activity of several proteins and kinases involved in vital signaling pathways including MAPK, NGF, BCR, AMPK, and mTOR signaling by the compounds. Kinome profiling using desthiobiotin-ATP enrichment quantitative proteomics and radiometric assays further indicated inhibition of CKId, ERK1/2, CDK2/7, TNIK and STK26 activity as a common mechanism of action for the compounds. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of several convergent kinases resulted in circadian period lengthening, establishing them as novel bone fide circadian targets. TPP analysis using live cells revealed binding of these drugs to clock regulatory kinases, signaling molecules, and ubiquitination mediator (F-box) proteins. Phenotypic proteomic profiling thus establishes a set of novel circadian clock effectors.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent human osteosarcoma U2OS cell cultures grown in 150 mm dishes (2 x 107) were treated with circadian period altering compounds to a final concentration of 10 μM dissolved in DMSO or an equivalent amount of DMSO (vehicle only). Cells were harvested by trypsinization, washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and were lysed in 500 μL lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), 8M urea, 1% NP40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and benzonase nuclease. Then mild sonication was applied for 15 min and lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. Protein precipitation was performed with 1:6 volume of pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone for overnight at 4°C. Protein concentration in each sample was determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After in-solution digestion, samples were labelled with TMT isobaric label reagents (Tandem mass tag, 10-plex) following the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Scientific). 10% of the TMT labelled peptides was used for global proteomics analysis, while the remaining 90% was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides enrichment was performed using Pierce TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Clean-up Kit (Thermo Scientific) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT-labelled peptides were desalted using C18 Spin Tips. Kinase profiling was performed using desthiobiotin nucleotide (ATP) probes following the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce Kinase Enrichment Kit with ATP Probe).  Sample preparation (intact live U2OS cells) for thermal proteome profiling (TPP) was carried out following the same protocol as described by Franken et al. (Franken et al., 2015) with slight modifications. In brief, confluent U2OS cell cultures were treated with circadian period altering compounds (10 μM) dissolved in DMSO or an equivalent amount of DMSO (vehicle only). Incubation of cells with the compounds and vehicle was conducted in parallel at 37°C. TPP experiments were performed including two biological replicates for each condition. Cells were resuspended in ice-cold PBS containing 0.4% NP-40 and protease inhibitors and the resulting cell suspension were divided in ten 0.2-mL PCR tubes (50 μL each). Compound and vehicle treated cells were then heated in parallel in a PCR machine for 3 min to the respective temperature (ten temperatures: 37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63 and 67°C), followed by a 3-min incubation at room temperature. The entire content was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  In the integrated quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics work-flow the pooled TMT-labelled samples were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10,000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105 ms. In TPP and kinase enrichment experiments peptide mixtures from TMT 10-plex labelled samples were chromatographically resolved on an EASY-spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100Å, 75µm X 50 cm ID) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 180 min gradient at 40°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics, and TPP raw data files were analysed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.5.2.8) with the Andromeda search engine. MS2/MS3 spectra were searched against UniProt database specifying Homo sapiens (Human) taxonomy (Proteome ID: UP000005640; Organism ID: 9606; Protein count: 73,920). All searches were performed using “Reporter ion MS2/MS3” with “10-plex TMT” as isobaric labels with a static modification for cysteine alkylation (carbamidomethylation), and oxidation of methionine (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as the variable modifications. Phospho (STY) was included as an additional variable modification for the phosphopeptide enriched samples. Trypsin digestion with maximum one missed cleavage, minimum peptide length as seven amino acids, precursor ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were specified in all analyses. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept at 0.01 for peptide spectrum match (PSM), protein and site decoy fraction. The raw data files for kinase enrichment analysis were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and were searched against the UniProt Human database using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.06 Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (M) and desthiobiotin lysine (K) as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT mass tag to peptide N-termini were included as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. All peptide data was filtered at high (1%) and medium (5%) false discovery rate (FDR). Processing and statistical analysis of quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics datasets were performed using the Perseus workstation (version 1.5.5.3). During data processing, reverse and contaminant database hits and candidates identified only by site were filtered out. Proteins groups were filtered for valid values (at least 80% in each group), and p-values obtained from a paired t-test were used to determine significance of differences in protein or phosphosite abundances between control and compound-treated groups. In TPP quantitative proteomics experiments, fold-changes were calculated by using the lowest temperature condition (37°C) as the reference. Curve fitting (relative fold changes as a function of temperature), normalization, and assessment of slope and melting point differences were performed using the TR workflow of the TPP R package (Savitski et al., 2014; Franken et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Determining the exact targets and mechanisms of action of drug molecules that modulate circadian rhythms is critical to develop novel compounds to treat clock-related disorders. Here, we have used phenotypic proteomic profiling (PPP) to systematically determine molecular targets of four circadian period-lengthening compounds in human cells. We demonstrate that the compounds cause similar changes in phosphorylation and activity of several proteins and kinases involved in vital pathways, including MAPK, NGF, B-cell receptor, AMP-activated protein&#xa0;kinases (AMPKs), and mTOR signaling. Kinome profiling further indicated inhibition of CKId, ERK1/2, CDK2/7, TNIK, and MST4 kinases as a common mechanism of action for these clock-modulating compounds. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of several convergent kinases lengthened circadian period, establishing them as novel circadian targets. Finally, thermal stability profiling revealed binding of the compounds to clock regulatory kinases, signaling molecules, and ubiquitination proteins. Thus, phenotypic proteomic profiling defines novel clock effectors that could directly inform precise therapeutic targeting of the circadian system in humans.

### Keywords
Circadian rhythms; circadian period altering compounds; kinase; phenotypic proteome profiling; phosphoproteome; proteomics; thermal proteome profiling

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Systems Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

### Submitter
Sandipan Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh B. Reddy
Department of Systems Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.


