### Accession
PXD043867

### Title
Chemical proteomics of AP-3 in Actinosynnema pretiosum

### Description
we use chemoproteomic approach with an AP-3-derived photoaffinity probe to profile the proteome-wide interactions of AP-3.

### Sample Protocol
The procedure for target protein capture consisted of harvesting the mycelia of strain ATCC 31280 by centrifugation, followed by washing with 7% NaCl, suspending in PBS buffer (150 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.2-7.4) and crushing with an ultrasonic processor. The 10 mM chemical probe (QG-YNE) was pre-incubated with 50 µL of 30 mg/mL cell lysate for 2 h and then irradiated with UV light at 365 nm for another 20/ 10/ 5 mins on ice for the generation of the covalent binding between the diazirine group on the probe and the amino acid residues of the targeted proteins. The probe-binding proteins underwent another click reaction with 0.5 mM biotin-N3 assisted by 0.1 mM Tris-hydroxypropyltriazolylmethylamine (THTPA), 1 mM CuSO4 and 1 mM vitamin C sodium (NaVc). Then, 50 µL streptavidin-sepharose (GE Healthcare) beads were poured into each reaction sample and incubated for 16 h with continuous rotation at room temperature. The beads were washed with 600 µL 0.1 M PBS, 0.5 M NaCl, 4.0 M urea, and 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) consecutively. The enriched proteins were subjected to reductive alkylation with 200 µL 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 200 µL 55 mM iodoacetamide. Enriched proteins were digested with 0.25 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The digests of both dead-YNE (diazirine-alkyne moiety, Supplementary Fig. 6) and QG-YNE treated-samples were labeled with TMT2-126 and TMT2-127 Isobaric Label Reagent.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching Uniprot protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by SEQUEST HT algorithm. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. One missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) and ITRAQ-8plex (K, Y and N-terminal) were used as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) was used as variable modifications. All spectra were searched against protein database using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The proteins identified in both channels were additionally filtered by at least two spectral counts and one unique peptides in each experimental replicate. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of peptide with S/N ratio higher than 10 of a protein. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.5.1.6. Isobaric ratios obtained from Proteome Discoverer 2.1 were transformed with log2-(x) and then normalized using Z-score and -log10-(p-value) were obtained by a two sided one sample t-test over biological duplicates. Only proteins identified have normalized ratios higher than 3.0 and p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistical significant hits.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial bioactive natural products mediate ecologically beneficial functions to the producing strains, and have been widely used in clinic and agriculture with clearly defined targets and underlying mechanisms. However, the physiological effects of their biosynthesis on the producing strains remain largely unknown. The antitumor ansamitocin P-3 (AP-3), produced by Actinosynnema pretiosum ATCC 31280, was found to repress the growth of the producing strain at high concentration and target the FtsZ protein involved in cell division. Previous work suggested the presence of additional cryptic targets of AP-3 in ATCC 31280. Herein we use chemoproteomic approach with an AP-3-derived photoaffinity probe to profile the proteome-wide interactions of AP-3. AP-3 exhibits specific bindings to the seemingly unrelated deoxythymidine diphosphate glucose-4,6-dehydratase, aldehyde dehydrogenase, and flavin-dependent thymidylate synthase, which are involved in cell wall assembly, central carbon metabolism and nucleotide biosynthesis, respectively. AP-3 functions as a non-competitive inhibitor of all three above target proteins, generating physiological stress on the producing strain through interfering diverse metabolic pathways. Overexpression of these target proteins increases strain biomass and markedly boosts AP-3 titers. This finding demonstrates that identification and engineering of cryptic targets of bioactive natural products can lead to in-depth understanding of microbial physiology and improved product titers.

### Keywords
Actinosynnema pretiosum, Ap-3, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Shanghai-Islamabad-Belgrade Joint Innovation Center on Antibacterial Resistances, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Qingxv Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Linquan Bai
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Shanghai-Islamabad-Belgrade Joint Innovation Center on Antibacterial Resistances, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.


