### Accession
PXD007825

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis in Candida albicans using SILAC-based mass spectrometry

### Description
Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in conjunction with mass spectrometry analysis is a sensitive and reliable technique for quantifying relative differences in protein abundance and post-translational modifications between cell populations. We have developed and utilised SILAC-MS workflows for quantitative proteomics in the fungal pathogen Candida albicans. Arginine metabolism provides important cues for escaping host defences during pathogenesis, which limits the use of auxotrophs in Candida research. Our strategy eliminates the need for engineering arginine auxotrophs for SILAC experiments and allows the use of ARG4 as selectable marker during strain construction. Cells that were auxotrophic for lysine were successfully labelled with both lysine and arginine stable isotopes. We found that prototrophic C. albicans preferentially uses exogenous arginine and downregulates internal production, which allowed it to achieve high incorporation rates. However, similar to other yeast, C. albicans was able to metabolise heavy arginine to heavy proline, which compromised the accuracy of protein quantification. A computational method was developed to correct for the incorporation of heavy proline. In addition, we utilised the developed SILAC labelling in Candida albicans for the global quantitative proteomic analysis of a strain expressing a phosphatase-dead mutant Cdc14PD.

### Sample Protocol
Cdc14PD cells were grown in heavy media. Wild type cells were grown in light media. Equal amounts of both strains were mixed together. Cells were lysed to extract soluble proteins. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion was performed. Proteins were identified by Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Perseus were used to process the data.

### Publication Abstract
Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in conjunction with MS analysis is a sensitive and reliable technique for quantifying relative differences in protein abundance and posttranslational modifications between cell populations. We develop and utilise SILAC-MS workflows for quantitative proteomics in the fungal pathogen Candida albicans. Arginine metabolism provides important cues for escaping host defences during pathogenesis, which limits the use of auxotrophs in Candida research. Our strategy eliminates the need for engineering arginine auxotrophs for SILAC experiments and allows the use of ARG4 as selectable marker during strain construction. Cells that are auxotrophic for lysine are successfully labelled with both lysine and arginine stable isotopes. We find that prototrophic C. albicans preferentially uses exogenous arginine and down-regulates internal production, which allow it to achieve high incorporation rates. However, similar to other yeast, C. albicans is able to metabolise heavy arginine to heavy proline, which compromised the accuracy of protein quantification. A computational method is developed to correct for the incorporation of heavy proline. In addition, we utilise the developed SILAC labelling in C. albicans for the global quantitative proteomic analysis of a strain expressing a phosphatase-dead mutant Cdc14<sup>PD</sup> .

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Silac, Cdc14, Mass spectrometry, Nativesilac

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Iliyana Kaneva

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Dickman
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Sheffield


