### Accession
PXD029264

### Title
Perception of a conserved family of plant signaling peptides by the receptor kinase HSL3

### Description
Plant genomes encode hundreds of secreted peptides; however, relatively few have been characterised. We report here an uncharacterised, stress-induced family of plant signalling peptides, which we call CTNIPs. Based on the role of the common co-receptor BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1-ASSOCIATED KINASE 1 (BAK1) in CTNIP-induced responses, we identified the orphan receptor kinase HAESA-LIKE 3 (HSL3) as the CTNIP receptor via a proteomics approach. CTNIP binding, ligand-triggered complex formation with BAK1, and induced downstream responses all involve HSL3. Notably, the HSL3-CTNIP signalling module is evolutionary ancient, predating the divergence of extant angiosperms.  Definition of this signalling module will help establish its physiological role and provides a resource to understand further receptor-ligand co-evolution.

### Sample Protocol
All steps involving the protein extract and subsequent protein isolation were carried out on ice or at 4 °C and all buffers and tubes were pre-cooled.  Seeds were sown on 1/2 MS agar and stratified for 3 days as described above. When seedlings had germinated, they were transferred 6 seedlings per well into 6 well plates containing 5 mL of liquid MS media and grown for a further 12 days. Seedlings were then transferred into MS media either with or without CTNIP4 addition and vaccum infiltrated for 2 min and left in the solution for a further 10 min. Seedlings were rapidly dried and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground. Proteins were extracted using by addition of ~2:1extraction buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM EDTA, 10 % Glycerol, 1 % IGEPAL, 5 mM DTT, 1 % Plant Protease Inhibitor (P9599, Sigma)):ground tissue (v/v). Proteins were solubilised at 4 °C with gentle agitation for 30 min before filtering through miracloth. The filtrate was centrifuged at 30000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were normalised using Bradford assay. An input sample was taken. To each 15 ml of protein extract 40 ul of GFP-TRAP AGAROSE BEADS (50 % slurry, ChromoTek) washed in extraction buffer were added and incubated with gentle agitation for 4 h at 4 °C. Bead were harvested by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 2 min and washed 3 times in extraction buffer. Fifty microliters of 1.5 x elution (NuPage) buffer and incubated at 80 °C for 8 min. Samples were subsequently used from MS analysis or Western blotting.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists in the form of Mascot generic files were prepared from raw data files using MS Convert (Proteowizard) and sent to a peptide search on Mascot server v2.7 using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, Ltd.) against an in-house contaminants database and the Araport 11 protein database. Tryptic peptides with up to 1 possible mis-cleavage and charge states +2, +3 were allowed in the search. The following peptide modifications were included in the search: carbamidomethylated Cysteine (fixed) and oxidized Methionine (variable). Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Decoy database was used to validate peptide sequence matches. Mascot results were combined in Scaffold v4.4.0 (Proteome Software Inc.) and peptide and protein identifications accepted if peptide probability and protein threshold was ≥ 95.0% and 95% respectively. Under these conditions the False Discovery Rate was 0.47%. Data was then exported to Excel (Microsoft) for further processing. Proteins were accepted if identified by at least 2 peptide and present in 2 or more biological replicates. Spectral counts from the 4 biological replicates were summed and used to derive a ratio of CTNIP4 treatment:mock treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Plant genomes encode hundreds of secreted peptides; however, relatively few have been characterised. We report here an uncharacterised, stress-induced family of plant signalling peptides, which we call CTNIPs. Based on the role of the common co-receptor BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1-ASSOCIATED KINASE 1 (BAK1) in CTNIP-induced responses, we identified in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> the orphan receptor kinase HAESA-LIKE 3 (HSL3) as the CTNIP receptor via a proteomics approach. CTNIP-binding, ligand-triggered complex formation with BAK1, and induced downstream responses all involve HSL3. Notably, the HSL3-CTNIP signalling module is evolutionarily conserved amongst most extant angiosperms. The identification of this novel signalling module will further shed light on the diverse functions played by plant signalling peptides and will provide insights into receptor-ligand co-evolution.

### Keywords
Receptor, Arabidopsis, Immunity

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory
The Sainsbury Laboratory

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank L.H. Menke
The Sainsbury Laboratory


