### Accession
PXD022859

### Title
Meta-omics analysis indicates the saliva microbiome and its proteins associated with the prognosis of oral cancer patients

### Description
The relationship between the microbial changes with clinical-pathological outcomes are still far from being conclusive. Herein, we investigate the ability of metagenomics (MG) and metaproteomics (MP) saliva data in distinguishing C, L0 and L1 patients. For that, we combined two strategies using MG analysis using 16S rDNA sequencing of saliva cells, and MP analysis using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry of saliva supernatant and cells.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, proteins extracted from supernatant and cell fractions were treated with dithiothreitol (DTT 5 mM for 25 min at 56 °C) and alkylation was performed with iodoacetamide (IAA 14 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark). For protein digestion, urea was diluted to a final concentration of 1.6 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1 mM of calcium chloride was added to the samples for trypsin digestion for 16 h at 37 °C (0.2 µg of trypsin for 10 µg of total protein). The reaction was quenched with 0.4% formic acid, and peptides were desalted with C18 stage tips, dried in a vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and stored at −20 °C for subsequent analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Target-decoy database search was performed at a maximum of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both the protein and peptide identification and label-free quantification was set using the MaxLFQ algorithm [46]. Both razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification, and the minimum ratio count was set as 1. A match time window of 2 min was applied. As search parameters, a mass tolerance of 6 ppm was considered for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, with a maximum of two missed cleavages for the first database and none for the second database search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered variable modifications. A protein group was considered as human or microbiome protein group only when all the majority proteins were from human or microbiome proteome database, respectively. Only for the first built database has the ´´split by taxonomy´´ function enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Saliva is a biofluid that maintains the health of oral tissues and the homeostasis of oral microbiota. Studies have demonstrated that Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients have different salivary microbiota than healthy individuals. However, the relationship between these microbial differences and clinicopathological outcomes is still far from conclusive. Herein, we investigate the capability of using metagenomic and metaproteomic saliva profiles to distinguish between Control (C), OSCC without active lesion (L0), and OSCC with active lesion (L1) patients. The results show that there are significantly distinct taxonomies and functional changes in L1 patients compared to C and L0 patients, suggesting compositional modulation of the oral microbiome, as the relative abundances of Centipeda, Veillonella, and Gemella suggested by metagenomics are correlated with tumor size, clinical stage, and active lesion. Metagenomics results also demonstrated that poor overall patient survival is associated with a higher relative abundance of Stenophotromonas, Staphylococcus, Centipeda, Selenomonas, Alloscordovia, and Acitenobacter. Finally, compositional and functional differences in the saliva content by metaproteomics analysis can distinguish healthy individuals from OSCC patients. In summary, our study suggests that oral microbiota and their protein abundance have potential diagnosis and prognosis value for oral cancer patients. Further studies are necessary to understand the role of uniquely detected metaproteins in the microbiota of healthy and OSCC patients as well as the crosstalk between saliva host proteins and the oral microbiome present in OSCC.

### Keywords
Oral microbiome, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Oral cancer diagnosis and prognosis, Saliva, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, LNBio, CNPEM, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, LNBio, CNPEM, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil


