### Accession
PXD037315

### Title
Quantitative proteome dataset profiling of UBC4 and UBC5 deletion strains in Saccharomyces cerevisiae v

### Description
The Ubiquitin-Proteasome System (UPS) regulates many cellular processes in eukaryotic cells. Ubiquitylation by the UPS mainly directs proteins to proteasomal degradation, but it can also have non-degradative functions, such as regulating protein activity or localization. The small protein ubiquitin is conjugated to its substrates via a cascade of E1-E2-E3 enzymes. Dysregulation of the UPS has been implicated in the genesis and progression of many diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases and cancer; thus, the UPS components are attractive targets for developing pharmaceutical drugs. E2s, or ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, are central players of the UPS. E2s function in tandem with specific ubiquitin ligases (E3s) to transfer ubiquitin to substrates. Here, we present the first proteome stability analysis of two closely related ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, UBC4 and UBC5, in S. cerevisiae. These two E2s are nearly identical, having 92% sequence identity and differing by only 11 amino acid residues. This dataset is of broad interest because higher eukaryotes express ubiquitin conjugating enzymes that are analogous to the yeast UBC4/5.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis buffer (8M urea in 200mM EPPS, pH 8.5 plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors) was added to the yeast cell pellets. Samples were lysed by bead beating (5 cycles of 30 seconds). Protein concentration of each sample was determined with a BCA assay (according to manufacturer’s instruction). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (15 min), alkylated with 10 mM NEM (15 min) and the NEM was then quenched with 5 mM DTT (15 min). Alkylation and quenching were performed in the dark. 100 µg of protein from each sample was precipitated with chloroform-methanol [3], and then resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Samples were digested by Lys-C (overnight at 24°C) and trypsin (6 h at 37°C). 1 µg of each enzyme was used per 100 µg of protein.   As preparation for TMT labeling, acetonitrile was added to a final volume of 30% to each digest.  For each sample, 50 µg of peptide were labeled with 100 µg of TMTpro reagents at room temperature for one hour. The labeling scheme was as follows: wt triplicates: 126, 127n,127c; ubc4 triplicates: 128n,128c,129n; ubc5 triplicates:129c,130n,130c. Upon verifying that labeling efficiency was >97% [4], the reactions were quenched by adding hydroxylamine to give a final concentration of ~0.3% and incubating 15 min at room temperature. The label-check was a quality control step prior to the final pooling of TMT-labeled samples. Here, we combined a small amount (1-3 µL or ~2µg) of each sample and analyzed it by mass spectrometry to confirm that peptide digestion was successful, if the degree of labeling is sufficient, and if the labeled samples contained approximately equal amount of peptides. During database searching, the TMTpro label was considered a variable modification at the N-terminus and at lysine residues. We then determined the labeling efficiency for the N-terminus and the lysine residues by dividing labeled N-terminal peptides by total peptides and then labeled lysine-containing peptides by the total lysine-containing peptides.

### Data Protocol
The spectra, which were converted to mzXML with MSconvert, were searched with the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2021) plus the same protein sequences with amino acid residues in the reversed order. Our forward databases consisted of 6,077 reviewed yeast entries and 115 common contaminants. This database was concatenated with a decoy database in which each protein sequence is reversed so as to enable the calculation of the target-decoy strategy for false discovery rate. These searches were performed using 50-ppm and 0.03 Da mass tolerances for precursors and fragments, respectively. We have traditionally used the 50ppm mass tolerance for our Sequest and now Comet database searches. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. In addition, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification, whereas alkylation with N-ethylmaleimide at cysteine residues (+125.048 Da) and TMTpro tag modifications at peptide N-termini and lysine residues (+304.207 Da) were set as static modifications. A linear discriminant analysis was performed for PSM filtering, such that a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set, after which then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Ubiquitin proteasome system, Protein stability, Tmt, Isobaric tagging

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School Dept. of Cell Biology Boston, MA USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Dept. of Cell Biology Boston, MA USA


