### Accession
PXD013216

### Title
Analysis of PKD1 autophosphorylation in vitro and confirmation of stoichiometric S742 phosphorylation of a recombinant PRKD1 kinase domain

### Description
Protein kinase D1 (PRKD1, also referred to as PKD1), has been proposed to undergo autophosphorylation on serine 742 and potentially also on serine 738 in the activation loop of its kinase domain. We used recombinant PKD1 kinase domain to test whether PKD1 is indeed able to undergo autophosphorylation of its kinase domain and how many sites could be phosphorylated. In order to obtain fully phosphorylated PKD1 kinase domain we adapted our autophosphorylation protocol to obtain monophosphorylated PKD1 kinase domain and determined the phosphorylation site by ArgC digest and phosphopeptide mapping.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated and pure protein was obtained by expressing the kinase domain of human PKD1 (residues 569-892) as an N-terminal GST-fusion in Sf9 insect cells. The protein was purified by affinity chromatography, followed by cleavage of the affinity tag using TEV protease. The protein was further purified by Q anion exchange and size exclusion chromatography. The identity of the protein was confirmed by intact mass spectrometry and showed it to be largely devoid of post-translational modifications. 10 µM of the protein were incubated in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM TCEP, 1 mM ATP, and 2 mM MgCl2 at room temperature for 18 h. After this the protein was checked by intact mass spectrometry for incorporation of phosphates. Autophosphorylation was carried out on the beads by resuspending the GST-PKD1CAT bound glutathione beads in 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM TCEP, 0.25% CHAPS, 10 mM ATP, 20 mM MgCl2, and incubation for 100 minutes at room temperature followed by 14 hours at 4°C. The GST-tag was removed by TEV cleavage and the monophosphorylated PKD1CAT species was isolated by MonoQ chromatography and size exclusion chromatography. 1 µg of protein was denatured in 8 M urea 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), reduced with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature, alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 20 min at room temperature in the dark, excessive IAA quenched with 10 mM DTT and then diluted to 0.6 M urea with 50 mM ABC. After addition of 10 mM CaCl2 the protein was digested overnight using mass-spec grade ArgC (Roche) at 37°C. The digestion was stopped with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides were desalted using custom-made C18 stagetips (1). The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher), applying a linear gradient from 2% to 30% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 60 min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), equipped with a Proxeon nano-spray-source (Thermo Fisher), operated in data-dependent mode. Survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 380-1650 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120.000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 10 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 2 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match option was set to “preferred”, the exclude isotope feature was enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 15 seconds. The phosphorylation site mapping was performed once for each protein preparation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16, http://www.maxquant.org/) and searched against a custom database containing the PKD1CAT (569-892) target sequence, the Bombyx mori reference proteome (Uniprot), Spodoptera proteins (Uniprot), and a database of common contaminants (containing 28512, 14785, and 379 entries, respectively). The search was performed with full ArgC specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were defined as variable modifications - all other parameters were set to default. Search results were filtered at 1% FDR on PSM (peptide spectrum match), peptide and protein level. All top-scoring spectra for PKD1 phosphopeptides were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase D (PKD) is an essential Ser/Thr kinase in animals and controls a variety of diverse cellular functions, including vesicle trafficking and mitogenesis. PKD is activated by recruitment to membranes containing the lipid second messenger diacylglycerol (DAG) and subsequent phosphorylation of its activation loop. Here, we report the crystal structure of the PKD N terminus at 2.2 &#xc5; resolution containing a previously unannotated ubiquitin-like domain (ULD), which serves as a dimerization domain. A single point mutation in the dimerization interface of the ULD not only abrogated dimerization in cells but also prevented PKD activation loop phosphorylation upon DAG production. We further show that the kinase domain of PKD dimerizes in a concentration-dependent manner and autophosphorylates on a single residue in its activation loop. We also provide evidence that PKD is expressed at concentrations 2 orders of magnitude below the ULD dissociation constant in mammalian cells. We therefore propose a new model for PKD activation in which the production of DAG leads to the local accumulation of PKD at the membrane, which drives ULD-mediated dimerization and subsequent trans-autophosphorylation of the kinase domain.

### Keywords
Protein kinase d, Pkd1

### Affiliations
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas A. Leonard
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria


