### Accession
PXD024401

### Title
wing scale LC-MSMS ANALYSIS RAW DATA

### Description
The LC-MS/MS was ferformed to study the proteins involved in the scale's formation

### Sample Protocol
the wing scales were collected from the pupal day 6 and day 8 of bombyx mori and dissovled in the 8M urae/100mM DTT, the The protein concentration of the dissolved scales was determined with a BCA protein analysis kit. The Filter Aided Sample Preparation method was employed to digest the proteins（1μg trypsin / per 50μg protein, incubated at 37 °C for 20 hr）and produce a highly concentrated sample without any insoluble material. Mass spectrometric analysis Q-Exactive was performed for separated tryptic peptides

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a database based on protein information deduced from silkworm Gene sets A and B downloaded from KAIKObase (http://sgp.dna.affrc.go.jp/ComprehensiveGeneSet/) using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.17) software, with a false discovery rate ≤ 0.01 (Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co. Ltd).

### Publication Abstract
Scales are symbolic characteristic of Lepidoptera; however, nothing is known about the contribution of cuticular proteins (CPs) to the complex patterning of lepidopteran scales. This is because scales are resistant to solubilization, thus hindering molecular studies. Here we succeeded in dissolving developing wing scales from Bombyx mori, allowing analysis of their protein composition. We identified a distinctive class of histidine rich (His-rich) CPs (6%-45%) from developing lepidopteran scales by LC-MS/MS. Functional studies using RNAi revealed CPs with different histidine content play distinct and critical roles in constructing the microstructure of the scale surface. Moreover, we successfully synthesized films in vitro by crosslinking a 45% His-rich CP (BmorCPR152) with laccase2 using N-acetyl- dopamine or N-&#x3b2;-alanyl-dopamine as the substrate. This molecular study of scales provides fundamental information about how such a fine microstructure is constructed and insights into the potential application of CPs as new biomaterials.

### Keywords
Wing, Lc-ms/ms, Bombyx mori, Scale

### Affiliations
Biological Science Research Center, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, China
Southwest University, Chongqing, China, 400715

### Submitter
践秋 刘

### Lab Head
Dr Mita Kauzei
Biological Science Research Center, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, China


