### Accession
PXD025848

### Title
Salmonella temperature dependent proteome

### Description
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (STM) is one of the major causes of gastroenteritis and is linked to the consumption of contaminated food. Thereby, STM is associated to food of animal related produce (pork, chicken, eggs) and to food of non-animal related produce (vegetables, fruits, nuts, herbs and water). A lot of studies investigated the process of infection of warm-blooded mammalian hosts by STM and the underlying complex regulatory network of virulence gene expression dependent of various environmental conditions encountered in hosts. However, less is known about the proteome and possible regulatory networks for gene expression of STM outside the preferred host. Nutritional limitations and changes in temperature are the most obvious stresses outside the native host. Thus, we analyzed the proteome profile of STM grown in rich medium (LB medium) and minimal medium (PCN medium) at temperatures ranging from 8 °C to 37 °C. LB medium mimics the nutritional rich environment inside the host, whereas minimal PCN medium represents nutritional limitations outside the host, found during growth of non-animal related produce (field conditions). Further, the used range of temperature is found inside natural hosts (37 °C), at ambient room conditions (20 °C), during agricultural growth on open field (16 °C and 12 °C) and probably during food storage (8 °C). For the investigation of implications of altered nutrient availability and changes in growth temperature on STM proteome, whole cell lysates of STM grown under various conditions were analyzed by HPLC/MS-MS and label-free quantification. With this method, we are able to decipher changes in the complete proteome of STM in comparison to standard laboratory conditions mimicking the natural host.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Protein concentration was determined using an IMPLEN NanoPhotometer®. For each sample 100 µl were digested. Reduction occurred by 5 mM DTT (in ABC puffer) for 30 min at 37 °C. For alkylation, 15 mM iodoacetamide (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/NH3, pH 8.5 buffer = ABC buffer) were added to the samples and incubated for 30 min at RT in dark. For digestion, 10 µg protein was digested by 0.3 µg LysC/Trypsin (Promega) for 3 h at 37 °C. ABC buffer was added to a final volume of 79.2 µl and further incubated o/n at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 100% formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Particles left were removed by centrifugation and the peptide containing supernatant was transferred to HPLC vials and processed to mass spectrometry measuring 1 µg digested protein. Label-free protein quantification by mass spectrometry HPLC/MS-MS analyses were done using an Ultimate 3000 Nano HPLC (ThermoFisher). Therefore, 8 µl of samples were desalted and concentrated using a precolumn (ThermoFisher, C18 PepMap 5 µm, 100 A with dimension of 300 µm (id) x 5 mm (length)). The corresponding solvent was water supplemented with 0.1% TFA/H2O at a flow rate of 25 µl/min. The loaded precolumn was switched into the `nano flow line´ (250 nl/min) with an Easy Spray column (ThermoFisher, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 A with dimension of 75 µm (id) x 500 mm). Peptides were eluted by 80 % ACN and 0.1 % in H2O continuously in 180 min. Electro spray ionization (ESI) was done at 1,500 V (ESI Spray Source, ThermoFisher). A Q-Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) was used to determine the MS/MS data under the conditions mentioned in Table 1. Table 1: Settings for label-free protein quantification by mass spectrometry          MS MS precursor selection MSMS Resolution 70,000                17,500 AGC target 3x106 5x102 1x105 Max IT 50 ms  80 ms MS Range 375-1800 m/z   Loop Count    10 NCE   27 Isolation Width   1.4 m/z charge  2-5

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were analyzed by Peaks Studio X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc, Canada). The peptides were identified using a de novo approach and the corresponding proteins by a DB search using a database for STM 14028 (Salmonella Typhimurium strain 14028s/ SGSC 2262; 5,369 proteins; Uniprot, 21.07.2019). For both searches the MS tolerance was adjusted to 10.0 ppm, the MS/MS tolerance to 0.2 Da and one missed cleavage was conceded. Further post translationally variable modifications carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were chosen. In addition, label-free quantification was performed using three biological replicates with a retention time shift of 25.0 and a false discovery rate of 1 %. Further data were normalized to house-keeping protein DnaK of reference sample STM grown in LB medium or PCN medium at 37 °C. For determination of significantly differential protein abundances in STM grown at various temperatures compared to STM grown at 37 °C in the respective medium, we used the Student´s t-test, considering p≤0.05 as significant, and the Benjamini-Hochberg correction to adjust for multiple hypothesis testing. Further, only proteins with at least >2-fold change in abundance and presence in all three replicates in both groups with at least one identical found peptide were included. In addition, proteins were analyzed with regard to their exclusive occurrence in only one of two compared groups. Hence, the protein has to be found in all three replicates of the respective group. Proteomic data were subsequently analyzed for potential altered gene groups by comparison to gene ontology groups.

### Publication Abstract
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (STM) is a major cause of gastroenteritis and transmitted by consumption of contaminated food. STM is associated to food originating from animals (pork, chicken, eggs) or plants (vegetables, fruits, nuts, and herbs). Infection of warm-blooded mammalian hosts by STM and the underlying complex regulatory network of virulence gene expression depend on various environmental conditions encountered in hosts. However, less is known about the proteome and possible regulatory networks for gene expression of STM outside the preferred host. Nutritional limitations and changes in temperature are the most obvious stresses outside the native host. Thus, we analyzed the proteome profile of STM grown in rich medium (LB medium) or minimal medium (PCN medium) at temperatures ranging from 8 &#xb0;C to 37 &#xb0;C. LB medium mimics the nutritional rich environment inside the host, whereas minimal PCN medium represents nutritional limitations outside the host, found during growth of fresh produce (field conditions). Further, the range of temperatures analyzed reflects conditions within natural hosts (37 &#xb0;C), room temperature (20 &#xb0;C), during growth under agricultural conditions (16 &#xb0;C and 12 &#xb0;C), and during food storage (8 &#xb0;C). Implications of altered nutrient availability and growth temperature on STM proteomes were analyzed by HPLC/MS-MS and label-free quantification. Our study provides first insights into the complex adaptation of STM to various environmental temperatures, which allows STM not only to infect mammalian hosts but also to enter new infection routes that have been poorly studied so far. With the present dataset, global virulence factors, their impact on infection routes, and potential anti-infective strategies can now be investigated in detail. Especially, we were able to demonstrate functional flagella at 12 &#xb0;C growth temperature for STM with an altered motility behavior.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Salmonella

### Affiliations
Resercher
Dep. Microbiology University of Osnabrueck Faculty Biology / Chemistry Division Microbiology  Barbarastrasse 11 49076 Osnabrueck

### Submitter
Joerg Deiwick

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hensel
Dep. Microbiology University of Osnabrueck Faculty Biology / Chemistry Division Microbiology  Barbarastrasse 11 49076 Osnabrueck


