### Accession
PXD017513

### Title
Serial In-solution digestion protocol for mass spectrometry-based glycomics and proteomics analysis

### Description
Advancement in mass spectrometry has revolutionised the field of proteomics. However, there remains a gap in the analysis of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs), particularly for glycosylation. Glycosylation, the most common form of PTM, is involved in most biological processes; thus, analysis of glycans along with proteins is crucial to answering important biologically relevant questions. Of particular interest is the brain extracellular matrix (ECM), which has been called the “final frontier” in neuroscience that consists of highly glycosylated proteins.  Among these,  proteoglycans (PGs) contain large glycan structures called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and form crucial ECM components, including perineuronal nets (PNNs), shown to be altered in neuropsychiatric diseases. Thus, there is a growing need for high-throughput methods that combine GAG (glycomics) and PGs (proteomics) analysis to unravel the complete biological picture. The protocol presented here integrates glycomics and proteomics to analyze multiple classes of biomolecules.

### Sample Protocol
We use a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) type serial in-solution digestion of GAG classes, including hyaluronan (HA), chondroitin sulfate (CS), and heparan sulfate (HS), followed by peptides. The GAGs and peptides are then cleaned and analysed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This protocol is an efficient and economical way of processing tissue or cell lysates to isolate various GAG classes and peptides from the same sample. The method is more efficient (single-pot) than available parallel (multi-pot) release methods, and removal of GAGs facilitates the identification of the proteins with higher peptide-coverage using conventional-proteomics. Overall, we demonstrate a high-throughput & efficient protocol for mass spectrometry-based glycomic and proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data are converted into mzXML format using ProteoWizard msConvert.The data are searched using PeaksDB and PeaksPTM using Peaks Studio version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) against the Uniprot/Swissprot database for appropriate species with a 1% false discovery rate and at least two unique peptides. A 10-ppm error tolerance for the precursor (MS1) and 0.02 Da mass error tolerance for fragment ions (MS2) are specified. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages per peptide is allowed for the database search, permitting non-tryptic cleavage at one end. Trypsin+LysC is specified as the enzyme and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. A peaksPTM search is performed using advanced settings of a larger set of variable modifications,  including hydroxylation P, oxidation M, hydroxylation K, hydroxylation-Hex K,  hydroxylation-Hex-Hex K, HexNAc ST, HexHexNAc ST, phosphorylation STY,  ubiquitination K, deamidation N, methoxy K, and nitrotyrosine Y. Our in house software GlycreSoft can be further used to identify glycopeptides and linker peptides (formed after removal of GAG chains) in the proteomics data

### Publication Abstract
Advancement in mass spectrometry has revolutionized the field of proteomics. However, there remains a gap in the analysis of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs), particularly for glycosylation. Glycosylation, the most common form of PTM, is involved in most biological processes; thus, analysis of glycans along with proteins is crucial to answering important biologically relevant questions. Of particular interest is the brain extracellular matrix (ECM), which has been called the "final Frontier" in neuroscience, which consists of highly glycosylated proteins. Among these, proteoglycans (PGs) contain large glycan structures called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) that form crucial ECM components, including perineuronal nets (PNNs), shown to be altered in neuropsychiatric diseases. Thus, there is a growing need for high-throughput methods that combine GAG (glycomics) and PGs (proteomics) analysis to unravel the complete biological picture. The protocol presented here integrates glycomics and proteomics to analyze multiple classes of biomolecules. We use a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) type serial in-solution digestion of GAG classes, including hyaluronan (HA), chondroitin sulfate (CS), and heparan sulfate (HS), followed by peptides. The GAGs and peptides are then cleaned and analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This protocol is an efficient and economical way of processing tissue or cell lysates to isolate various GAG classes and peptides from the same sample. The method is more efficient (single-pot) than available parallel (multi-pot) release methods, and removal of GAGs facilitates the identification of the proteins with higher peptide-coverage than using conventional-proteomics. Overall, we demonstrate a high-throughput &amp; efficient protocol for mass spectrometry-based glycomic and proteomic analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017513).

### Keywords
Glycosaminoglycans, Proteoglycans, Extracellular matrix., Glycomics, Proteomics, Fasp, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston University, Boston MA 02125

### Submitter
Manveen Sethi

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Joseph Zaia
Center for biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston University, Boston MA 02125


