### Accession
PXD032362

### Title
MS-based proteomic characterization of Toxoplasma gondii BCC7 interactome

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular protozoan parasite of a wide range of homeotherm animals worldwide. T. gondii belongs to the ancient phylum of Apicomplexa and shares with the other companion groups from the Alveolata infrakingdom, a featuring trilamellar pellicle outlining the cell while a permanent apico-basal polarity also characterizes the T. gondii zoites. In addition to the plasma membrane bilayer, the pellicle also encompasses the underneath inner membrane complex (IMC) itself derived from flattened and fused vesicles identified as alveoli and made of a IMC and IMC-like protein’s repertoire, yet to complete. We identified a 500 kDa protein encoded by TGGT1_311230, the basal complex component BCC7, exhibiting a posterior localization. To gain insight about the role of BCC7 in T. gondii, we characterized its interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly egressed RHΔku80 parasites collected from twenty T180 flasks (1.3-1.5 x1010 tachyzoites) were washed and resuspended in 5 mL PBS supplemented with Triton X-100 1% (v/v). All lysis steps were performed at 4°C in presence of antiproteases (Complete, Roche) and 1mM PMSF.A first mechanical lysis step was performed with Dounce homogeneisation of parasites followed by 1 h incubation on rotating shaker. The insoluble fraction collected after centrifugation (16,000 x g; 20 minutes) was resuspended in lysis buffer (1x109 tachyzoites/mL) supplemented with 1% Empigen (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 µL Benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich). This BCC7 enriched fraction was further submitted to a second step of mechanical Dounce homogeneisation and 1 h incubation on rotating shaker. The soluble lysate obtained after centrifugation (20,000 x g; 45 min) was diluted half in lysis buffer without detergent and incubated with 1 mL anti-FLAG M2 affinity beads (Sigma-Aldrich). After 1 h incubation, beads were washed with 30 mL PBS and elution was carried out with 150 mg/mL FLAG peptide. Experiments were conducted in triplicate with both RHΔku80_BCC7-HA-FLAG and wild-type (WT) parasites used as controls. Eluted proteins were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked in in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega).The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 140 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.7.0.1, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, v.30, downloaded from ToxoDB), the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, October 2010 version), and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (bovine albumin, keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6, PSM score ≥ 25, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and a minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
<i>T. gondii</i> is a eukaryotic parasite that has evolved a stage called tachyzoite which multiplies in host cells by producing two daughter cells internally. These nascent tachyzoites bud off their mother and repeat the division process until the expanding progenies escape to settle and multiply in other host cells. Over these intra- and extra-cellular phases, the tachyzoite maintains an essential apicobasal polarity that emerges through a unique bidirectional budding process of the elongating cells. This process requires the assembly of several molecular complexes that, at the nascent pole, encompass structural and myosin motor elements. To characterize a recently identified basal pole marker named BCC7 with respect to the posterior myosin J and myosin C motors, we used conventional biochemistry as well as advanced proteomic and in silico analysis in conjunction with live and super resolution microscopy of transgenic fluorescent tachyzoites. We document that BCC7 forms a ribbed ring below which myosin C motor entities distribute regularly. In addition, we identified-among 13 BCC7 putative partners-two novel and five known members of the inner membrane complex (IMC) family which ends at the apical side of the ring. Therefore, BCC7 could assist the stabilization of the IMC plaques and contribute to the parasite biomechanical properties.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Nanolc-ms/ms, Basal pole, Bcc7, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


