### Accession
PXD006531

### Title
Proteome of an early evolutionary stage photosynthetic organelle in the amoeba Paulinella chromatophora

### Description
The endosymbiotic acquisition of mitochondria and plastids >1 Ga ago profoundly impacted eukaryote evolution. Early stages of organelle integration however remain poorly understood. The amoeba Paulinella chromatophora contains more recently established cyanobacterium-derived photosynthetic organelles, termed “chromatophores”. To explore the re-arrangement of an organellar proteome during its integration into a eukaryotic host cell, we characterized the chromatophore proteome by mass spectrometry. Apparently, genetic control over the chromatophore has shifted substantially to the nucleus. Two classes of nuclear-encoded proteins are imported into the chromatophore, likely through independent pathways. Most imported proteins seem to derive from ancestral host genes rather than nuclear genes transferred from the endosymbiont. Intriguingly, the putative targeting signal found in one class of imported proteins confers chloroplast localization upon heterologous expression in a plant cell suggesting common features in chromatophore and plastid protein import pathways. Finally, combining experimental data with in silico predictions we provide a comprehensive catalogue of chromatophore-localized proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for MS analysis were shorty separated (about 4 mm running distance) by SDS-PAGE on 4-12% polyacrylamide gels followed by silver staining and then prepared as described (Poschmann et al, 2014, PMID 24646099 ). Briefly, reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using 0.1 µg trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany). Finally, resulting peptides were extracted from the gel with 1:1 (v/v) 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid / acetonitrile and the acetonitrile removed by vacuum concentration.

### Data Protocol
Database searches and protein quantification were carried out within the MaxQuant environment version 1.5.3.8 (MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) using standard parameters if not otherwise stated. A proteome dataset, which consists of 60,975 entries (composed of the translated P. chromatophora transcriptome excluding chromatophore-derived transcripts plus translated ORFs on the chromatophore genome) was used for spectrum identification. Peptides and proteins were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%, tryptic cleavage specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were given as parameters for digestion. Protein-N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were considered as variable as well as carbamido methylation at cysteines as fixed modification. Precursor mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for the first and after recalibration 4.5 ppm for the second search, mass tolerances for fragment spectra to 20 ppm. Label-free quantification was enabled with standard parameters (minimal ratio count of two, unique and razor peptides were used for quantification as well as peptides with variable modifications).

### Publication Abstract
The endosymbiotic acquisition of mitochondria and plastids more than 1 Ga ago profoundly impacted eukaryote evolution. At the heart of understanding organelle evolution is the re-arrangement of the endosymbiont proteome into a host-controlled organellar proteome. However, early stages in this process as well as the timing of events that underlie organelle integration remain poorly understood. The amoeba Paulinella chromatophora contains cyanobacterium-derived photosynthetic organelles, termed "chromatophores," that were acquired more recently (around 100 Ma ago). To explore the re-arrangement of an organellar proteome during its integration into a eukaryotic host cell, here we characterized the chromatophore proteome by protein mass spectrometry. Apparently, genetic control over the chromatophore has shifted substantially to the nucleus. Two classes of nuclear-encoded proteins-which differ in protein length-are imported into the chromatophore, most likely through independent pathways. Long imported proteins carry a putative, conserved N-terminal targeting signal, and many specifically fill gaps in chromatophore-encoded metabolic pathways or processes. Surprisingly, upon heterologous expression in a plant cell,&#xa0;the putative chromatophore targeting signal conferred chloroplast localization. This finding suggests common features in the protein import pathways of chromatophores and plastids, two organelles that evolved independently and more than 1&#xa0;Ga apart from each other. By combining experimental data with in&#xa0;silico predictions, we provide a comprehensive catalog of almost 450 nuclear-encoded, chromatophore-targeted proteins. Interestingly, most imported proteins seem to derive from ancestral host genes, suggesting that the re-targeting of nuclear-encoded proteins that resulted from endosymbiotic gene transfers plays only a minor role at the onset of chromatophore integration.

### Keywords
Endosymbiosis, Organell evolution, Evolution, Model organism

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


