### Accession
PXD017470

### Title
Distinct gene clusters drive formation of ferrosome organelles in bacteria

### Description
Cellular iron homeostasis is vital and maintained through tight regulation of iron import, efflux, storage and detoxification1-3. The most common modes of iron storage use proteinaceous compartments, such as ferritins and related proteins4,5. Although lipid-bounded iron compartments have also been described, the basis for their formation and function remains unknown6,7. Here we focus on one such compartment, herein named the 'ferrosome', that was previously observed in the anaerobic bacterium Desulfovibrio magneticus6. Using a proteomic approach, we identify three ferrosome-associated (Fez) proteins that are responsible for forming ferrosomes in D. magneticus. Fez proteins are encoded in a putative operon and include FezB, a P1B-6-ATPase found in phylogenetically and metabolically diverse species of bacteria and archaea. We show that two other bacterial species, Rhodopseudomonas palustris and Shewanella putrefaciens, make ferrosomes through the action of their six-gene fez operon. Additionally, we find that fez operons are sufficient for ferrosome formation in foreign hosts. Using S. putrefaciens as a model, we show that ferrosomes probably have a role in the anaerobic adaptation to iron starvation. Overall, this work establishes ferrosomes as a new class of iron storage organelles and sets the stage for studying their formation and structure in diverse microorganisms.

### Sample Protocol
D. magneticus cells were lysed by passing through a French pressure cell three times. The lysate was then passed through a 0.2 μm filter to remove unlysed cells. The filtered cell lysate was gently layered over a 65% sucrose cushion and centrifuged at 35,000 rpm at 4°C for 2 hours. The resulting pellet containing isolated ferrosomes was washed twice with 1 ml of buffer and resuspended in a final volume of 50 μl. 50 μl of isolated ferrosomes (5 μg) and cell lysate (50 μg) were prepared for liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry. Each sample was combined with 0.06% RapiGest SF surfactant and 12 mM NH4CO3 pH 7.5 at 80°C for 15 minutes. Samples were incubated with 2.9 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 minutes followed by addition of 7.9 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were then digested with 1:50 trypsin-protein at 37°C overnight in the dark. Following digestion, 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid was added and incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes to hydrolyze the RapiGest. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 30 minutes and the supernatant was tranfered to a Waters Total Recovery vial. Trypsin-digested samples were analyzed in triplicate at the QB3 Mass Spectrometry Facility using an Acquity M-class liquid chromatograph that was connected in-line with a Synapt G2-Si high-definition ion mobility mass spectrometer equipped with an electrospray ionization source.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis was performed by Anthony Iavarone at the QB3 Mass Spectrometry Facility using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software for relative protein quantification using a label-free approach. Raw data was searched against the D. magneticus FASTA protein database to identify tryptic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular iron homeostasis is vital and maintained through tight regulation of iron import, efflux, storage and detoxification<sup>1-3</sup>. The most common modes of iron storage use proteinaceous compartments, such as ferritins and related proteins<sup>4,5</sup>. Although lipid-bounded iron compartments have also been described, the basis for their formation and function remains unknown<sup>6,7</sup>. Here we focus on one such compartment, herein named the 'ferrosome', that was previously observed in the anaerobic bacterium Desulfovibrio magneticus<sup>6</sup>. Using a proteomic approach, we identify three ferrosome-associated (Fez) proteins that are responsible for forming ferrosomes in D.&#x2009;magneticus. Fez proteins are encoded in a putative operon and include FezB, a P<sub>1B-6</sub>-ATPase found in phylogenetically and metabolically diverse species of bacteria and archaea. We show that two other bacterial&#xa0;species, Rhodopseudomonas palustris and Shewanella putrefaciens, make ferrosomes through the action of their six-gene fez operon. Additionally, we find that fez operons are sufficient for ferrosome formation in foreign hosts. Using S.&#x2009;putrefaciens as a model, we show that ferrosomes probably have a role in the anaerobic adaptation to iron starvation. Overall, this work establishes ferrosomes as a new class of iron storage organelles and sets the stage for studying their formation and structure in diverse microorganisms.

### Keywords
Organelle, Bacteria, Iron, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, USA
 University of California, Berkeley

### Submitter
Carly Grant

### Lab Head
Dr Arash Komeili
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, USA


