### Accession
PXD025456

### Title
Identification of novel ADAMTS cleavage sites in versican using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach

### Description
We used recombinant Versican (either isoform V1 or an abridged isoform called V1-5GAG) digested with purified ADAMTS1, 4, or 5 compared to inactive controls to determine novel protease cleavage sites within versican.

### Sample Protocol
Samples underwent and in-solution digest in 6M urea and were digested with trypsin at 1:25 protease: protein ratio overnight. Samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns and ran on a Fusion Lumos 2-hour gradient with a 3-sec MS2 window.

### Data Protocol
Individual LC-MS/MS raw files were searched against human (Uniprot.org) and single recombinant protein databases using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) and search parameters specified in the manuscript. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to identify high confidence proteins. The human database included all reviewed proteins with experimental evidence and was used to validate the purity of the mixture. Quantitation was only performed with the single protein searches. Peptide abundances were compared between the active and inactive protease and a z-score of significance was calculated in Microsoft Excel. Volcano plots were created using GraphPad Prism.

### Publication Abstract
Infective endocarditis is a life-threatening infection of heart valves and adjacent structures characterized by vegetations on valves and other endocardial surfaces, with tissue destruction and risk of embolization. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to define the proteome of staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetations and Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to define their proteolytic landscapes. These approaches identified over 2000 human proteins in staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetations. Individual vegetation proteomes demonstrated comparable profiles of quantitatively major constituents that overlapped with serum, platelet, and neutrophil proteomes. Staphylococcal vegetation proteomes resembled one another more than the proteomes of non-staphylococcal vegetations. TAILS demonstrated extensive proteolysis within vegetations, with numerous previously undescribed cleavages. Several proteases and pathogen-specific proteins, including virulence factors, were identified in most vegetations. Proteolytic peptides in fibronectin and complement C3 were identified as potential infective endocarditis biomarkers. Overlap of staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetation proteomes suggests a convergent thrombotic and immune response to endocardial infection by diverse pathogens. However, the differences between staphylococcal and non-staphylococcal vegetations and internal variance within the non-staphylococcal group indicate that additional pathogen- or patient-specific effects exist. Pervasive proteolysis of vegetation components may arise from vegetation-intrinsic proteases and destabilize vegetations, contributing to embolism.

### Keywords
Z-score, Adamts, Versican

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic, Lerner Research Institute, Biomedical engineering
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Daniel Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Cleveland Clinic, Lerner Research Institute, Biomedical engineering


