### Accession
PXD006653

### Title
Shift of EMT gradient in 3D spheroid MSCs for activation of mesenchymal niche function

### Description
This project is described about the detailed characterization of 3D spheroid mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Specifically, authors showed the dynamic action towards EMT in 3D MSCs and the potential of EMT-enhanced “naïve” mesenchymal phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
The protein sample (100 μg) was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 36 °C for 25 min and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 30 min. The sample was diluted five times to decrease urea concentration to less than 1.6 M in solution. The protein mixture was digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin at 37 °C for 16 h. The ratio of enzyme to protein was 1:200. Peptide samples were desalted with C18 spin column. The analytes were analyzed using an LTQ XL-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 1.9 kV and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (300–2000 m/z) were acquired from the Orbitrap with one microscan and a resolution of 100,000, allowing preview mode for precursor selection and charge-state determination. MS/MS spectra of the 10 most intense ions from the preview survey scan were acquired concurrently from the ion-trap for full-scan acquisition in the Orbitrap with the following options: isolation width, 10 ppm; normalized collision energy, 35%; dynamic exclusion duration, 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were analyzed using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4.0.288). The swissprot human database (released in 2016.01) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the wide use of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) for paracrine support in clinical trials, their variable and heterogeneous supporting activity pose major challenges. While three-dimensional (3D) MSC cultures are emerging as alternative approaches, key changes in cellular characteristics during 3D-spheroid formation remain unclear. Here, we show that MSCs in 3D spheroids undergo further progression towards the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), driven by upregulation of EMT-promoting microRNAs and suppression of EMT-inhibitory miRNAs. The shift of EMT in MSCs is associated with widespread histone modifications mimicking the epigenetic reprogramming towards enhanced chromatin dynamics and stem cell-like properties, but without changes in their surface phenotype. Notably, these molecular shifts towards EMT in 3D MSCs caused enhanced stem cell niche activity, resulting in higher stimulation of hematopoietic progenitor self-renewal and cancer stem cell metastasis. Moreover, miRNA-mediated induction of EMT in 2D MSCs were sufficient to mimic the enhanced niche activity of 3D spheroid MSCs. Thus, the molecular hierarchy in the EMT gradient among phenotypically indistinguishable MSCs revealed the previously unrecognized functional parameters in MSCs, and the EMT-enhanced "na&#xef;ve" mesenchymal state represents an 'activated mesenchymal niche' in 3D spheroid MSCs.

### Keywords
Human, Mesenchymal stem cell, Lc-ms/ms, 3d-cultured, Cell

### Affiliations
Yokohama City University
Theragnosis research center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Korea

### Submitter
Jihye Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Theragnosis research center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Korea


