### Accession
PXD017385

### Title
Sample multiplexing for targeted pathway proteomics:  application to aging mice

### Description
Pathway proteomics strategies measure protein expression changes in specific cellular processes that carry out related functions.  Using targeted TMT-based sample multiplexing, hundreds of proteins can be quantified across 10 or more samples simultaneously.  To facilitate these highly complex experiments, we introduce a strategy that provides complete control over targeted sample multiplexing experiments, termed Tomahto, and present its first implementation on the Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer platform. Importantly, this software monitors via the external desktop computer to the data stream and inserts optimized MS2 and MS3 scans in real time based on an application programming interface (API) with the mass spectrometer. Hundreds of proteins of interest from diverse biological samples can be targeted and accurately quantified in a sensitive and high throughput fashion. It achieves comparable, if not better, sensitivity as deep fractionation and requires minimal total sample input (~10 µg). As a proof-of-principle experiment, we selected 4 pathways important in metabolism- and inflammation-related processes (260 proteins/520 peptides) and measured their abundance across 90 samples (9 tissues from 5 old and 5 young mice) to explore effects of aging. Tissue-specific aging are presented here and we highlight the role of inflammation- and metabolism-related processes in white adipose tissue.  We validated our approach through comparison with a global proteome survey across the tissues, work that we also provide as a general resource for the community.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation, and all tissues were rapidly extracted within thirty seconds after euthanasia. Wollenberger tongs were prechilled in liquid nitrogen and were used to freeze-clamp each tissue immediately after extraction (1). Clamped tissues were then placed in a liquid nitrogen dewar. To ensure the extraction speed, in each age group, brown fat, kidney, skeletal muscle, and white fat (epididymal fat) were extracted from a set of five mice, and brain, liver, heart, spleen, and lung were from the other set of five mice.  Tissues were homogenized by bead beating in 8 M urea buffer [8 M urea, 2% SDS w/v, 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5), 1 x protease inhibitor tablet (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1 x phosphatase inhibitor tablet (Thermo Fisher Scientific)]. Suspensions were centrifuged at maximum speed for 15 min at 4°C and lysates were transferred to clean Eppendorf tubes. Protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide that was quenched with 10 mM DTT. A total of 100 μg of protein was chloroform−methanol precipitated. Protein was reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS at pH 8.5 and digested by Lys-C overnight and trypsin for 6 h, both at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio. Resulting peptides were labeled with TMT10 at a ratio of 2:1 (TMT:Peptide) by mass. The reaction proceeded at room temperature for 1 hr before quenching with a final volume of 0.5% hydroxylamine (Sigma). Peptides were then combined at a 1:1 across all channels and desalted using a 100 mg SepPak cartridge. For TOMAHAQ analysis, 100 fmol TMTsh-labeled trigger peptides and 2 µg TMT10-labeled endogenous were loaded on column. For shotgun proteome analysis, 600 µg of labeled peptides were loaded and fractionated with basic-pH reverse-phase (BPRP) high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) , collected in a 96-well plate and consolidated to a final of 24 fractions, out of which only alternating fractions (a total of 12) were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
For shotgun DDA-SPS-MS3 analyses, raw data were converted to mzXML format using a modified version of RawFileReader and searched against a mouse target-decoy protein database (Uniprot, December 21, 2018) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Searches were performed with a 50 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.9 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, trypsin digest with up to 2 missed cleavages. Allowed modifications included cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146), static TMT on lysine and peptide N temini (+229.16293) and up to 3 variable methionine oxidation (+15.99491).  Peptide spectral matches were filtered with a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) method to a 1% FDR (5) and protein-level FDR of 1% was enforced at the entire dataset level of 108 runs (9 tissues of 12 fractions each)

### Publication Abstract
Pathway proteomics strategies measure protein expression changes in specific cellular processes that carry out related functions. Using targeted tandem mass tags-based sample multiplexing, hundreds of proteins can be quantified across 10 or more samples simultaneously. To facilitate these highly complex experiments, we introduce a strategy that provides complete control over targeted sample multiplexing experiments, termed Tomahto, and present its implementation on the Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer platform. Importantly, this software monitors via the external desktop computer to the data stream and inserts optimized MS2 and MS3 scans in real time based on an application programming interface with the mass spectrometer. Hundreds of proteins of interest from diverse biological samples can be targeted and accurately quantified in a sensitive and high-throughput fashion. It achieves sensitivity comparable to, if not better than, deep fractionation and requires minimal total sample input (&#x223c;10 &#xb5;g). As a proof-of-principle experiment, we selected four pathways important in metabolism- and inflammation-related processes (260 proteins/520 peptides) and measured their abundance across 90 samples (nine tissues from five old and five young mice) to explore effects of aging. Tissue-specific aging is presented here and we highlight the role of inflammation- and metabolism-related processes in white adipose tissue. We validated our approach through comparison with a global proteome survey across the tissues, work that we also provide as a general resource for the community.

### Keywords
Real-time instrument control, Tomahto, Isobaric labeling, Tissue-specific aging, Targeted pathway proteomics

### Affiliations
Harvard medical school
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Qing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P Gygi
Harvard medical school


