### Accession
PXD030724

### Title
Isotopic N,N-dimethyl leucine tags for absolute quantification of clusterin and  apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and one of the leading causes of death in the United States. In past decades, extensive efforts have been devoted to improving our understanding of AD pathogenesis and accelerating biomarker discovery for early diagnosis and clinical treatment of AD. Herein, this study aims to quantify clusterin (CLU) and apolipoprotein E (APOE) in blood samples from AD patients and evaluate these two proteins as potential biomarkers in AD diagnosis. In-house synthesized 5-plex isotopic N,N-dimethyl leucine (iDiLeu) tags were used to label target peptide standards at different concentrations to construct standard curves. Our study reveals that the levels of CLU and APOE exhibit clear disparities in male vs. female AD groups but not in male vs. female non-AD groups, while the levels of serum CLU and APOE do not show statistical differences in the AD groups and non-AD groups. Principal component analysis (PCA) with CLU and APOE showed some separation between the AD and non-AD participants. Significance: Dissecting CLU and APOE heterogeneity in AD pathogenesis may therefore facilitate delineating the pathological relevance for specific pathways between different genders, leading to personalized medicine in the future. Collectively, this study introduces a cost-effective absolute quantitative proteomics strategy for target protein quantitation and lays the foundation for future investigation of CLU and APOE as potential biomarkers for AD.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were collected from 10 patients with AD (5 men and 5 women), and 9 healthy individuals (5 men and 4 women). Ten µL of serum was diluted in 190 µL water and protein concentrations were measured by protein assay kit following the manufacturer’s protocols. Serum proteins were dissolved in 6 M urea, 50 mM tris buffer (contains 5 mM CaCl2, 20 mM NaCl, and 1 tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 8), reduced by dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 5 mM for 1 h. Fifteen mM of iodoacetamide was added for alkylation of cysteines by incubating for 30 min in dark, followed by addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol for quenching unreacted iodoacetamide. Then the protein mixture was digested with trypsin/LysC (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, United States) at a protein:enzyme ratio of 25:1 at 37 °C for 3 h. The sample was then diluted by 50 mM Tris buffer to a final urea concentration of 1 M, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 15 h. The digestion reaction was quenched by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% (pH 3), followed by desalting with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Then the digested peptides were dried down with a SpeedVac concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Then peptide digestion was aliquot at 50 µg in each tube and was dried in vacuo for further use. Stock solutions of synthetic human peptide (Biomatik, Ontario, Canada) ASSIIDELFQDR (unique peptide of CLU), were prepared at 1 mM. APOE protein standard was digested according to digestion procedure described above. iDiLeu reagents were in-house synthesized. In each peptide aliquot, 4 nmol of CLU peptide standard (about 4 µg) was combined with 400 pmol APOE protein digests, and the mixture was resuspended in 10 μL of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Each mixture was labeled by each iDiLeu tag (d0, d3, d6, d9, and d12) at a ratio of 10:1 (tags−peptide, by weight) or higher with excessive tags. A volume of 40 μL of activated iDiLeu tags was added to each aliquot to 80:20 organic−aqueous solution ratio and shake for 1.5 h at room temperature, respectively. Hydroxylamine (50%) was added to a final concentration of 0.25% to quench the reaction.  Unreacted reagents and by-products of iDiLeu labeling reaction were removed by SCX TopTips according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The eluate was dried in vacuo and desalted with Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tips  Serum protein digests were reconstituted in 10 μL of 0.5 M TEAB and labeled with d0 iDiLeu tag separately according to the peptide standards labeling procedure described above. The other four channels labeled peptide standards were spiked into each d0-labeled serum sample in a ratio of 1:5:25:100. The combined sample was cleaned up with SCX TopTips and desalted with Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tips. For correction factor calculation, four μg of each labeled peptide standard was cleaned up with SCX TopTips and desalted with Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tips.  All the labeled samples were then dried in vacuo and reconstituted in 50 µL. of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) against SwissProt human database (February 2020) with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide and protein level. The first search peptide tolerance for precursor and product ion were 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The maximum missed cleavages per peptide were set at 2. Fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) and d0 labeling of N-terminal of peptides and lysine residues (+141.1154 Da). Oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) was selected as variable modification. The intensity obtained from relative quantification in MaxQuant was further analyzed in Excel for advanced downstream analysis. For absolute quantification of CLU and APOE, protein identification was performed using the Peaks Studio Xpro software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). The data refinement was used to adjust precursor mass by default. All the raw files were searched with UniProt Homo sapiens reviewed database with trypsin as digestion enzyme. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass and 0.02 Da for product ions. The maximum missed cleavages per peptide were set as two, allowed to be cleaved at both ends of the peptides. Fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.0215 Da), iDiLeu labels (+141.1154 Da, +144.1313 Da, +147.1409 Da, +150.1631 Da, and +153.1644 Da for d0, d3, d6, d9 and d12 channel, respectively) of peptide N-termini and lysine residues, along with oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) chosen as variable modifications. Peptides with FDR < 1% were considered as unambiguous identifications. Peak areas generated by Genesis peak detection algorithm in Thermo Xcalibur 4.0 software were used for absolute quantification. The precursor ion integration tolerance was 0.015 Da. Retention time of extracted ion chromatogram of 5-plex iDiLeu-labeled peptides was required to be within 2 min. Isotopic interference correction factors were applied to each sample to correct the raw values. A two-sided Student’s t-test was used to evaluate the differences of the protein expression levels in the serum samples. A p-value of 0.05 or less is the cutoff for significance.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and one of the leading causes of death in the United States. In the past decades, extensive efforts have been devoted to biomarker discovery for early diagnosis and treatment of AD. Herein, this study aims to quantify clusterin (CLU) and apolipoprotein E (APOE) in blood samples from AD patients and evaluate these two proteins as potential biomarkers in AD diagnosis. In-house synthesized 5-plex isotopic N,N-dimethyl leucine (iDiLeu) tags were used to label target peptide standards at different concentrations to construct standard curves. Our study revealed that the levels of CLU and APOE exhibited clear differences in male vs. female AD groups but not in male vs. female non-AD groups. In contrast, the levels of serum CLU and APOE did not show statistically significant differences in the AD groups and non-AD groups. Principal component analysis (PCA) with CLU and APOE showed some separation between the AD and non-AD participants. Significance: Dissecting CLU and APOE heterogeneity in AD pathogenesis may therefore facilitate delineating the pathological relevance for sex-related pathways, leading to personalized medicine in the future. Collectively, this study introduces a cost-effective absolute quantitative proteomics strategy for target protein quantitation and lays the foundation for future investigation of CLU and APOE as potential biomarkers for AD. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: As blood-based biomarkers for AD diagnosis are cost-effective and introduce less invasiveness, discovery and validation of biomarkers in the blood samples of AD patients have become a hot topic in Alzheimer's and dementia research. Thus far, amyloid &#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;), total-tau and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) in blood show great accuracy and specificity in diagnosis of AD. However, the underlying mechanism of AD pathology remains to be elusive and complex. Besides these well studied proteins, many other proteins, such as clusterin (CLU) and apolipoprotein E (APOE) have also been found to be related to AD development. It has been implicated that these two proteins are involved in A&#x3b2; clearance and deposition. In this study, we measure the absolute concentrations of these two proteins in blood and shed some light on the potential roles of CLU and APOE in AD pathology. Dissecting CLU and APOE heterogeneity in AD pathogenesis may therefore facilitate delineating the pathological relevance for specific pathways between different genders, leading to personalized medicine in the future. Collectively, this study introduces a cost-effective absolute quantitative proteomics strategy for target protein quantitation and lays the foundation for future investigation of CLU and APOE as potential biomarkers for AD.

### Keywords
Protein quantitation, Alzheimer’s disease, Apolipoprotein e, Absolute quantification, Biomarker analysis, Serum, Clusterin, Isotopic labeling

### Affiliations
Univerisity of Wisconsin - Madison
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry              University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Yuan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry              University of Wisconsin-Madison


