### Accession
PXD001393

### Title
MMP-9 dependent extracellular protein changes in the left ventriclar infarcts at day 7 post myocardial infarction

### Description
Glycopeptides of the LVI tissues of WT and MMP-9 null mice at day-7 post-MI.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples and protein extraction. The LV infarct region was collected at 7 days post-MI and was homogenized sequentially in PBS with 1x protease inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) to remove the soluble proteins and then in Reagent 4 (16 L per mg LV wet weight; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) with 1x protease inhibitors for the insoluble proteins.   Trypsin digestion. Total protein from the insoluble fraction (1 mg) was denatured and reduced by 8 M urea and 12 mM TCEP, and were then alkylated with 16 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were diluted 5-fold prior to the addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w, enzyme:protein).  N-Linked glycopeptide capture. N-linked glycopeptides were isolated from the tryptic peptides using the solid phase extraction of glycopeptides (SPEG) method previously reported [1,2].  Mass spectrometry analysis. The peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm x 75 µm C18 column (5 µm particles with 100 angstrom pore size).  A nano UPLC at 300 nL/min with a 90 min linear acetonitrile gradient (from 5-35% B over 90 min; A = 0.2% formic acid in water, B = 0.2% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) was used.  A top 20 data dependent MS/MS with exclusion for 25 s was set. The samples were run with HCD fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 30 and an isolation width of 2 m/z.  A lock mass of the polysiloxane peak at 371.10123 was used to correct the mass in MS and MS/MS.  Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.  [1] Zhang, H., Li, X.J., Martin, D.B., and Aebersold, R. (2003). Identification and quantification of N-linked glycoproteins using hydrazide chemistry, stable isotope labeling and mass spectrometry. Nat Biotechnol 21, 660-666. [2] Tian, Y., Zhou, Y., Elliott, S., Aebersold, R., and Zhang, H. (2007). Solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides. Nature protocols 2, 334-339.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3; Thermo Fisher) against the mouse IPI database (version 3.87) containing 59,534 sequences. For this database search, the precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set at 15 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as the protease. The fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation (C), and other modifications were set as flexible modification as follows: deamidation (N) and oxidation (M).  Full-tryptic end and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. A decoy version of the IPI mouse database was used to estimate peptide and protein false discovery rate. The False Discovery Rate was set at 0.01 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myocardial infarction, Lv, Mmp-9, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
FDA
Department of Physiology and Biophysics University of Mississippi Medical Center

### Submitter
Yuan Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Merry Lindsey
Department of Physiology and Biophysics University of Mississippi Medical Center


