### Accession
PXD019768

### Title
Avaxia_InGelDigest_Pancreatin digest products of bovine Ig

### Description
Analysis of bovine immunoglobulins from serum or colostrum after treatment with simulated intestinal fluid containing pancreatin

### Sample Protocol
Selected time points from pancreatin degradation reactions were prepared for reducing SDS-PAGE analysis. The proteins in the gel slices were denatured, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were recovered from the gel slices by diffusion and analyzed by LC/MS/MS with a C-18 reversed-phase HPLC column and a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the bovine proteome (123449 entries) assuming strict trypsin digestion. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm

### Publication Abstract
Bovine colostral antibodies, purified from cow's milk produced immediately after calving, have enhanced resistance to degradation by intestinal proteases relative to antibodies from human or bovine serum, making them of particular interest as orally administered therapeutic agents. However, the basis of this resistance is not well defined. We evaluated the stability of AVX-470, a bovine colostral anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) polyclonal antibody used in early clinical studies for treatment of ulcerative colitis, using conditions that mimic the human small intestine. AVX-470 was degraded &#x223c;3 times more slowly than human IgG antibodies or infliximab (a monoclonal mouse-human chimeric IgG). Bovine IgG1 antibodies, the primary component of AVX-470, were slowly cleaved to F(ab')<sub>2</sub> fragments. In contrast, bovine IgG2 and human IgG1 antibodies were cleaved rapidly into Fab and smaller fragments, pointing to specific regions where additional stability might be gained. Infliximab was modified to incorporate the sequences from these regions, including the bovine IgG1 hinge region and a predicted disulfide bonding motif linking the upper hinge region, the CH1 domain, and the light chain. This infliximab-bovine IgG1 chimera (bovinized infliximab) retained the antigen binding and neutralization activity of the WT sequence but was degraded 9-fold more slowly than the unmodified infliximab. This remarkable increase in stability with as few as 18 amino acid substitutions suggests that this bovinization process is a means to enable oral delivery of proven therapeutic antibodies as well as novel antibodies to targets that have been previously inaccessible to therapies delivered by injection.

### Keywords
Bovine immunoglobulin serum colotrum

### Affiliations
Avaxia Biologics, Inc.
Avaxia Biologics

### Submitter
Randall Burton

### Lab Head
Dr Randall Edward Burton
Avaxia Biologics, Inc.


