### Accession
PXD044866

### Title
FAM210A is essential for cold-induced mitochondrial remodeling in brown adipocytes

### Description
Cold stimulation dynamically remodels mitochondria in brown adipose tissue (BAT) to facilitate non-shivering thermogenesis in mammals, but what regulates mitochondrial plasticity is poorly understood. Comparing mitochondrial proteomes in response to cold identify  FAM210A as a cold-inducible mitochondrial inner membrane protein. Adipocyte-specific constitutive knockout of Fam210a (Fam210aAKO) disrupts mitochondrial cristae structure and diminishes the thermogenic activity of BAT, rendering the Fam210aAKO mice lethal hyperthermia under acute cold exposure. Induced knockout of Fam210a in adult adipocytes (Fam210aiAKO) does not affect steady-state, non-thermogenic mitochondria under thermoneutrality, but impairs cold-induced mitochondrial remodeling, leading to progressive loss of cristae and reduction of mitochondrial density. Proteomics reveals an association between FAM210A and OPA1, whose cleavage governs cristae dynamics and mitochondrial remodeling. Mechanistically, FAM210A interacts with mitochondrial protease YME1L and modulates its activity toward OMA1 and OPA1 cleavage. These data establish FAM210A as a key regulator of mitochondrial cristae remodeling in BAT and shed light on the mechanism underlying mitochondrial plasticity in response to cold.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mitochondria proteomics:  Mitochondrial pellets frozen at -80 ℃ were lysed in PTS buffer (12 mM SLS/12 mM SDC in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and sonicated in 15 W for a total of 1 min with 10 s interval and 10s cooling on an ice bath. The mixture was cleared at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 ℃, and the supernatant was transferred into a fresh Eppendorf tube. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, with boiling the samples at 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were diluted with 5X trimethylammonium bicarbonate (50 mM). The proteins were digested with lys-C at a 1:100 by mass (enzyme: substrate) for 3 h at 37 °C and then further digested with proteomics grade trypsin to a final 1:100 (enzyme: substrate) ratio overnight. On the next day, samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with 50mg Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters). A portion of the eluted peptides was quantified with peptide BCA assay, and 2 µg of aliquot peptides were dried to completion in a vacuum concentrator, and samples were ready for Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS) analysis.  Liquid chromatography (LC)- mass spectrometry (MS) analysis:  Peptides were dissolved in 16 µl of 3% acetonitrile /0.3% formic acid, and 4 µl of each sample was injected into a linear ion trap orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, LTQ-Orbitrap Velos) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source were operated in the data-dependent mode for LC-MS analysis of peptides. The electrospray emitter tip was pulled using a laser puller (Sutter Instrument Peptides, Model P2000). Peptides were separated using a C18 capillary column (75 μm inner diameter, 45 cm length) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.2 μm bead size, 100Å pore size; Bischoff). The mobile phase buffers consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in MS-grade ultra-pure water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). Samples were analyzed using a 90 min gradient from 3% to 30% B, followed by an increase to 50% and 95% B, and then a return to 6% B at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode in which a full MS scan from m∕z 350–1,500 was followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. Ions with a charge state of +1 were excluded, and the mass exclusion time was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of proteomic raw files:  The raw files were searched against the Mus musculus database with no redundant entries (Uniprot FASTA file released November 2016) using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant 77 (version 1.6.10.43). Andromeda is a probabilistic search engine that uses the LFQ method to identify peptides and proteins with an FDR of less than 1%. MaxQuant generated a reverse decoy database based on the provided forward database, and proteins matching the reverse decoy database or the common laboratory contaminant database in MaxQuant were discarded. The MaxLFQ algorithm was enabled for label-free proteome quantitation, and this feature is a peptide intensity-based algorithm. The Match between runs feature was also enabled to match high-resolution MS1 features between runs, and the retention time window was set to 1.0 min. Peptide precursor mass tolerance for the main search was 6 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Searches were performed with complete tryptic digestion, and peptides were allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages. Search criteria included a static modification of cysteine residues of +57.0214 Da to account for alkylation and a variable modification of +15.9949 Da for potential oxidation of methionine residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown fat, Mitochondria, Fam210a, Lc-msms, Mouse, Cold, Brown adipocyte

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA Center for Cancer Research Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

### Submitter
Jiamin Qiu

### Lab Head
Dr Shihuan Kuang
Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA Center for Cancer Research Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA


