### Accession
PXD013003

### Title
Ubiquitin mediated intracellular trafficking is required for Jam-C function

### Description
Endothelial cells form a barrier between the components present in the blood and the underlying tissue. Essential to formation of this barrier are junctional complexes present between cells. These complexes are dynamic, tightly regulated and remodel during key physiological processes such as inflammation, angiogenesis and development to allow passage of molecules, cells and movement of endothelial cells. One such junctional protein, Jam-C, is involved in the pathology of a number of inflammatory disease states and its inhibition in vitro and in vivo results in aberrant forms of leukocyte migration, dysregulated angiogenesis and inhibition of cell migration. Intracellular trafficking has been shown to be a general means of regulating the function of junctional proteins but its role in Jam-C function is unclear. Using a combination of receptor mutagenesis, HRP and APEX-2 proximity labelling alongside light and electron microscopy, we here characterise the dynamics and route of Jam-C trafficking. Rather than trafficking with junctional proteins associated with the inflammatory process, Jam-C co-traffics with receptors associated with changes in permeability such as VE-Cadherin, NRP-1 and 2. We show that Jam-C becomes ubiquitylated by the E-3 ligase CBL and that this post translational modification controls the likelihood of its degradation in the lysosomes or its recycling back to the cell surface. Finally, we show that Jam-C trafficking is essential for some of the endothelial functions of Jam-C.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, Immunoprecipated (IP) protein complex beads were digested into peptides using trypsin and peptides were desalted using C18+carbon top tips (Glygen corparation, TT2MC18.96) and eluted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formaic acid.  Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate 250nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN) . The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 4.0) and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (release December 2015) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.5.0) with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into excel files for further normalisation and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Proteomics, Intracellular trafficking, Lc-ms/ms, Jam-c, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Cell Signalling & Proteomics Group, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pedro Cutillas
Cell Signalling & Proteomics Group, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK


