### Accession
PXD026711

### Title
Low kindlin-3 levels in osteoclasts of kindlin-3 hypomorphic mice result in osteopetrosis due to leaky sealing zones

### Description
Osteoclasts form special integrin-mediated adhesion structures called sealing zones that enable them to adhere to and resorb bone. Sealing zones consist mainly of densely packed podosomes tightly inter-connected by actin fibers. Their formation requires the presence of the hematopoietic integrin regulator kindlin-3. In the current study, we investigated osteoclasts and their adhesion structures in kindlin-3 hypomorphic mice expressing only 5-10% of kindlin-3. Low kindlin-3 expression reduces integrin activity, results in impaired osteoclast adhesion and signaling, and delays cell spreading. Despite these defects, in vitro generated kindlin-3-hypomorphic osteoclasts arrange their podosomes into adhesion patches and belts, which show abnormal podosome and actin organization. Remarkably, kindlin-3-hypomorphic osteoclasts form sealing zones when cultured on calcified matrix in vitro and on bone surface in vivo. However, functional assays as well as immunohistochemical staining and electron micrographs of bone sections showed that they fail to properly seal the resorption lacunae, which is required for secreted proteases to be able to digest bone matrix. This results in mild osteopetrosis. Our study reveals a new, hitherto understudied function of kindlin-3 as an essential organizer of integrin-mediated adhesion structures, such as sealing zones.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion for MS Samples for MS analysis were prepared by in-solution digestion. Tissues were lysed in 4% SDS in PBS, heated to 95 °C and sonicated. 20 µg of protein were precipitated overnight in four volumes (v:v) of ice-cold acetone and protein pellets were extracted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 min and dissolved in Urea buffer (6 M Urea,  2 M Thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0). Urea-containing  samples were reduced by applying DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM for 1 h at RT, alkylated with a final concentration of 40 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at RT, digested w  ith 1 µL LysC for 2-3 h at RT, diluted with 50 mM ABC to a Urea concentration of 2 M, incubated with 1 µL 0.5 mg/mL trypsin overnight at RT, acidified to 1% FA and purified using Stop and Go extraction tips (StageTips) [1].  MS-based proteome analysis Proteome samples were analyzed using a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on a Q-Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ (Thermo Fisher). Chromatographic peptide separation was achieved on PoroShell 120 packed 50 cm analytical columns coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system and a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B  (80% ACN/0.1% FA). Samples derived from in-solution digestion were measured over a 90 min gradient, raising the content of buffer B from 4 to 23% over 65 min, from 23 to 55% over 13 min and from 55 to 95% over 3 min. The column was washed with 95% buffer B for 9 min. Full MS spectra  (350–1,650 m/z) were recorded at a resolution (R) of 60,000, maximum injection time (max. IT) of  20 ms and AGC target of 3e6. The 22 most abundant ion peptides in each full MS scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at nominal collisional energy (NCE) of 28. MS2 spectra were recorded at  R = 15,000, a maximum IT of 22 ms, and an AGC target of 1e5.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and analysis The generated MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant analysis software and the implemented Andromeda software (1.5.3.8) [2, 3]. Peptides and proteins were identified using the mouse UniProt database with common contaminants. All parameters in MaxQuant were set to the default values. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as a fixed modification. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantify the measured peptides and the “match between runs” option was enabled to quantify peptides with a missing MS2 spectrum. iBAQ quantification was selected. Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (1.5.5.3) software. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were excluded, and values were log2 transformed. iBAQ values of selected proteins were normalized to the median iBAQ values of kindlin-3.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoclasts form special integrin-mediated adhesion structures called sealing zones that enable them to adhere to and resorb bone. Sealing zones consist of densely packed podosomes tightly interconnected by actin fibers. Their formation requires the presence of the hematopoietic integrin regulator kindlin-3 (also known as Fermt3). In this study, we investigated osteoclasts and their adhesion structures in kindlin-3 hypomorphic mice expressing only 5-10% of the kindlin-3 level of wild-type mice. Low kindlin-3 expression reduces integrin activity, results in impaired osteoclast adhesion and signaling, and delays cell spreading. Despite these defects, in vitro-generated kindlin-3-hypomorphic osteoclast-like cells arrange their podosomes into adhesion patches and belts, but their podosome and actin organization is abnormal. Remarkably, kindlin-3-hypomorphic osteoclasts form sealing zones when cultured on calcified matrix in vitro and on bone surface in vivo. However, functional assays, immunohistochemical staining and electron micrographs of bone sections showed that they fail to seal the resorption lacunae properly, which is required for secreted proteinases to digest bone matrix. This results in mild osteopetrosis. Our study reveals a new, hitherto understudied function of kindlin-3 as an essential organizer of integrin-mediated adhesion structures, such as sealing zones.

### Keywords
Bone resorption, Integrin, Podosome, Sealing zone, Osteoclast, Kindlin-3

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne
Institute of Experimental Hematology, School of Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich, D-81675, Germany; Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, D-82152 Martinsried

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Moser
Institute of Experimental Hematology, School of Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich, D-81675, Germany; Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, D-82152 Martinsried


