### Accession
PXD026893

### Title
p53 forms redox-dependent protein-protein interactions through cysteine 277

### Description
Reversible cysteine oxidation plays an essential role in redox signaling by reversibly altering protein structure and function. Cysteine oxidation may lead to intra- and intermolecular disulfide formation, and the latter can drastically stabilize protein-protein interactions in a more oxidizing milieu. The activity of the tumor suppressor p53 is regulated at multiple layers, including various post-translational modification (PTM) and protein-protein interactions. In the past decades, p53 has been shown to be a redox sensitive protein, and undergoes reversible cysteine oxidation both in vitro and in vivo. It is not clear however, whether p53 also forms intermolecular disulfides with interacting proteins and whether these redox-dependent interactions contribute to the regulation of p53. In the present study, by combining (co-)immunoprecipitation, quantitative Mass spectrometry and Western blot we found that p53 forms disulfide-dependent interactions with several proteins under oxidizing conditions. p53-Cys277 is required for most of the disulfide-dependent interactions, including those with 14-3-3 and 53BP1. Taken together, our findings uncovered a new form of p53 cysteine oxidation, which strengthened the biochemical features of p53 as a redox sensitive protein.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were scraped in NEM buffer and all replicates were collected in same 15 ml tube followed by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min. Cell pellets were lysed in 8 ml of lysis buffer and 1% of supernatant was taken as input. 80 µL of FlagM2 agarose beads were taken for immunoprecipitation. After final cleaning for the beads, 1% beads solution was taken for Western blotting detection pre-MS and the rest was used for MS experiment. Proteins on beads were incubated with reduction and alkylation buffer (50 mM Acetonitrile, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA and 8M urea) at room temperature for 30 min, and then digested with 250 ng of trypsin overnight at 37 °C on a shaker. Peptides were then loaded on C18 stagetips and washed twice with 0.1% formic acid solution. Peptides were separated on a 30-cm pico-tip column (75 µm ID, New Objective) and were packed in-house with 3 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (Dr. Maisch) using a 140-min gradient (7–80%ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (LC 120, Waltham, MA, USA, Thermo Scientific), and electro-sprayed directly into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (LC 120, Waltham, MA, USA, Thermo Scientific) and ran in data-dependent mode with the resolution of the full scan set at 240000, after which the top N peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy)  using the top speed option with a cycle time of 1 second. with a target intensity of 1E4.

### Data Protocol
The raw Mass spectrometry files were processed using Maxquant software (version 1.6.3.4). The human protein database of UniProt was searched with both proteins and peptides (false discovery rate set to 1%) with Oxidation of methionine set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P53 redox-dependent protein-protein interactions cysteine

### Affiliations
Department Molecular Cancer Research , Center for Molecular Medicine, Universitair Medisch Centrum Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Dansen
Department Molecular Cancer Research , Center for Molecular Medicine, Universitair Medisch Centrum Utrecht, The Netherlands


