### Accession
PXD033172

### Title
Segmental Bronchial Allergen Challenge Elicits Distinct Metabolic Phenotypes in Allergic Asthma

### Description
Asthma is a complex syndrome associated with episodic decompensations provoked by aeroaller-gen exposures. The underlying pathophysiological states driving exacerbations are latent in the resting state and do not adequately inform biomarker-driven therapy. A better understanding of the pathophysiological pathways driving allergic exacerbations is needed. We hypothesized that disease-associated pathways could be identified in humans by unbiased metabolomics of bron-choalveolar fluid (BALF) during the peak inflammatory response provoked by a bronchial aller-gen challenge. We analyzed BALF metabolites in samples from 12 volunteers who underwent segmental bronchial antigen provocation (SBP-Ag). Metabolites were quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) followed by pathway analysis and cor-relation with airway inflammation. SBP-Ag induced statistically significant changes in 549 fea-tures that mapped to 72 uniquely identified metabolites. From these features, two distinct induci-ble metabolic phenotypes were identified by the principal component analysis, partitioning around medoids (PAM) and k-means clustering. Ten index metabolites were identified that in-formed the presence of asthma-relevant pathways, including unsaturated fatty acid produc-tion/metabolism, mitochondrial beta oxidation of unsaturated fatty acid, and bile acid metabolism. Pathways were validated using proteomics in eosinophils. A segmental bronchial allergen chal-lenge induces distinct metabolic responses in humans, providing insight into pathogenic and pro-tective endotypes in allergic asthma.

### Sample Protocol
LC–MS/MS experiments were performed using a Bruker Impact II quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) cou-pled to a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) using the workflow in Figure 7. The metabolites were loaded on a Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 trap column (100 Å, 5 µm, 300 µm × 50 mm) for online desalt-ing. A Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 300 µm × 100 mm) was used for reversed-phase separation of the metabolites. The LC–MS/MS data were ac-quired in both positive and negative ion modes. For positive ion modes, mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid in H2O and 0.1% formic acid in ACN, respectively. For negative ion modes, mobile phases A and B were 0.1% (m/v) ammonium bicarbonate in H2O and 0.1% (m/v) ammonium bicarbonate in ACN, respectively. The metabolites were trapped on the trap column for 5 min at 8 µL/min flow rate, and then were sepa-rated on the reversed-phase column at 4 µL/min flow rate using a 30 min stepwise gradient (99% A-0 min, 99% A-3 min, 1% A-10 min, 1% A-24 min, 99% A-24.2 min, 99% A-30 min). The column temperature was 40 °C. The metabolites eluted from the column were infused into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ion (ESI) source. The end plate offset was 500 V, and the capillary voltage was 4500 V for the positive ion mode, and 3500 V for the negative ion mode. Nebulizer gas pressure was set to 0.5 Bar. Dry gas flow rate was 4.0 L/min, and dry gas temperature was 220 °C. MS/MS data were acquired in a data-dependent acquisition, dynamically choosing the top 10 precursor ions from the surveyor scan (MS) for collision-induced dissociation (CID). The same precursor ion was excluded after 2 spectra, and released after 0.3 min.

### Data Protocol
Bucket (mass) lists in the positive and negative modes were generated using the T-ReX 3D workflow in MetaboScape 4.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The mzDelta was set to 0.50 mDa. The maximum charge state was set to 3, and the intensi-ty threshold was set to 0. The minimum number of features for the result was set to 5. The bucket lists in the positive and negative modes were merged into one bucket list with 1.0 ppm m/z tolerance. Metabolites were identified by searching the LC–MS/MS data against the databases downloaded from MassBank of North America (MoNA), including NoNA-export-LipidBlast, NoNA-export-Experimental_Spectra, NoNA-export-HMDB, NoNA-export-MassBank, NoNA-export-LC–MS-MS_Spectra databases. Pathway analysis was performed using KEGG and SMPDB libraries.

### Publication Abstract
Asthma is a complex syndrome associated with episodic decompensations provoked by aeroallergen exposures. The underlying pathophysiological states driving exacerbations are latent in the resting state and do not adequately inform biomarker-driven therapy. A better understanding of the pathophysiological pathways driving allergic exacerbations is needed. We hypothesized that disease-associated pathways could be identified in humans by unbiased metabolomics of bronchoalveolar fluid (BALF) during the peak inflammatory response provoked by a bronchial allergen challenge. We analyzed BALF metabolites in samples from 12 volunteers who underwent segmental bronchial antigen provocation (SBP-Ag). Metabolites were quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) followed by pathway analysis and correlation with airway inflammation. SBP-Ag induced statistically significant changes in 549 features that mapped to 72 uniquely identified metabolites. From these features, two distinct inducible metabolic phenotypes were identified by the principal component analysis, partitioning around medoids (PAM) and k-means clustering. Ten index metabolites were identified that informed the presence of asthma-relevant pathways, including unsaturated fatty acid production/metabolism, mitochondrial beta oxidation of unsaturated fatty acid, and bile acid metabolism. Pathways were validated using proteomics in eosinophils. A segmental bronchial allergen challenge induces distinct metabolic responses in humans, providing insight into pathogenic and protective endotypes in allergic asthma.

### Keywords
Allergic asthma; saturated fatty acid synthesis; segmental bronchial antigen provocation; metabolomics; phenotype

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR), University of Wisconsin-Madison,  Madison, WI 53705, USA
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Yanlong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Allan R. Brasier
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR), University of Wisconsin-Madison,  Madison, WI 53705, USA


