### Accession
PXD023242

### Title
Ubiquitin-dependent transfer of PAF1c from MYC onto RNA Polymerase controls double-strand break repair at active promoters

### Description
MYC family proteins are oncogenic transcription factors that can globally affect the function of RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII). The ability of MYC proteins to promote transcription elongation depends on their ubiquitination, but the underlying mechanism and its biological relevance are unknown. Here we show that MYC and the Polymerase II associated factor, PAF1c, interact directly and their function is mutually dependent, since the specific binding of MYC to active promoters depends on PAF1c and, conversely, PAF1c is required for MYC-dependent pause release. Upon binding, PAF1c is rapidly transferred from MYC onto RNAPII and this transfer is driven by the HUWE1 ubiquitin ligase. Both MYC and HUWE1 globally control histone H2B ubiquitylation, which promotes transcriptional elongation and alters chromatin structure for double-strand break repair. Consistently, MYC suppresses the accumulation of double-strand breaks at promoters in response to topoisomerase II inhibition. While depletion of PAF1c has only minor effects on MYC-dependent gene expression, MYC induces rampant transcription-dependent DNA damage in PAF1c-depleted cells. We propose that the HUWE1-dependent transfer of PAF1c from MYC onto RNAPII is critical for absorbing the topological stress accompanied with deregulated and oncogenic transcription.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS SILAC labeled cells were either mock-treated, treated with HUWE1 targeting siRNA or HUWE1 inhibitor. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Modified peptide enrichment was done using di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology). Peptides were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (Michalski et al., 2011; Kelstrup et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
(Michalski et al., 2011; Kelstrup et al., 2012). MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) was used to analyze the raw data files (Cox and Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a human protein database obtained from UniProtKB released in May 2016 using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Experimental details were described previou sly (Heidelberger et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
The MYC oncoprotein globally affects the function of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). The ability of MYC to promote transcription elongation depends on its ubiquitylation. Here, we show that MYC and PAF1c (polymerase II-associated factor 1 complex) interact directly and mutually enhance each other's association with active promoters. PAF1c is rapidly transferred from MYC onto RNAPII. This transfer is driven by the HUWE1 ubiquitin ligase and is required for MYC-dependent transcription elongation. MYC and HUWE1 promote histone H2B ubiquitylation, which alters chromatin structure both for transcription elongation and double-strand break repair. Consistently, MYC suppresses double-strand break accumulation in active genes in a strictly PAF1c-dependent manner. Depletion of PAF1c causes transcription-dependent accumulation of double-strand breaks, despite widespread repair-associated DNA synthesis. Our data show that the transfer of PAF1c from MYC onto RNAPII efficiently couples transcription elongation with double-strand break repair to maintain the genomic integrity of MYC-driven tumor cells.

### Keywords
Rnapii, Paf1c, Myc, Dna repair, Huwe1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


