### Accession
PXD032300

### Title
A high fat diet modifies brain neurotransmitter profile and hippocampal proteome and morphology in an IUGR pig model

### Description
Intrauterine Growth Restriction (IUGR) is a pathological condition that hinders the correct growth of the foetus during pregnancy due to oxygen or nutrient deficiency. Consequently, the foetus adapts its metabolism and physiology to survive in such scarce environment. The major adaptation is the so called “brain sparing”; this effect gives priority to brain development to ensure the individual survival. Nevertheless, this does not warrant the normal development of the brain and the risk exists of neurological and cognitive deficits at short or long term. In turn, this adaptation leads to other systemic alterations that affect the energetic metabolism, thus inducing the emergence of a fairly characterized phenotype called “thrifty phenotype”. This phenotype is responsible for the metabolic alterations that last up until adulthood, which increase the incidence of some diseases like diabetes and metabolic syndrome. On the other hand, diets rich in fat are known to exert pernicious effects Using a pig model of IUGR, animals are classified as normal birth weight (NBW) or low birth weight (LBW). We have studied the effect of a long-term high fat diet (HFD) on the neurological alterations regarding the neurotransmitter profile in several brain areas, the morphology of the hippocampus and the proteome of this same brain area. Our hypothesis is that those animals that were affected by IUGR during their gestation, and therefore were born LBW, will present a different susceptibility to a HFD than NBW animals when they become adults. Our results indicate that HFD had a significant effect on the neurotransmitter profile of the hippocampus, amygdala, hypothalamus, striatum and prefrontal cortex. The most affected neurotransmitter was serotonin (5-HT), thus affecting the indolamine pathway. On the other hand, HFD does not provoke relevant changes in the morphology of the hippocampus. Finally, the proteomic analysis revealed that, in some instances, NBW and LBW animals respond to HFD in different ways. In particular, NBW animals present changes in the mitochondrial respiratory chain and oxidative phosphorylation, and in the extracellular matrix and its interaction with the cell. LBW animals present differences in RNA splicing, anterograde and retrograde transport and the mTOR pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal samples were frozen in OCT medium (Aname, Madrid, Spain) using molds, an isopentane bath (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), and dry ice, controlling the freezing temperature between −40 °C and −60 °C. The OCT blocks were cut with a cryostat (SME Cryotome Thermo Electron Corporation, Thermo Scientific, Braunschweig, Germany) into 40 μm thick sections in a longitudinal orientation, collecting them in flotation with an antifreeze solution pH 7.4 (40 % ethylene glycol, 30 % glycerol, and 30 % phosphate buffer 0.1 M pH 7.4). Protein extracts were prepared in 400 µL of 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% NP-40. Protein quantification was performed using PierceTM 660 nm Protein Assay (#22662) and Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent (#22663). Trypsin digestion was performed following the FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). After digestion, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid solution, followed by desalting and clean-up with PolyL C18. 70 μg of protein for each sample were dried, reconstituted in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate) and labelled with TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific) in three reactions, accounting for all individual samples plus three pools as internal controls. After labelling, samples were combined, desalted and cleaned with PolyLC C18 and PolySCXn and resuspended in 1% formic acid in 3% acetonitrile prior to MS analysis. LC-MS coupling was performed with the Advion Triversa Nanomate (Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY, USA) as the nanoESI source performing nanoelectrospray through chip technology. Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a NanoEase MZ HSS T3 column (75 µm × 250 mm, 1.8 µm, 100Å, Waters). Chromatographic gradients started at 99 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in H2O) and 1 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min and gradually increased to 35 % buffer B in 270 min and then to 50 % buffer B in 5 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 15 % buffer A and 85 % buffer B. The Nanomate was attached to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer and operated at a spray voltage of 1.7 kV and a delivery pressure of 0.5 psi in positive mode and source temperature at 275 °C. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1600 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolution setting and automatic gain control [AGC] of 2 x 105). The following MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted with a top speed approach. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35 %, 0.25 activation Q, an AGC target of 1 x 104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and turbo ion scan rate. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. For the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, multiple fragment ions from the previous MS2 scan (SPS ions) were coselected and fragmented by HCD using a 65 % collision energy and a precursor isolation window of 2 Da. Reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000, an AGC of 1 x 105 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT search engine and UniProt_PIG_2021_02 and contaminants. Search was run against targeted and decoy database to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethyl in cysteine and TMT 6plex peptide N-terminus as static modification and TMT 6plex in K, methionine oxidation and acetylation in protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm for MS1, 0.6 for the MS2 and 20 ppm for the MS3. Peptides with a q-value lower than 0.1 were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level. TMT reporter ions intensities were used for protein quantification. Unique peptides (peptides that are not shared between different protein groups) were considered for further quantitative and statistical analysis. Within each TMT experiment, peptide quantitation was normalized by summing the abundance values for each channel over all peptides identified within an experiment. The channel with the highest total abundance was taken as a reference and all abundance values corrected in all other channels by a constant factor per channel, so that at the end the total abundance is the same for all channels. Protein quantitation was done by summing all peptide normalized intensities for a given protein.

### Publication Abstract
Intrauterine Growth Restriction (IUGR) hinders the correct growth of the fetus during pregnancy due to the lack of oxygen or nutrients. The developing fetus gives priority to brain development ("brain sparing"), but the risk exists of neurological and cognitive deficits at short or long term. On the other hand, diets rich in fat exert pernicious effects on brain function. Using a pig model of spontaneous IUGR, we have studied the effect on the adult of a long-term high-fat diet (HFD) on the neurotransmitter profile in several brain areas, and the morphology and the proteome of the hippocampus. Our hypothesis was that animals affected by IUGR (born with low birth weight) would present a different susceptibility to an HFD when they become adults, compared with normal birth-weight animals. Our results indicate that HFD affected the serotoninergic pathway, but it did not provoke relevant changes in the morphology of the hippocampus. Finally, the proteomic analysis revealed that, in some instances, NBW and LBW individuals respond to HFD in different ways. In particular, NBW animals presented changes in oxidative phosphorylation and the extracellular matrix, whereas LBW animals presented differences in RNA splicing, anterograde and retrograde transport and the mTOR pathway.

### Keywords
Intrauterine growth restriction, Brain, Neurotransmitters, Metabolism, Hippocampus, High fat diet, Pig

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Bassols
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona


