### Accession
PXD031379

### Title
Targeted proteoform mapping uncovers specific Neurexin-3 variants required for dendritic inhibition

### Description
Diversification of cell adhesion molecules by alternative splicing is proposed to underlie molecular codes for neuronal wiring. Transcriptomic approaches mapped detailed cell type-specific mRNA splicing programs. However, it has been hard to probe synapse-specific localization and function of the resulting protein splice isoforms, or “proteoforms”, in vivo. We here apply a proteoform-centric workflow in mice to test synapse-specific functions of splice isoforms of the synaptic adhesion molecule Neurexin-3 (NRXN3). We uncover a major proteoform, NRXN3 AS5, that is highly expressed in GABAergic interneurons and dendrite-targeting GABAergic terminals. NRXN3 AS5 abundance significantly diverges from the distribution of the Nrxn3 mRNA and is gated by translation-repressive elements. Nrxn3 AS5 isoform deletion results in selective impairment of dendrite-targeting interneuron synapses in the dentate gyrus without affecting somatic inhibition or glutamatergic perforant-path synapses. This work establishes cell- and synapse-specific functions of a specific neurexin proteoform and highlights the importance of alternative splicing regulation for synapse specification.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Eluted immuno-purified protein samples were mixed with one volume of 2x MS-lysis buffer (200mM Triethyl-ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB / Sigma), 10% SDS, 20 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP / Sigma)) and incubated for 10 min at 95°C. Samples were cooled down to room temperature incubated for 30 mins with 20mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Subsequently, samples were acidified by addition of phosphoric acid (1.2% final concentration), mixed 1:6 with S-trap buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB), loaded on S-trap micro columns (Protifi, NY, US), and washed 3 x with S-trap buffer. 20 µlof trypsin solution (2.5µl trypsin (0.4µg/µl Promega) in 50 mM TEAB)) was added on the columns and samples incubated 47°C for 1h. Peptides were eluted from the columns in 3 steps: 1x with 40 µL 50 mM TEAB, 1x with 40 µL 0.2% formic acid in H2O and 1x with 40 µL 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried, re-suspended in 20 µL LC/MS-buffer (0.1% formic acid in water) and the peptide concentration determined using a SpectroStar nano Spectrophotometer (BMG Labtech, Germany). For targeted proteomics, to each peptide sample an aliquot of a heavy reference peptide mix containing chemically synthesized proteotypic peptides (Spike-Tides, JPT, Berlin, Germany) was spiked into each sample at a concentration of 2 fmol/ug of total peptide mass of heavy reference peptides per sample.   For targeted proteomics from brain tissue, dissected tissue was lysed and alkylated in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH8.5, 15mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP) by homogenization with a 21G needle followed by ultra-sonication (10 cycles, Bioruptor, Diagnode). Samples were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further use. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.   Shotgun LC-MS analysis of Neurexin immunoprecipitates. 1 ug of peptides were subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. A linear gradient ranging from 5% buffer B to 45% buffer B over 60 minutes was used for peptide separation. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a total cycle time of approximately 1 s. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 25 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, maximum accumulation time of 50 ms and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions, ions with charge state ≥ 6 and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a mus musculus database (SwissProt, www.uniprot.org, release date 26/09/2018) including all splice variants of interest plus commonly observed contaminants (in total 34,770 sequences) using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the dataset. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2. (Ahrne et al., 2016) (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. No global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs was performed for the AP-MS data to consider the low peptide amounts present in control samples. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and t-Tests, MS-intensity signals were transformed from the linear to the log-scale. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html). The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Targeted ms, Neurexin-3

### Affiliations
University of Basel, Biozentrum, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
University of Basel, Biozentrum, Switzerland


