### Accession
PXD006234

### Title
Hydrogen exchange soybean lipoxygenase

### Description
Defining specific pathways for efficient heat transfer from protein-solvent interfaces to their active sites represents one of the compelling and timely challenges in our quest for a physical description of the origins of enzyme catalysis. Enzymatic hydrogen tunneling reactions constitute excellent systems in which to validate experimental approaches to this important question, given the inherent temperature independence of quantum mechanical wave function overlap. Herein, we present the application of hydrogen deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry toward the spatial resolution of protein motions that can be related to the chemical reaction within an enzyme active site. Employing the proton-coupled electron transfer reaction of soybean lipoxygenase as proof of principle, we first corroborate the impact of active site mutation on increased local flexibility and second, uncover a solvent-exposed loop, 15-34 Å from the reactive ferric center whose temperature-dependent motions are demonstrated to mirror the enthalpic barrier for catalytic C-H bond cleavage. A network that connects this surface loop to the active site is structurally identified and supported by changes in kinetic parameters that result from site-specific mutations.

### Sample Protocol
Purified aliquots of wild-type and variant SLO were thawed and diluted to 100 µM. Protein aliquots from this stock sample were diluted 10-fold in D2O buffer [10 mM HEPES pD 7.4; corrected pD = pHread + 0.4 to an effective pL of 8.0 (confirmed with pH electrode)]. Samples were incubated randomly at a specified temperature (temperatures studied: 10, 20, 25, 30, and 40˚C; bath stability ± 0.1˚C), using a NESLAB RTE-111 water bath, for 14 time points (0, 10, 30, 45, 60, 180, 600, 1200, 1800, 2700, 3600, 7200, 10800, 14400 s) for each temperature and mutation. For each given temperature and mutant, the time points (samples) were collected over the course of three to four days and randomized to reduce systematic error. Each sample (from a unique time point) for a given temperature and SLO variant was prepared and processed once. Upon completion of the designated incubation time, all samples were then treated identically; the samples were rapidly cooled (-20°C bath) and acid quenched (to pH 2.4, confirmed with pH electrode, with 0.32 M citric acid stock solution at 0°C). Procedures from this point were conducted near 4°C. Prior to pepsin digestion, guanidine HCl (in citric acid, pH 2.4) was mixed with the samples to a final concentration of ca. 0.5 M.  SLO samples were digested with pre-washed immobilized pepsin for 2.5 min. The peptide fragments were filtered from the immobilized pepsin using spin cups (cellulose acetate) and by centrifugation at 6,000 x g for 10 seconds at 4°C. Samples were flash frozen immediately in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C until data collection. .  To identify peptide fragments of SLO-1 resulting from pepsin digestion, samples of pepsin-digested SLO-1 were analyzed using a Thermo Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatograph (LC) that was connected in-line with an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  The LC was equipped with a C18 analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, 150 mm length × 0.075 mm inner diameter, 3 µm particles, Thermo).  Solvent A was 99.9% water/0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v).  The elution program consisted of isocratic flow at 2% B for 4 min, a linear gradient to 30% B over 38 min, isocratic flow at 95% B for 6 min, and isocratic flow at 2% B for 12 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The column exit was connected to the ESI source of the mass spectrometer using polyimide-coated, fused-silica tubing (20 µm inner diameter × 280 µm outer diameter, Thermo).  Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode over the range m/z = 350 to 1800 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer, in profile format, with a mass resolution setting of 60,000 (at m/z = 400, measured at full width at half-maximum peak height). Deuterated, pepsin-digested samples of SLO from hydrogen/deuterium exchange experiments were analyzed using an Agilent 1200 LC (Santa Clara, CA) that was connected in-line with the LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo).  The LC was equipped with a reversed-phase analytical column (Viva C8, 30 mm length × 1.0 mm inner diameter, 5 µm particles, Restek, Bellefonte, PA) and guard pre-column (C8, Restek).  Solvent A was 99.9% water/0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v).  Each sample was thawed immediately prior to injection onto the column.  The elution program consisted of a linear gradient from 5% to 10% B over 1 min, a linear gradient to 40% B over 5 min, a linear gradient to 100% B over 4 min, isocratic conditions at 100% B for 3 min, a linear gradient to 5% B over 0.5 min, and isocratic conditions at 5% B for 5.5 min, at a flow rate of 300 µL/min.  The column compartment was maintained at 4 °C and lined with towels to absorb atmospheric moisture condensation.  The column exit was connected to the ESI source of the mass spectrometer using PEEK tubing (0.005” inner diameter × 1/16” outer diameter, Agilent).  Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode over the range m/z = 350 to 1800 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer, in profile format, with a mass resolution setting of 100,000 (at m/z = 400).  Data acquisition was controlled using Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
In the data-dependent mode, the eight most intense ions exceeding an intensity threshold of 30,000 counts were selected from each full-scan mass spectrum for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis using collision-induced dissociation (CID).  Real-time dynamic exclusion was enabled to preclude re-selection of previously analyzed precursor ions.  Data acquisition was controlled using Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo).  Raw data were searched against the amino acid sequence of the full-length protein using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3, SEQUEST, Thermo) to identify peptides from MS/MS spectra. Mass spectral data acquired for HDX measurements were analyzed using the software, HDX WorkBench.

### Publication Abstract
Defining specific pathways for efficient heat transfer from protein-solvent interfaces to their active sites represents one of the compelling and timely challenges in our quest for a physical description of the origins of enzyme catalysis. Enzymatic hydrogen tunneling reactions constitute excellent systems in which to validate experimental approaches to this important question, given the inherent temperature independence of quantum mechanical wave function overlap. Herein, we present the application of hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry toward the spatial resolution of protein motions that can be related to an enzyme's catalytic parameters. Employing the proton-coupled electron transfer reaction of soybean lipoxygenase as proof of principle, we first corroborate the impact of active site mutations on increased local flexibility and, second, uncover a solvent-exposed loop, 15-34 &#xc5; from the reactive ferric center whose temperature-dependent motions are demonstrated to mirror the enthalpic barrier for catalytic C-H bond cleavage. A network that connects this surface loop to the active site is structurally identified and supported by changes in kinetic parameters that result from site-specific mutations.

### Keywords
Soybean lipoxygenase, Hdxms

### Affiliations
University of California, Berkeley

### Submitter
Adam Offenbacher

### Lab Head
Dr Judith P. Klinman
University of California, Berkeley


