### Accession
PXD011936

### Title
Integrative analysis of phenotype and testicular quantitative proteome of CKLF-like MARVEL transmembrane domain-containing protein 4 (CMTM4) deficiency mouse reveal its association with male fertility

### Description
iTRAQ quantitative proteome of wild and CMTM4 knockout mouse testis tissue.Integrative analysis of phenotype and testicular quantitative proteome of CKLF-like MARVEL transmembrane domain-containing protein 4 (CMTM4) deficiency mouse reveal its association with male fertility.

### Sample Protocol
The testes protein samples from the wild or Cmtm4 knockout mice were pooled, respectively. 200 μ g pooled testes from the wild or Cmtm4 knockout mice were separated into 4 tubes (100 μ g each) and the pH was adjusted to 8.5 by adding 25 μ l of triethylamoniumbicarbonat (TEAB) buffer. Then samples were treated with 20 m M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 60 min and 50 mM iodoacetamide in dark for 30 min. After digestion with 3μg of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, France) at 37 °C overnight, the peptides were labeled with iTRAQ tags and dried. The first dimension RP separation by microLC was performed by using a Durashell RP column. Totally, 10 fractions were generated for further LC-MS/MS analysis, for which a nanoflow HPLC instrument (EASY-nLC 1000 system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an on-line Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. The chromatography columns were packed in-house with Ultimate XB-C18 3μm resin (Welch Materials, Shanghai, China). The peptide mixtures were loaded onto the C18 reversed phase column (10-cm length, 75μm inner diameter) with buffer A (99.5% water and 0.5% formic acid) and separated with a 75-min linear gradient of 5–100% buffer B (99.5% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Including the loading and washing steps, the total time for an LC-MS/MS run was 90 min. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. Peptides were analyzed by data-dependent MS/MS acquisition with dynamic exclusion duration of 18 s. In MS1, the resolution was 70,000, the automatic gain control (AGC) target was 3e6, and the maximum injection time was 20 ms. In MS2, the resolution was 17,500, the automatic gain control target was 1e6, and the maximum injection time was 60 ms. The scan range was 300–1400 m/z, and the top 75 intensive precursor ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using the proteomic workflow of Proteome Discoverer 1.3. The fragmentation spectra were searched against the UniProtreviewed mouse database (2017_12, 16950 sequences) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2.06) with the precursor and fragment mass tolerances set to 15 ppm and 20 milli-mass units (mmu), respectively. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation (Cysteine), and the variable modifications were oxidation (Methionine), acetylation (protein N terminus), and iTRAQ labeling (Tyrosine and Lysine, N-terminal residue). Peptide ions were filtered using the cutoff scores of Percolator based on p＜0.01. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide identifications. An additional filter was applied with the removal of spectrum matches with scores lower than 10. The iTRAQ quantization values were automatically calculated on the basis of the intensity of the iTRAQ reporter ions in the dissociation scans with higher collision energy using Proteome Discoverer. All protein iTRAQ ratios were exported to an Excel file, the Gaussian distribution of ratios was recalculated manually, and all ratios were transformed to base 10 logarithm values. A confidence interval of  99% (0.7539-1.2385) was used to determine the cutoff values for statistically significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
The chemokine-like factor (CKLF)-like MARVEL transmembrane domain-containing family (CMTM) is a gene family that has been implicated in male reproduction. CMTM4 is an evolutionarily conserved member that is highly expressed in the testis. However, its function in male fertility remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that CMTM4 is associated with spermatogenesis and sperm quality. Using Western blotting and immunohistochemical analyses, we found CMTM4 expression to be decreased in poor-quality human spermatozoa, old human testes, and testicular biopsies with nonobstructive azoospermia. Using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, we knocked out the <i>Cmtm4</i> gene in mice. These <i>Cmtm4</i> knockout (KO) mice showed reduced testicular daily sperm production, lower epididymal sperm motility and increased proportion of abnormally backward-curved sperm heads and bent sperm midpieces. These mice also had an evident sub-fertile phenotype, characterized by low pregnancy rates on prolonged breeding with wild type female mice, reduced <i>in vitro</i> fertilization efficiency and a reduced percentage of acrosome reactions. We then performed quantitative proteomic analysis of the testes, where we identified 139 proteins to be downregulated in Cmtm4-KO mice, 100 (71.9%) of which were related to sperm motility and acrosome reaction. The same proteomic analysis was performed on sperm, where we identified 3588 proteins with 409 being differentially regulated in <i>Cmtm4</i>-KO mice. Our enrichment analysis showed that upregulated proteins were enriched with nucleosomal DNA binding functions and the downregulated proteins were enriched with actin binding functions. These findings elucidate the roles of CMTM4 in male fertility and demonstrates its potential as a promising molecular candidate for sperm quality assessment and the diagnosis or treatment of male infertility.

### Keywords
Cmtm4 itraq

### Affiliations
Beijing institute of Lifeomics
Beijing proteome research center

### Submitter
Mingchao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr wang mingchao
Beijing proteome research center


