### Accession
PXD037159

### Title
Application of the HCC spectral library in DIA quantitation

### Description
This project stores the search results of MaxQuant2.0.3.0 of 162 HCC cell line raw files and 48 raw files for spectral library generation, and search results of DIA-NN version 1.8 and Spectronaut version15.2 of HepG2, HCCLM3 and TGFB1-stimulated HCCLM3.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of peptide mixture of each HCC cell line, the LC-MS/MS system consisted of a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) instrument (EASY-nLCTM 1000 nanoflow LC, Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific, USA). For data acquisition, each fraction of peptide mixture was dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) ,99.9% pure water), and 1/10 of which was loaded onto the trapping column (100 μm × 20mm, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr Maisch, GmbH, Germany) using buffer A and then separated on the analytical column (150 μm x 150 mm, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm; Dr Maisch, GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 320 nL/min with following gradients: 0–8 min, 5–8% buffer B (0.1% FA in 99.9% acetonitrile); 8–58 min,8–23% buffer B; 58–70 min, 23–32% buffer B; 70–71 min, 32–95% buffer B; and 71–80 min, 95% buffer B. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was set to the OT-IT mode. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the AGC target was 5 × 10^5 and the scan ranged from 300 to 1,400 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For the MS2 scan, a duty cycle of 3 s was set with the top-speed mode. Only spectra with a charge state of 2–6 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 35%. The MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode with an AGC target of 5,000 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. For analysis of peptide mixture of HCCLM3 and TGFB1-stimulated HCCLM3 using DIA, the LC-MS/MS system consisted of the EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. For data acquisition, 2 μg peptide mixture in buffer A was loaded and separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 500 nL/min with following gradients: 0~13 min, 6 ~ 10% buffer B (0.1% FA in 99.9% acetonitrile); 13 ~ 99 min, 10~23% buffer B; 99 ~ 120 min, 23 ~ 33% buffer B; 120~123 min, 33 ~ 90% buffer B; 123 ~135 min, 90% buffer B. For the full mass (MS1) scan, the target value was 3E6 and the m/z scan ranged from 400 to 1200 Da at a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. For the MS2 scan, the isolation window range was set to 26 m/z at resolution of 30,000, and the AGC target was set to 5 × 10^5. The maximum injection time for MS2 was set to auto. The normalized collision energy was set to 27, and the spectrum type was set to profile. For data acquisition of spectral library generation, 1/8 of each of the Hp-RP fractions in buffer A was loaded and separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 500 nL/min with following gradients: 0~13 min, 7 ~ 13% buffer B (0.1% FA in 100% acetonitrile); 13 ~ 99 min, 13~28% buffer B; 99 ~ 120 min, 28 ~ 42% buffer B; 120~123 min, 42 ~ 95% buffer B; 123 ~135 min, 95% buffer B. For the full mass (MS1) scan, the target value was 3E6 and the m/z scan ranged from 300 to 1400 Da at a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Only spectra with charge states of 2~ 6 were selected for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Precursor ions with top 20 intensities were selected for fragmentation. For MS2 scan, the target value was 5E4 and the resolution was 15000 with a maximum injection time of 45 ms. The iRT peptide standards (Biognosys AG, Schlieren-Zürich, Switzerland) were spiked into all runs of spectral library generation.

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files were searched against the human UniProt database (updated at 2022-09-07 with 20,398 protein groups and the iRT peptide sequence) with MaxQuant v2.0.3.0. The digestion mode was set to specific, and trypsin/P was chosen. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-term of peptides were set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on both PSM and protein level. The max peptide mass range was set to 4600 Da, and the peptide length range was set from 7 to 25, and the missed cleavage was set to 2. The MS/MS match tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS de novo tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The “proteinGroups.txt” file generated by MaxQuant v2.0.3.0 was then imported into Perseus v1.5.2.6 to extract the iBAQ value of each protein groups of each cell lines.  For library generation by SpectronautTM version 15.2 , the missed cleavage was set to 2. The m/z range was set as 400 to 1200 Da, and the ‘bet N fragments per peptide’ was set as 3 to 6. B and Y fragments were chosen, and modifications including oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-term of peptides and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was kept during library generation. The ‘empirical iRT database’ was set as the iRT reference, and the minimum square cutoff was set to 0.8. FDR was set to 0.01 on both precursor and protein level. For calibration and main search, the tolerance was set to dynamic. 
For SpectronautTM version 15.2, ‘Trypsin/P’ was chosen for digestion. ‘Maximum intensity’ was used for intensity extraction of MS1 and MS2. Both correction factor for MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance were set to 1. XIC RT extraction window was set to dynamic and correction factor was set to 1. The calibration mode was set to automatic, and the iRT-RT regression was set to ‘local (non-linear regression)’, and ‘used Biognosys iRT Kit’ was chosen. Decoy method was set to “Mutated, and Decoy limit strategy were set to dynamic. Kernel density estimator was chosen to estimated p value.  The precursor and protein q-value cut-off were both set to 0.01. Proteotypic sequences and the MS2-level peak area were used for protein quantification and the same human UniProt database used for MaxQuant v2.0.3.0 was set as the reference database. Top3 precursurs were used for peptide quantification, and top3 peptides were used for protein quantification. For DIA-NN, Trypsin/P was chosen for digestion, and the miss cleavage sit was set to 2, and modifications including oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-term and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine were chosen. Peptide length range was set to 7 to 25, and precursor charge range was set to 1 to 4, and precursor m/z range was set to 400 to 1200, and fragment ion m/z was set to 200 to 2000. The generated HCC spectral library was used as spectral. Mass accuracy and MS1 accuracy was set to 0, so DIA-NN could determine them automatically. Single-pass mode neural network was chosen, and high accuracy was selected for quantification. RT-dependent cross-run normalization was selected. Precursor false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcc celllines hepg2 hcclm3 tgfb1 dia

### Affiliations
Beijing institute of Lifeomics

### Submitter
Mingchao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wang mingchao
Beijing institute of Lifeomics


