### Accession
PXD007958

### Title
Populus metacaspases -  The function of two type II metacaspases in woody tissues of Populus trees

### Description
Metacaspases (MCs) are cysteine proteases that are implicated in programmed cell death of plants. AtMC9 (Arabidopsis thaliana Metacaspase9) is a member of the Arabidopsis MC family that controls the rapid autolysis of the xylem vessel elements, but its downstream targets in the xylem remain uncharacterized.  PttMC13 and PttMC14 were identified as AtMC9 homologs of hybrid aspen (Populus tremula x tremuloides).  A proteomic analysis was conducted in xylem tissues of transgenic hybrid aspen trees which carried either an overexpression or an RNAi construct for PttMC13 and PttMC14.  The proteomic analysis revealed modulation of levels of both previously known targets of metacaspases, such as Tudor staphylococcal nuclease, heat shock proteins and 14-3-3 proteins as well as novel targets, such as homologs of the PUTATIVE ASPARTIC PROTEASE 3 (PASPA3) (PASPA) and the cysteine protease RD21 by PttMC13 and PttMC14.  We identified here the pathways and processes that are modulated by PttMC13 and PttMC14 in xylem tissues. In particular, the results indicate involvement of PttMC13 and/or PttMC14 in controlling not only xylem cell autolysis but also cell death. This work provides a valuable reference dataset on xylem specific metacaspase functions for future functional and biochemical analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was separated into water soluble and insoluble fractions. Soluble proteins were extracted as previously described (Bylesjö et al., 2009), placed on a 10 kDa spin-filter and washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Samples where then incubated for 60 min at 95ºC in 6 M Guanidine hydrochloride with 20 mM DTT, alkylated in 80 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness, and washed twice with 50 mM ABC before overnight digestion with trypsin in ABC. Proteins from the water-insoluble pellet were extracted and digested according to Masuda et al. (2008). The resulting peptides from both fractions were cleaned using a C18 STAGE-tip (Rappsilber et al., 2003) and the concentration of each sample was measured using a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).   Mass spectrometry analysis The samples were loaded on an HSS T3 C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 200 mm, 1.8 μm particles; Waters, Milford, MA), scaled to equal amounts of starting material, and separated using a linear 90 min gradient of 1–30% solvent B (3:1 Acetonitrile/2-propanol) balanced with 0.1% aqueous formic acid (solvent A) at a flow rate of 300 nl minPP−1PP. The eluate was passed to a nano-ESI equipped SynaptPPTMPP G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA) operating in resolution mode. All data were collected using ion-mobility MSPPePP with a scan-time of 1 sec and mass-corrected using Glu-fibrinopeptide B and Leucine Enkephalin as reference peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed using ProteinLynxGlobalServer v3.0 (Waters, Milford, MA). Databank search parameters were as follows; 10 ppm mass tolerance, <1 % FDR, 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylated cysteines as fixed modification, and oxidized Methionine, deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Identified peptides were cross-matched between runs. The resulting data table was imported into SIMCA (MKS, Malmö, Sweden) for multivariate analysis. Peptides with a variable importance > 1 were considered significant for describing the separation between the sample groups and used as basis for which proteins differ between the sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
Metacaspases (MCs) are cysteine proteases that are implicated in programmed cell death of plants. AtMC9 (Arabidopsis thaliana Metacaspase9) is a member of the Arabidopsis MC family that controls the rapid autolysis of the xylem vessel elements, but its downstream targets in xylem remain uncharacterized. PttMC13 and PttMC14 were identified as AtMC9 homologs in hybrid aspen (Populus&#xa0;tremula&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;tremuloides). A proteomic analysis was conducted in xylem tissues of transgenic hybrid aspen trees which carried either an overexpression or an RNA interference construct for PttMC13 and PttMC14. The proteomic analysis revealed modulation of levels of both previously known targets of metacaspases, such as Tudor staphylococcal nuclease, heat shock proteins and 14-3-3 proteins, as well as novel proteins, such as homologs of the PUTATIVE ASPARTIC PROTEASE3 (PASPA3) and the cysteine protease RD21 by PttMC13 and PttMC14. We identified here the pathways and processes that are modulated by PttMC13 and PttMC14 in xylem tissues. In particular, the results indicate involvement of PttMC13 and/or PttMC14 in downstream proteolytic processes and cell death of xylem elements. This work provides a valuable reference dataset on xylem-specific metacaspase functions for future functional and biochemical analyses.

### Keywords
Lc-mse, Cell death, Wood formation, Populus, Metacaspase

### Affiliations
Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC),
Deptartment of Chemistry, Umeå University
Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden

### Submitter
Joakim Bygdell

### Lab Head
Dr Hannele Tuominen
Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden


