### Accession
PXD042643

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the mucus of the photosynthetic sea slug Elysia crispata

### Description
Elysia crispata is a tropical sea slug Sacoglossa is a superorder of marine sea slugs, of which a few speciesthat can retain intracellular functional chloroplasts from their its algae prey, a mechanism termed kleptoplasty. Elysia crispata is a tropical species of Sacoglossa that can feed through this mechanism on and acquire chloroplasts from a variety of macroalgae. Thisese sea slugs, as other gastropods, produce mucus, a viscous secretion with multiple functions, such as lubrication, protection, and locomotion. This study presents the first comprehensive analysis of the mucus proteome of the sea slug E. crispata using gel electrophoresis and HPLC-MS/MS. We identified 306 proteins in the mucus secretions of this animal, despite the limited entries for E. crispata in the Uniprot database. The reproducibility of the mucus sampling technique was evaluated revealing no significant differences in protein abundance across samples. The functional annotation of the mucus proteome using Gene Ontology identified proteins involved in different functions such as hydrolase activity (molecular function), carbohydrate-derived metabolic processes (biological processes) and cytoskeletal organization (cell component). Moreover, a high proportion of proteins with enzymatic activity in the mucus of E. crispata suggests potential biotechnological applications including antimicrobial and antitumor activities. Putative antimicrobial properties are reinforced by the high abundance of hydrolases. This study also identified proteins common in mucus samples from various species, supporting a common mechanism of mucus in protecting cells and tissues while facilitating animal movement. This study highlights the need for further research to fully understand the roles of these proteins in mucus, their potential impact on animal physiology, and the influence of genetics, and environmental factors, including the type of mucus, on protein composition and relative abundance.

### Sample Protocol
First-generation laboratory-reared E. crispata adults were randomly sampled from the Life Support System for mucus collection. Animals were passed through clean Artificial Sea Water to remove any debris attached to the sea slugs. Each animal was then placed in a sieve and excess water was removed with tissue paper. The slugs were then placed in individual 8 cm watch glasses, wetted with 200 L of ASW and gently swirled for 5 min to induce mucus production. The secreted mucus was then collected with a micropipette into previously cooled 15 mL falcon tubes. Each mucus sample represented a pool of 7 individual sea slugs and a total of 3 samples were collected for analysis. Samples were then frozen at –80 °C for further processing.   Sample Preparation for Proteomics . Samples were thawed and homogenized for 5 min in an ultrasonic bath (VWR, Radnor, USA) at room temperature (RT). 300 uL of extraction buffer (1.5 M Tris-HCL, pH 8.5; 5 M Urea; 2% SDS; 2 mM DTT) were added to 900 uL of sample. Samples were incubated for 1 h at 60 °C and 400 rpm. After cooling to room temperature, 50 uL of a 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) solution was added to each sample and left in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. To stop the reaction, 50 uL of b-mercaptoethanol were added to each sample and centrifuged at 4 °C and 24500  x g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected in a new tube to which acetone at –20 °C was added in a ratio of 1:4 and the solution was allowed to precipitate overnight at –20 °C. The samples were then centrifuged at 4 °C and 24500  x g for 15 min and the precipitate was resuspended in the extraction buffer. The protein concentration was determined with the RC/DC protein assay kit (BioRad, Herculer, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. After quantification, samples were prepared for gel electrophoresis.  Gel Electrophoresis and Peptide Sequencing by Mass Spectrometry  For gel electrophoresis, a loading gel buffer (0.5 M Tris, pH 6.8; 10% SDS; 100% glycerol; bromophenol blue and b-mercaptoethanol) was added to the protein extracts, incubated for 5 min, at 95 °C and 300 rpm. Samples were then loaded into 10% SDS gels. The gel was run for 1 h, at 180 V, using a Mini-PROTEAN® Tetra Vertical Electrophoresis Cell (Bio-Rad, California, USA) and then stained with Coomassie Blue (Bio-Rad, California, USA). The gel was divided into smaller portions and destained through multiple washes  A solution of trypsin in 50 mM AMBIC was added to the gel pieces and incubated on ice for 45 minutes. The excess trypsin was removed, and the gel pieces were completely covered with 50 mM AMBIC and left overnight. The supernatant was collected into new vials and subjected to two washes, collecting the supernatant with each wash. Following that, the samples were partially dried using a speed vacuum (Savant SPD121P SpeedVac Concentrator, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Finally, a 1% FA solution prepared in liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) grade water was added to each sample. The peptides were then analysed by high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Samples were loaded onto an EASY-Spray HPLC column (75 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm, 100 A, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), at 40 °C. A Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used to perform Nanoflow LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The buffer system consisted of two mobile phases (buffer A- 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water; buffer B- 80% HPLC grade ACN in 20% HPLC grade water and 0.1% FA) and the flow rate was 300 nL/min. Elution of peptide was performed using a 92 minute gradient (0-3 min of 96% solvent, 3-70 min of 4-25% solvent B, 70-90 min of 25-40% solvent B, 90-92 min of 90% solvent B, 92-100 min of solvent B and 101-120 min of 96% solvent A) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data acquisition was performed using the Xcalibur v3.3 data system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Proteome Discover software (v2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Data were obtained by searching against the Elysia protein database (accessed 21 April 2022, taxon identifier=71493, Swiss Prot), with Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search engines, with percolator validation. For the search, the following parameters were used: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, as a static modification, and acetylation of N-terminal proteins (N-Terminus) and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 10 ppm (MS) and 0.02 Da (MS/MS). For trypsin digestion, up to two missed cleavages were considered, while the threshold of the global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was 0.01. For data analysis, only proteins with a minimum number of two peptides   were considered.  Proteins were quantified using a label-free method, using the area of the total ion current of precursor ion.

### Publication Abstract
Elysia crispata is a tropical sea slug that can retain intracellular functional chloroplasts from its algae prey, a mechanism termed kleptoplasty. This sea slug, like other gastropods, secretes mucus, a viscous secretion with multiple functions, including lubrication, protection, and locomotion. This study presents the first comprehensive analysis of the mucus proteome of the sea slug E. crispata using gel electrophoresis and HPLC-MS/MS. We identified 306 proteins in the mucus secretions of this animal, despite the limited entries for E. crispata in the Uniprot database. The functional annotation of the mucus proteome using Gene Ontology identified proteins involved in different functions such as hydrolase activity (molecular function), carbohydrate-derived metabolic processes (biological processes) and cytoskeletal organization (cell component). Moreover, a high proportion of proteins with enzymatic activity in the mucus of E. crispata suggests potential biotechnological applications including antimicrobial and antitumor activities. Putative antimicrobial properties are reinforced by the high abundance of hydrolases. This study also identified proteins common in mucus samples from various species, supporting a common mechanism of mucus in protecting cells and tissues while facilitating animal movement. SIGNIFICANCE: Marine species are increasingly drawing the interest of researchers for their role in discovering new bioactive compounds. The study "Proteomic Analysis of the Mucus of the Photosynthetic Sea Slug Elysia crispata" is a pioneering effort that uncovers the complex protein content in this fascinating sea slug's mucus. This detailed proteomic study has revealed proteins with potential use in biotechnology, particularly for antimicrobial and antitumor purposes. This research is a first step in exploring the possibilities within the mucus of Elysia crispata, suggesting the potential for new drug discoveries. These findings could be crucial in developing treatments for severe diseases, especially those caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria, and may lead to significant advances in medical research.

### Keywords
Elysia crispata, Sea sug, Proteome, Mucus

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Centre, LAQV-REQUIMTE—Associated Laboratory for Green Chemistry of the Network of Chemistry and Technology, Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal
University of Aveiro

### Submitter
Diana Lopes

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Miguel
Mass Spectrometry Centre, LAQV-REQUIMTE—Associated Laboratory for Green Chemistry of the Network of Chemistry and Technology, Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal


