### Accession
PXD037596

### Title
RhoA GEFs (Lfc subcellular localization and activity is controlled by αv-class integrin)

### Description
Fibronectin (FN)-binding integrins control a variety of cellular responses through Rho GTPases. The FN-binding integrins, αvβ3 and α5β1, are known to induce different effects on cell morphology and motility. Here we report that FN-bound αvβ3 integrin, but not FN-bound α5β1 integrin, triggers the dissociation of the RhoA GEF Lfc (GEF-H1 in humans) from microtubules (MT), leading to the activation of RhoA, formation of stress fibres and maturation of focal adhesions (FAs). Conversely, loss of Lfc expression decreases RhoA activity, stress fibre formation and FA size, suggesting that Lfc is the major GEF downstream of FN-bound αvβ3 that controls RhoA activity. Mechanistically, FN-engaged αvβ3 integrin activates a kinase cascade involving MARK2/3, which in turn leads to phosphorylation of several phospho-sites on Lfc. In particular, S151 was identified as the main site involved in the regulation of Lfc localization and activity. Our findings indicate that activation of Lfc/RhoA is orchestrated in FN-adherent cells in an integrin-specific manner. 

### Sample Protocol
Samples from active GEF pulldown assays were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on a 4–15% gradient gel. Gel was stained with Coomassie using the GelCodeTM Blue Safe Protein Stain reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample preparation: Gel lanes of interest were excised, chopped, and washed twice with 150 µL of de-staining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% ethanol). Gel pieces were dehydrated twice in 150 µL of 100% ethanol and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Then, 50 µL of digestion buffer (25mM Tris HCl, 10% acetonitrile, 10ng/µL of trypsin) was added. After incubation for 20 min on ice, 50 µL of ammonium bicarbonate buffer (25 mM) was added and the gel pieces were incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides in the supernatant were collected and additional peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by repeated incubation at 25°C in 100 µL of extraction buffer (3% TFA, 30% acetonitrile), with a subsequent centrifugation and collection of the supernatants. Finally, the gel pieces were dehydrated by incubation at 25°C in 100 µL of 100% acetonitrile and the supernatant was unified with the supernatants from previous extraction steps. Acetonitrile was removed by vacuum-centrifugation and 70 µL of 2 M Tris HCl as well as 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide was added. After incubation for 30 min at 37°C, peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted using Stage Tips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.5.0) (https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.1511) with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the Uniprot database of Mus musculus (55.466 entries) with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant, by default, enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant as label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Bioinformatic analysis and heatmaps generation were made with the free access program Perseus, developed at Max Planck Biochemistry institute by Dr. Cox (https://maxquant.net/perseus/) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The data corresponding to the biological replicates were filtered, based on valid values. Multiple testing corrections were performed.

### Publication Abstract
Fibronectin (FN)-binding integrins control a variety of cellular responses through Rho GTPases. The FN-binding integrins, &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 and &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1, are known to induce different effects on cell morphology and motility. Here, we report that FN-bound &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 integrin, but not FN-bound &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 integrin, triggers the dissociation of the RhoA GEF Lfc (also known as GEF-H1 and ARHGEF2 in humans) from microtubules (MTs), leading to the activation of RhoA, formation of stress fibres and maturation of focal adhesions (FAs). Conversely, loss of Lfc expression decreases RhoA activity, stress fibre formation and FA size, suggesting that Lfc is the major GEF downstream of FN-bound &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 that controls RhoA activity. Mechanistically, FN-engaged &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 integrin activates a kinase cascade involving MARK2 and MARK3, which in turn leads to phosphorylation of several phospho-sites on Lfc. In particular, S151 was identified as the main site involved in the regulation of Lfc localization and activity. Our findings indicate that activation of Lfc and RhoA is orchestrated in FN-adherent cells in an integrin-specific manner.

### Keywords
Mouse, Gef, Rhoa

### Affiliations
Cancer Biology lab, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía Blanca (CONICET), Departamento de Biología, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina
CONICET

### Submitter
GEORGINA COLO

### Lab Head
Dr Georgina Pamela Coló
Cancer Biology lab, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de Bahía Blanca (CONICET), Departamento de Biología, Bioquímica y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina


