### Accession
PXD023811

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus Trigger factor is involved in biofilm formation and cooperates with the chaperone PpiB

### Description
Peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerases (PPIases) are enzymes that assist in protein folding around proline-peptide bonds, and often possess chaperone activity. Staphylococcus aureus encodes three PPIases; PrsA, PpiB and Trigger factor (TF). Previous work by our group demonstrated a role for both PrsA and PpiB in S. aureus, however, TF remains largely unstudied. Here, we identify a role for TF in S. aureus biofilm formation, and demonstrate cooperation between TF and the cytoplasmic PPIase PpiB. Mutation of the tig gene (encoding TF) leads to reduced biofilm development in vitro but no significant attenuation of virulence in a mouse model of infection. To determine if TF contributes to biofilm formation via chaperone activity, we analyzed the ability of a tig mutant to survive acid and basic stress. While there was no significant decrease in a tig mutant, a ppiB/tig double mutant exhibited a significant decrease in cell viability after acid and base challenge. We then demonstrate that a ppiB/tig double mutant has exacerbated phenotypes in vitro and in vivo when compared to either single mutant. Finally, in vivo immunoprecipitation of epitope tagged PpiB reveals that PpiB interacts with four times the number of proteins when TF is absent from the cell, suggesting it may be compensating for the loss of TF. Interestingly, the only proteins found to interact with TF are TF itself, FnBPB and the chaperone protein ClpB. Collectively, these results support the first phenotype for S. aureus TF and demonstrate a greater network of cooperation between chaperone proteins in Staphylococcus aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using S-trap micro columns (Protifi) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were resuspended in 5 % (w/v) SDS, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific), reduced for 10 mins at 95 °C, and clarified by centrifugation at 17000 g for 10 mins. Protein concentration was determined by Pierce 660 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) and samples standardized to 50 µg, reduced with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at RT, quenched with 1.2 % (v/v) phosphoric acid, combined with S-trap buffer (100 mM TEAB pH 7.4 in 90 % (v/v) methanol), and adsorbed to the S-trap columns and washed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Digestion was performed using 1 µg trypsin in TEAB, and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hours. Samples were eluted, desiccated, and resuspended in 1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Trypsin-digested peptides (5 µl) were separated on a 50 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 180 min gradient (2 to 32 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition in which the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the S. aureus USA300 proteome (UniProt ID: UP000001939) using MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and the integrated Andromeda search engine. Digestion was set as trypsin/P, variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term), and carbamidomethylation (C) was fixed. Label free quantification was used, with peptides matched between runs. Other settings were left as defaults. The resulting protein groups files were further processed using Perseus, and for whole proteome experiments this included an imputation step with default settings. Unpaired T-test with Welch’s correction was used to establish significant changes in protein abundance (LFQ intensity) between strains.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fk506 binding proteins, Virulence, Cyclophilins, Trigger factor, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University
Ohio University

### Submitter
Ronan Carroll

### Lab Head
Dr Ronan Carroll
Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University


