### Accession
PXD036946

### Title
BioID of 41 ASD-risk genes to identify protein-protein interaction networks and shared pathways

### Description
Identified the protein-protein interaction network of 41 ASD-risk genes in mouse cortical neurons using BioID

### Sample Protocol
Lysed cells were thawed and DNA was digested using benzonase (Sigma). Lysates were than sonicated at high speed for 5 seconds and centrifuged at 20,000xG for 30 minutes. The lysate supernatants were incubated with streptavidin Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) at 4 C for 3 hours. Following the incubation, the supernatant was spun down at 100xG for 2 minutes and the supernatant was removed. The beads were than washed once with RIPA buffer, and then six times with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with centrifugation between each wash. After the final wash, the beads are then resuspended in 100 mM TEAB and sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added to digest the biotinylated proteins on the beads into peptides. The beads were incubated at 37 C for 16 hours while rotating, and additional trypsin was added and incubated for a further 2 hours. The beads were then pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The beads were washed twice with  100 mM TEAB and each wash was added to the supernatant. The supernatant was then transferred to a 1.5 mL screw cap tub and speed vacuum dried. The dried peptides were stored at 4 C for TMT-labeling. Peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded for liquid chromatography, which was conducted using a home-made trap-column (5 cm x 200 µm inner diameter; POROS 10 µm 10R2 C18 resin) and a home-made analytical column (50 cm x 50 µm inner diameter; Monitor 5 µm 100A C18 resin), running a 120min (label free) or 180min (TMT) reversed-phase gradient at 70nl/min on a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano UPLC system coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. A parent ion scan was performed using a resolving power of 120,000 and then up to the 20 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS (minimum ion count of 1000 for activation), using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was activated such that MS/MS of the same m/z (within a range of 10 ppm; exclusion list size = 500) detected twice within 5 seconds were excluded from analysis for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo). For protein identification, search was against the Swiss-Prot mouse proteome database (55,366 protein isoform entries)(Bateman et al., 2021), while the search parameters specified a parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and an MS/MS fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, with up to two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin. Dynamic modification of +16@M was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Neurons, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University Health Network, Krembil Research Institute
University Health Network

### Submitter
Nadeem Murtaza

### Lab Head
Dr Karun Singh
University Health Network, Krembil Research Institute


