### Accession
PXD008775

### Title
HLA-DM-mediated HLA-DR3 Immunopeptidome

### Description
T2 cells stably expressing HLA-DR3 and variable amounts of HLA-DM (none, low, and high, per GFP co-expression) were lysed and HLA-DR3-peptide complexes were isolated via immunoprecipitation. Antigenic peptides were then eluted and quantified by LC-MS/MS to assess presented antigenic epitopes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in Tris HCl 50 mM pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% CHAPS and protease inhibitor cocktail, then spun down at 15000xg for 30 min. pMHCII complexes were purified using L243 coupled to FF-Sepharose. Beads were washed with 10 volumes of lysis buffer with 500 mM NaCl, 10 lysis buffer with no NaCl, 10 volumes of lysis buffer with 150 mM NaCl, and finally 10 volumes of H2O. MHCII and peptides were dissociated from each other and from the column by adding 5 volumes of TFA to 0.02 %. The resulting peptide mixtures were fractionated using a 10 kDa cutoff micro-spin filter device and washed using C18 zip-tips. Peptides were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC) connected to an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fischer). LC was performed on a reversed-phase C18 column (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient ranging from 5 to 60 % of mobile phase B (10 to 60 min). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % Formic Acid in H 2 O and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % Formic acid in acetonitrile. A spray voltage of 2.1 kV was used for peptide ionization and collision-induced dissociation was performed for the 10 most intense precursor ions selected from each full scan in the Orbitrap (350–2000 m/z). An isolation width of 2 Da was used for the selected ions with an activation time of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was activated for the MS/MS scan with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) was used for peptide identification. A customized database featuring reviewed and non-redundant Uniprot human proteins (accessed March 2017) combined with 200 highly enriched bovine proteins found in FCS (21) was used for peptide identification. No enzyme specificity was used for the search, and a tolerance of 10 ppm was allowed for the main ion search and 50 ppm for the MSMS identification. The “match between runs” feature was enabled. The FDR was set at 0.01 (1 %). Reverse IDs and known contaminants like keratins were filtered before further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The major histocompatibility complex of class II (MHCII) immunopeptidome represents the repertoire of antigenic peptides with the potential to activate CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. An understanding of how the relative abundance of specific antigenic epitopes affects the outcome of T cell responses is an important aspect of adaptive immunity and offers a venue to more rationally tailor T cell activation in the context of disease. Recent advances in mass spectrometric instrumentation, computational power, labeling strategies, and software analysis have enabled an increasing number of stratified studies on HLA ligandomes, in the context of both basic and translational research. A key challenge in the case of MHCII immunopeptidomes, often determined for different samples at distinct conditions, is to derive quantitative information on consensus epitopes from antigenic peptides of variable lengths. Here, we present the design and benchmarking of a new algorithm [peptide landscape antigenic epitope alignment utility (PLAtEAU)] allowing the identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of shared consensus epitopes arising from series of nested peptides. The algorithm simplifies the complexity of the dataset while allowing the identification of nested peptides within relatively short segments of protein sequences. Moreover, we apply this algorithm to the comparison of the ligandomes of cell lines with two different expression levels of the peptide-exchange catalyst HLA-DM. Direct comparison of LFQ intensities determined at the peptide level is inconclusive, as most of the peptides are not significantly enriched due to poor sampling. Applying the PLAtEAU algorithm for grouping of the peptides into consensus epitopes shows that more than half of the total number of epitopes is preferentially and significantly enriched for each condition. This simplification and deconvolution of the complex and ambiguous peptide-level dataset highlights the value of the PLAtEAU algorithm in facilitating robust and accessible quantitative analysis of immunopeptidomes across cellular contexts. <i>In silico</i> analysis of the peptides enriched for each HLA-DM expression conditions suggests a higher affinity of the pool of peptides isolated from the high DM expression samples. Interestingly, our analysis reveals that while for certain autoimmune-relevant epitopes their presentation increases upon DM expression others are clearly edited out from the peptidome.

### Keywords
Hla-dm, Hla-dr, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
FU Berlin
Protein Biochemistry, Institute for Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Eliot Morrison

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Freund
Protein Biochemistry, Institute for Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany


