### Accession
PXD041490

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of Lysine 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation in Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus is the main culprit of invasive aspergillosis, which has a high mortality rate in immunocompromised patients. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation is a highly conserved posttranslational modification found in a wide variety of organisms. In this study, we survey the biological impact of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on lysine residuals (Khib) in A. fumigatus. Using an antibody-enrichment approach along with the traditional LC-MS/MS method, the pattern of Khib-modified proteins and sites were analyzed in one wild type strain of A. fumigatus. We identified 3494 Khib-modified proteins with 18091 modified sites in this strain, and a more detailed bioinformatics analysis indicated that the Khib-modified proteins are involved in a wide range of cellular functions with diverse subcellular locations. Functional enrichment analysis featured several prominent functional pathways, including ribosome, biosynthesis of amino acids and nucleocytoplasmic transport – of which the ribosome pathway is the most affected pathway. When compared with other reported Khib eukaryotes, both Khib-modified sites and Khib-modified proteins also remained the highest. It proves that this modification is of great importance in A. fumigatus. At the same time, several enzymes in the fungal ergosterol synthesis pathway are modified with Khib. These bioinformatic results suggest that 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation may play an indispensable role in the regulation of the ribosomal biogenesis and the process of fungal resistance. Findings in this study may provide new insights for studying PTM-associated mechanisms in fungal development and antifungal drug development.

### Sample Protocol
1.1 Sample Preparation 1.1.1 Protein Extraction (optional)  For cell samples: Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For tissue samples: The sample was grinded with liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For plant and fungus samples: Sample was first grinded with liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation.). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added. Then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Serum samples: Firstly, the cellular debris from serum sample was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Then, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The top 14 high abundance proteins were removed by Pierce? Top 14 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Finally, the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
1.2 LC-MS/MS Analysis 1.2.1 3D Mass Spectrometer (optional)  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 60 min, 25% to 35% in 22 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flowrate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific).  The separated peptides were analyzed in Q ExactiveTM HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 for a scan range of 350–1600 m/z. Up to 20 most abundant precursors were then selected for further MS/MS analyses with 30 s dynamic exclusion. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 1E5, with an intensity threshold of 3.3E4 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.  1.2.2 4D Mass Spectrometer(optional)  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics).  The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.  1.2.3 Database Search  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%

### Publication Abstract
Aspergillus fumigatus is the significant causative agent in cases of invasive aspergillosis, leading to a high mortality rate in immunocompromised patients. A comprehensive understanding of its growth patterns and metabolic processes within the host is a critical prerequisite for the development of effective antifungal strategies. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a highly conserved protein posttranslational modifications (PTM) found in various organisms. In this study, we investigate the biological impact of Khib in A. fumigatus. Using a combination of antibody enrichment with the conventional LC-MS/MS method, the pattern of Khib-modification in proteins and their respective sites were analyzed in a wild type strain of A. fumigatus. Our findings revealed 3494 Khib-modified proteins with a total of 18,091 modified sites in this strain. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that these Khib-modified proteins participate in a diverse range of cellular functions, spanning various subcellular locations such as ribosome biosynthesis, protein synthesis and nucleocytoplasmic transport. Notably, when compared with other reported eukaryotes, A. fumigatus exhibited consistently higher numbers of Khib-modified proteins, suggesting the potential significance of this modification in this organism. An interesting observation is the prevalence of Khib modifications in most enzymes involved in the ergosterol synthesis pathway. The insights gathered from this study provide new avenue for studying PTM-associated mechanisms in fungal growth and offer potential implication for antifungal drug development.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Proteome, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, China.
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042 People’s Republic of China. Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Skin Diseases and STIs, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042, People’s Republic of China.

### Submitter
Hailin Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr HaiLin Zheng
Department of Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Nanjing, China.


