### Accession
PXD021517

### Title
Stearic acid blunts growth-factor signaling via oleoylation of GNAI proteins

### Description
The aim of the MS analysis is to identify fatty acids modifying Cys3 of GNAI3. Detailed description in the manuscript Nuskova et al. submitted to NatComms.

### Sample Protocol
The nature of fatty acyl residue on purified GNAI3 was analyzed by MS. To purify large amounts of GNAI3, we employed GFP-binding protein (GBP) that can pull down GNAI3-GFP with high affinity and selectivity. Briefly, GBP was expressed in BL21 competent bacteria (Rosetta) from pET28c plasmid carrying 6xHis-GBP, purified using Ni-NTA agarose beads, dialyzed and covalently coupled to activated sepharose beads according to the manufacturer’s instructions. MCF7 cells with stable expression of GNAI3-GFP were harvested by trypsinization and lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 800 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 % NP-40, pH 7.5) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and palmostatin B, a deacylase inhibitor, to reach a final concentration of 250 uM (EMD Millipore Calbiochem InSolution APT1 inhibitor palmostatin B). Cleared lysates were diluted 1:2 with a dilution buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and mixed with GBPsepharose beads. Purification was performed for 2 h at 4 ºC with end-over-end rotation. Sepharose beads were washed 4 times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and purified proteins were eluted in non-reducing Laemmli buffer for 5 min at 95 ºC. Eluted proteins were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark, separated via SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane followed by Ponceau S staining. The band corresponding to GNAI3-GFP was processed as described previously with small modifications. It was cut into small pieces, rinsed quickly with 100−200 μL of 40 % acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.5) and digested with 10 μL of trypsin (Promega, 15 μg/μL in 80 % acetonitrile/20 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.5) for 1 h at 37 °C. The water-acetonitrile solution containing hydrophilic and slightly hydrophobic peptides was transferred to a clean tube and an aliquot (1−2 μL) was taken to confirm the protein identity by MALDITOF MS analysis and following Mascot server (www.matrixscience.com) search. The main part was frozen until combining with organic eluates and until further analysis. To release strongly hydrophobic peptides, the membrane pieces were further covered with a mixture of 5−10 μL of hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) and 10 μL of chloroform for 2 h to overnight. The water-acetonitrile and HFIP/chloroform extracts were combined, 15−20 μL of 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid/water solution was added to get phase separation and remove excess of buffer salts, and the organic phase enriched with various hydrophobic peptides was collected for MALDI-TOF MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Sample aliquots (1 μL) were mixed on a steel target with an equal volume of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid in 30 % acetonitrile/0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid water solution (10 mg/mL). Mass spectra were recorded with a Ultraflextreme MALDI TOF-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) equipped with a 355 nm (Nd) laser. The MH+ molecular ions were measured in reflector mode to determine monoisotopic peak masses with the accuracy within 30 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were obtained in LIFT mode, and the accuracy of daughter ions measurement was within 1 Da. Mass-spectra were processed using FlexAnalysis 3.2 software (Bruker Daltonik, Germany) and analyzed manually.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent attachment of C16:0 to proteins (palmitoylation) regulates protein function. Proteins are also S-acylated by other fatty acids including C18:0. Whether protein acylation with different fatty acids has different functional outcomes is not well studied. We show here that C18:0 (stearate) and C18:1 (oleate) compete with C16:0 to S-acylate Cys3 of GNAI proteins. C18:0 becomes desaturated so that C18:0 and C18:1 both cause S-oleoylation of GNAI. Exposure of cells to C16:0 or C18:0 shifts GNAI acylation towards palmitoylation or oleoylation, respectively. Oleoylation causes GNAI proteins to shift out of cell membrane detergent-resistant fractions where they potentiate EGFR signaling. Consequently, exposure of cells to C18:0 reduces recruitment of Gab1 to EGFR and reduces AKT activation. This provides a molecular mechanism for the anti-tumor effects of C18:0, uncovers a mechanistic link how metabolites affect cell signaling, and provides evidence that the identity of the fatty acid acylating a protein can have functional consequences.

### Keywords
Oleoylation, Stearoylation, Gnai3, Acylation

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Division of Signal Transduction in Cancer and Metabolism, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Hana Nuskova

### Lab Head
Dr Aurelio A. Teleman
Division of Signal Transduction in Cancer and Metabolism, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


