### Accession
PXD027662

### Title
Proteomics analysis unravels new functions of the KICSTOR component SZT2

### Description
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy is a group of rare, severe neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by the co-occurrence of epilepsy and intellectual disability (ID), in which there is additional developmental impairment independent of epileptic activity. In 2009, through a chemical mutagenesis screen performed in mice, it was found that mutations in Seizure threshold 2 (SZT2) trigger a higher susceptibility to seizures in a semidominant manner. Since then 27 patients have been identified with biallelic SZT2 mutations (in compound heterozygous or homozygous state), all of them displaying developmental delay of varying severity and dysmorphic features such as macrocephaly. Patients commonly suffer from recurrent epileptic seizures that often are refractory to available therapies.  Human SZT2 encodes a 3,375 amino acids protein highly conserved throughout evolution, that is predominantly expressed in embryonal stages and in the adult the brain. The molecular functions of SZT2 protein are largely unknown however it has been reported that SZT2 forms a complex with KPTN, ITFG2, and C12orf66. This complex, named KICSTOR, senses aminoacid depletion and functions as a negative regulator of mTORC1 under catabolic conditions.  Taking into consideration that SZT2 remain one of the least characterized regulators of mTORC1 we decided to decipher its interactome under catabolic and anabolic conditions. We found mTORC1 and AMPK signaling components enriched in the SZT2 interactome, but also prominent clusters of autophagy and ciliogenesis regulators as well as a significant number of hits that regulate neurogenesis and neurodegenerative processes. We have validated a few key hits from the interactome, including proteins involved in cilliogenesis and epilepsy. The detailed analysis of the SZT2KOs demonstrated that although these cells show increased mTORC1 signaling that can be prevented by treatment with either rapamycin or torin, they also contra intuitively display increased autophagy that is independent of the physiological conditions tested. These results are in accordance with our interactome data were we detect a significant pool of selective autophagy receptors/regulators. Overall the presented data should serve as a tool to address the physiological functions of SZT2 in more comprehensive manner. In the manuscript discussion we put forward our model in which SZT2 plays a broader role in the coordination of cellular metabolism than previously anticipated.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification and sample preparation for mass spectrometry The SH-affinity purification was performed exclusively on ice. The cell pellets were thawed and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA pH8.0, 0.5% NP-40, protease inhibitors, 1.5 µg/mL avidin, 1 mM Na3VO4). After 30 min incubation at 4°C, the cell lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 13 000 x g , 4°C. Supernatants were collected into fresh tubes and the centrifugation was repeated. Upon clearance, a 50 µL aliquot from each supernatant was collected for a posteriori analysis. The protein concentration of the remaining lysates was normalized prior to the subsequent steps. Strep-Tactin® Sepharose® beads, 600µl per sample were transferred to fresh tubes, washed twice and equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA pH8.0, 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM NaF. The washing steps were intercalated with 3 min centrifugations at max. 300 x g, 4°C. The normalized lysates were then added to the beads and the suspensions incubated for 1 hr, rotating at 20 RPM and 4°C. After incubation, the beads were centrifuged at max. 300 x g, 4°C. A 50 µL aliquot of each supernatant was collected as “flow through” (FT) for later analysis and the rest of the supernatant was aspirated with a sterile needle. The needle was changed between samples to avoid cross-contamination. The beads were then washed once in washing buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA pH8.0, 0.5% NP-40, protease inhibitors) and transfered into one preeqilibrated ‘Bio-Spin Disposable Chromatography Column’ per sample. Then the columns were washed 6 times with washing buffer followed by 2 times with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.1% NP-40. Finally, the proteins bound to the beads were eluted in 300 µL of 2.5 mM D-Biotin, 55 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 135 mM NaCl, 4.5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.09% NP-40 into 1.5 mL ‘Protein LoBind® Tubes’. The elution step was repeated 3 times. Two 50 µL aliquots of the eluate were kept aside for quality control purposes. The remaining eluate samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -20°C until further processing. To address if elution was complete, the beads were then incubated in 300 µL of SDS sample buffer without DTT (272mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 70% glycerol, 8% SDS, 0.02% bromophenol blue). The solution was collected into 1.5 mL tubes and the process repeated two more times. For western blot analysis, 25 µL of 5x sample buffer (250 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 150 mM Glycerol, 0.05% Bromphenol Blue, 10% SDS, 500 mM DTE) and 50 µL of 2 M Urea lysis buffer (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 10 mM NaF) were added to each of the quality control aliquots. These were denatured by heating at 60°C for 10 min.  Affinity purified SZT2 interacting proteins were precipitated with the TCA-DOC method and reconstituted in an SDS-containing sample buffer. Cysteines were reduced by incubating the samples in the presence of 20 mM DTT for 5 min at 95°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide as described previously. Six independent biological replicates for each condition analyzed as well as 6 corresponding to GFP control samples were loaded on 10% Tris-HCl polyacrylamide gels and run for 30 min until the dye front penetrated 2 cm into the resolving gel. Coomassie stained gels were sliced into 3 to 5 fractions, further chopped to app. 1x1 mm pieces and in-gel digested with trypsin followed by mass spectrometry.  LC-MS/MS analysis For LC-MS/MS analysis, the dried tryptic peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% FA. The samples were injected on a nano-ultra pressure liquid chromatography system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano pro flow, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via an electrospray ionization (ESI) source to an Orbitrap QExactive HFX (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples were loaded (5 µL/min) on a trapping column (nanoE MZ Sym C18, 5μm, 180umx20mm, Waters, Germany, buffer A: 0.1% FA in HPLC-H2O; buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC-H2O) with 5% buffer B. After sample loading, the trapping column was washed for 5 min with 5% buffer B (15 μL/min) and the peptides were eluted (250 nL/min) onto the separation column (nanoE MZ PST CSH, 130 A, C18 1.7μ, 75μmx250mm, Waters, Germany) and separated with a gradient of 5−37.5% B in 30 min. The spray was generated from a steel emitter (Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) at a capillary voltage of 1850 V. MS/MS measurements were carried out in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA) using a normalized HCD collision energy of 28% and a loop count of 15. MS scan was performed over an m/z range from 350-1600, with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 (maximum injection time= 50 ms, AGC target= 3e6). MS/MS spectra were recorded over a m/z range of 120-2000 m/z with a resolution of 7,500 at m/z 200 (maximum injection time= 50 ms, maximum AGC target= 1e5, intensity threshold: 8e3), a quadrupole isolation width of 0.8 Da and an exclusion time of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA). For peptide and protein identification, the LC-MS/MS were searched with SequesHT against a human database (Swis-sProt, 20,369 entries) and a contaminant database (116 entries). The following parameters were used for the data-base search: mass tolerance MS1: 6 ppm, mass tolerance MS2: 0.02 Da, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cystein), variable modification: Oxidation (Methionine), variable modification at protein N-terminus: Acetylation, Methionine loss, Methionine loss + Acetylation. Percolator were used for FDR calculation. For feature detection, Minora Feature Detection was used with default settings. For lable free quantification, the Precursor Ions Quantifier was used with the following parameters: Peptides to use: unique peptides, Precursor Abundance Based On: Area, Minimum Replicate Features: 50%, Normalization Mode: Total Peptide Amount, Protein Abundance Calculation: Summed Abundances, Top N: 3, Hypothesis testing: t-test (Background Based).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kicstor, Szt2, Mtorc1, Lysosome

### Affiliations
Medical University Innsbruck, Biocenter, Division of Cell Biology
Div. Cell Biology, Biocenter, Medical University Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
Mariana Eca Guimaraes de Araujo

### Lab Head
Dr Mariana Eca Guimaraes de Araujo
Div. Cell Biology, Biocenter, Medical University Innsbruck, Austria


