### Accession
PXD034220

### Title
Single Band Analsyis of PSII complex

### Description
Presence of Psb27 was confirmed by single band LCMS of HPLC purified protein complexes

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified by two-step HPLC (affinity+IEC). Samples were applied onto SDS-PAGE (~15 mg) and separated. Single bands were cut out and gel pieces washed with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC50), then washed several times with ABC25 in 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) until destained. Gel was dried with 100% ACN, followed by an overnight digest (37°C) with Trypsin (0.125 µg/sample, Promega) in ABC25 solution. Gel Pieces were extracted with 50% ACN 1mM FA and combined. The solution was dried in a vaccum concentrator. The samples were resuspended in 20 µl solution A (0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% ACN) and applied to a UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) and afterwards transferred to a UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 μm, 75 μm · 150 mm, Waters) on a nanoAQUITY gradient UPLC (Waters) at a flow rate of 5 µl·min-1. The sample was injected into a Thermofisher Scientific Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a PicoTip Emitter (SilicaTip, 30 µM, New Objective) at a flow rate of 0.4 µl·min-1 at 1.5-1.8 kV. The column oven temperature was set to 45 °C. Proteins were eluted over 60 min in a discontinuous gradient of solution A to solution B (0.1% FA in ACN): 0-5 min: 2% B; 5-10 min: 2-5% B; 10-41 min: 5-30 % B; 41-46 min: 30-85 % B; 46-47 min: 95% B; 47-60 min: 2% B. MS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 240,000 with a mass range of 300-2,000 m/z in parallel mode by the orbitrap, and MS2 spectra were recorded of the 20 most intense precursors. A dynamic exclusion of 1 min was applied and collision-induced dissociation (CID) was performed at 35% relative energy. Single charged ions were excluded from the analysis. See further details in the publication associated with this data. In brief, the samples were resuspended in 20 µl solution A (0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% ACN) and applied to a UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) and afterwards transferred to a UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 μm, 75 μm · 150 mm, Waters) on a nanoAQUITY gradient UPLC (Waters) at a flow rate of 5 µl·min-1. The sample was injected into a Thermofisher Scientific Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a PicoTip Emitter (SilicaTip, 30 µM, New Objective) at a flow rate of 0.4 µl·min-1 at 1.5-1.8 kV. The column oven temperature was set to 45 °C. Proteins were eluted over 60 min in a discontinuous gradient of solution A to solution B (0.1% FA in ACN): 0-5 min: 2% B; 5-10 min: 2-5% B; 10-41 min: 5-30 % B; 41-46 min: 30-85 % B; 46-47 min: 95% B; 47-60 min: 2% B. MS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 240,000 with a mass range of 300-2,000 m/z in parallel mode by the orbitrap, and MS2 spectra were recorded of the 20 most intense precursors. A dynamic exclusion of 1 min was applied and collision-induced dissociation (CID) was performed at 35% relative energy. Single charged ions were excluded from the analysis.

### Data Protocol
For analysis, Proteome Discoverer Version 2.3 was used. The spectrum files were recalibrated with a tolerance of 20 ppm and search was done using Sequest HT with a modified reference proteome database of Thermosynechococcus vestitus (UP000000440; obtained 2020-03) [67] with common contaminants from the Global Proteome Machine (GPM) database (https://thegpm.org/crap/index.html; obtained 2020-01) and the modified PsbO-Sequence. Up to two missed cleavage sites and the following modifications were allowed with a peptide length of at least 6 amino acids: N-terminal acetylation, Methionine oxidation. A strict FDR (< 0.01) was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Psb27, Photosystem ii, Photosynthesis, Thermosynechococcus elongatus

### Affiliations
Plant Biochemistry, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany
Ruhr-University Bochum

### Submitter
Jan Lambertz

### Lab Head
Dr Marc M. Nowaczyk
Plant Biochemistry, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany


