### Accession
PXD034148

### Title
Identification of bioactive peptides from a Brazilian kefir sample, and their anti-Alzheimer potential in Drosophila melanogasterIdentification of bioactive peptides from a Brazilian kefir sample

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in the elderly, affecting cognitive, intellectual, and motor functions. Different hypotheses explain AD’s mechanism, such as the amyloidogenic hypothesis. Moreover, this disease is multifactorial, and several studies have shown that gut dysbiosis and oxidative stress influence its pathogenesis. Knowing that kefir is a probiotic used in therapies to restore dysbiosis and that the bioactive peptides present in it have antioxidant properties, we explored its biotechnological potential as a source of molecules capable of modulating the amyloidogenic pathway and reducing oxidative stress, contributing to the treatment of AD. For that, we used Drosophila melanogaster model for AD (AD-like flies). Identification of bioactive peptides in the kefir sample was made by proteomic and peptidomic analyses, followed by in vitro evaluation of antioxidant and acetylcholinesterase inhibition potential. Flies were treated and their motor performance, brain morphology, and oxidative stress evaluated. Finally, we performed molecular docking between the peptides found and the main pathology-related proteins in the flies. The results showed that the fraction with the higher peptide concentration was positive for the parameters evaluated. In conclusion, these results revealed these kefir peptide-rich fractions have therapeutic potential for AD.

### Sample Protocol
In preparation for shotgun proteomics, the samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 0.5 M iodoacetamide. Samples were then digested with trypsin (0.01 μg/μL), except for the <10 kDa peptide fraction, which was obtained from Amicon filtering. A desalination step was performed with a ZipTips C18 column (Millipore, Billerica, MA, United States). Shotgun proteomics and peptidomics were performed by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-quadrupole-time of flight-mass Spectrometry (LC-ESI-Q-TOF-MS) using the 6520B instrument from Agilent. An AdvanceBio Peptide Mapping column (Agilent) was used (2.1 mm internal diameter, 10 cm long, 2.7 µm particles). In the mobile phase, water (A) and acetonitrile (B) were acidified with formic acid (0.1% v/v), using the gradient: 2% B (0 min), 2% B (10 min), 15% B (40 min), 50% B (150 min), 70% B (200 min), 98% B (220 min), 98% B (300 min), 100% B (301 min) and 100% B (400 min) at 400 µL/min. For ionization, a nebulizer pressure of 45 psi was used, with drying gas at 8 L/min (325 °C). 4 kV energy was applied to the capillary.

### Data Protocol
Spectrum Mill software (Agilent) was used for data analysis, using the following Uniprot databases: 1) “milk AND bovine” (69,760 results in February 2021); 2) “Lactobacillus” (1,250,616 results in February 2021) and 3) “Acetobacter” (185,991 results in February 2021). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed with and. Maximum missed cleavages were selected in two for trypsin. The precursor mass error and the fragments at 20 ppm, product mass tolerance at 50 ppm, and maximum ambiguous precursor charge at 3.  For de novo analysis, the Sherenga module of the Spectrum Mill software (Agilent) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in the elderly, affecting cognitive, intellectual, and motor functions. Different hypotheses explain AD's mechanism, such as the amyloidogenic hypothesis. Moreover, this disease is multifactorial, and several studies have shown that gut dysbiosis and oxidative stress influence its pathogenesis. Knowing that kefir is a probiotic used in therapies to restore dysbiosis and that the bioactive peptides present in it have antioxidant properties, we explored its biotechnological potential as a source of molecules capable of modulating the amyloidogenic pathway and reducing oxidative stress, contributing to the treatment of AD. For that, we used Drosophila melanogaster model for AD (AD-like flies). Identification of bioactive peptides in the kefir sample was made by proteomic and peptidomic analyses, followed by in vitro evaluation of antioxidant and acetylcholinesterase inhibition potential. Flies were treated and their motor performance, brain morphology, and oxidative stress evaluated. Finally, we performed molecular docking between the peptides found and the main pathology-related proteins in the flies. The results showed that the fraction with the higher peptide concentration was positive for the parameters evaluated. In conclusion, these results revealed these kefir peptide-rich fractions have therapeutic potential for AD.

### Keywords
Lc-msms. kefir, Peptide

### Affiliations
Federal University of Uberlandia
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia

### Submitter
Serena Malta

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Ueira-Vieira
Federal University of Uberlandia


