### Accession
PXD027744

### Title
THP-1 cells treated with plasticizer DINCH and metabolite MINCH

### Description
Since 2008, the consumption of the plasticizer bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) in the manufacture of plastic products has been restricted due to several adverse health effects. 1,2-cyclohexanedicarboxylic acid diisononyl ester (DINCH) is increasingly used as a harmless substituent for DEHP. However, the structural similarity to DEHP and first studies demonstrating adverse effects on reproduction and metabolism in rats, suggest that DINCH may act adverse on human health. Still, there is a lack of studies on the biological effects of DINCH, especially in the immune system, which is in constant communication with other tissues and thus crucial for maintaining a functional organism. Here we aimed to investigate the effects of DINCH and its naturally occurring biotransformation product monoisononylcyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxylic acid ester (MINCH) on the innate immune response. Human THP-1 macrophages were exposed to DINCH and MINCH in a concentration range of 10 nM to 10 μM for 4 h, 16 h and 24 h in the presence of LPS.

### Sample Protocol
Human THP-1 cells were cultured in growth medium consisting of RPMI 1640 medium (GibcoTM, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Biowest, France) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) at 5% CO2, 37°C, and 95% humidity. Differentiation into adherent macrophages was induced by incubating cells in medium supplemented with 100 ng/ml phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA, Sigma Aldrich, Germany) for 48 h. THP-1 macrophages were incubated in growth medium containing 10 µM, 1 µM, 0.1 µM, or 0.01 µM cyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxylic acid diisononyl ester (DINCH, CAS no. 166412-78-8, ABCR, Germany) or monoisononyl cyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxylate (MINCH, TRC, Canada) in methanol (MeOH, 0.01%, v/v in the medium) and with 0.01 µg/ml lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 4 h, 16 h, or 24 h. Vehicle controls with or without LPS contained 0.01% (v/v) MeOH. Cells were washed three times with 3 ml ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Lonza, Switzerland) and harvested with lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate in ddH2O supplemented with cOmplete Roche protease inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich, Germany). After 1 h incubation on ice, lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 4°C and 16000 g. Protein concentration was determined by DC assay (Bio-Rad, USA). Lysates were prepared by single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) based on previous publications in combination with a tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling strategy (TMT-10-plex) for protein quantification (10.1016/j.envint.2021.106730; 10.15252/msb.20145625; 10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x). Briefly, 20 µg per sample of SeraMag beads (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) were washed with ddH2O, incubated on a DynaMagTM magnetic rack (Life Technologies AS, Norway) for 2 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The washing step was repeated twice. Beads were transferred to a 96-well plate, washed with ddH2O, and the supernatant was discarded after incubation on the magnet rack. Vehicle controls containing 0.01% (v/v) MeOH were pooled before being split into four technical replicates during sample preparation. 25 µg of protein from each sample lysate was filled up to a volume of 100 µl with 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB, Sigma Aldrich, Germany). Proteins were reduced with 5 µl of 200 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) hydrochloride (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) in 100 mM TEAB buffer for 1 h at 55°C and then alkylated with 5 µl of 375 mM 2-iodoacetamide (IAA, Merck KGaA, Germany) in 100 mM TEAB buffer for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. 5 µl of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA, Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany) and 150 µl of acetonitrile (ACN, Merck KGaA, Germany) were added. The samples were transferred to the 96-well plate containing the prepared beads and incubated for 8 min. The supernatant was discarded after a 2 min incubation on the magnetic rack. The beads were washed twice with 70% (v/v) EtOH and once with ACN on the magnet rack. After removing the supernatant, the beads were air dried for 15 min. 5 µl of 1 µg/µl trypsin (Promega GmbH, Germany) (protein:trypsin ratio of 1:50) in 100 mM TEAB buffer was added to each well for proteolytic cleavage. 200 μl ddH2O was added to the empty wells, and the plate was sealed to counteract evaporation during the subsequent 16 h incubation period at 37°C.  For TMT labeling, 0.8 mg TMT label of TMT-10-plex labeling reagent set (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was dissolved in 42 μl ACN with occasional vortexing for 5 min. 5 μl of TMT label was added to each well and incubated for 1 h at room temperature on the magnet rack. To stop the labeling process, 1 μl of 5% hydroxylamine solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in 100 mM TEAB buffer was added and incubated for 15 min. 170 μl ACN was added to achieve an organic content of >95% to promote peptide binding to the beads. Samples belonging to the same 10-plex mix were combined and incubated for 8 min outside the magnet rack. After 2 min on the magnet rack, the supernatant was removed, and the beads were washed with 1 ml ACN. The first fraction was eluted by adding 200 μl 87% (v/v) ACN and ammonium formate (pH 10, Sigma Aldrich, Germany) in ddH2O, rinsing the solution over the beads five times before transferring to a new tube. For the second fraction, 50 μl ddH2O containing 2% DMSO (v/v) were added to the beads, sonicated for 1 min, centrifuged, and transferred to a new tube after incubation on the magnetic rack. Again, 50 µl of ddH2O containing 2% DMSO (v/v) were added, pipetted, incubated on the magnetic rack for 2 min, and the supernatant was combined with the second fraction. The fractions were evaporated and the pellets were dissolved in 20 µl ddH2O by sonication for 5 min. To remove any remaining beads, the solutions were incubated again on the magnet rack for 2 min. The supernatants were transferred to mass spectrometry tubes and acidified with 0.5 µl of 10% (v/v) FA.

### Data Protocol
The fractionated peptides were separated using the nano ultra-performance liquid chromatography system Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as described before (10.1016/j.tox.2020.152652). Samples were first trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column, nanoViper, 2μm, 75μm×5cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and then separated on an analytical reverse-phase column Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, nanoViper, 3μm, 75μm × 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) using a mixture of hydrophilic solution A (0.1% FA in H2O, v/v) and hydrophobic solution B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O, v/v) corresponding to a non-linear gradient of 180 min and a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The separated peptides were injected into a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate system (Advion, USA). The samples were analyzed using MS parameters as previously described, except of selecting top 15 precursor ions of each MS1 scan for fragmentation (10.1016/j.tox.2020.152652). MS raw data were processed using ProteomDiscoverer (2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The database search was performed using the UniprotKB/Swissprot reference proteome of Homo sapiens (06th of March 2019). The analysis resulted in replicate-wise TMT-reporter ion intensity fold changes (FCs) for 3865 proteins of treatment vs. control without LPS or treatment vs. control with LPS and were used for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The use of the plasticizer bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) and other plasticizers in the manufacture of plastic products has been restricted due to adverse health outcomes such as obesity, metabolic syndrome, and asthma, for which inflammation has been described to be a driving factor. The emerging alternative plasticizer 1,2-cyclohexanedioic acid diisononyl ester (DINCH) still lacks information regarding its potential effects on the immune system. Here, we investigated the effects of DINCH and its naturally occurring metabolite monoisononylcyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxylic acid ester (MINCH) on the innate immune response. Human THP-1 macrophages were exposed to 10 nM-10 &#x3bc;M DINCH or MINCH for 4 h, 16 h, and 24 h. To decipher the underlying mechanism of action, we applied an untargeted proteomic approach that revealed xenobiotic-induced activation of immune-related pathways such as the nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) signaling pathway. Key drivers were associated with oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, DNA damage repair, apoptosis, and autophagy. We verified increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to cellular damage, NF-&#x3ba;B activation, and subsequent TNF and IL-1&#x3b2; release, even at low nM concentrations. Taken together, DINCH and MINCH induced cellular stress and pro-inflammatory effects in macrophages, which may lead to adverse health effects.

### Keywords
Dinch, Plasticizers, Endocrine disruption, Minch

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research

### Submitter
Alexandra Schaffert

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Leipzig, Germany


