### Accession
PXD002339

### Title
Cytoplasmic erythrocyte proteome in Diamond Blackfan Anemia

### Description
Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a rare, congenital erythrocyte aplasia that is usually caused by haploinsufficiency of ribosomal proteins due to diverse mutations in one of several ribosomal protein genes.  A striking feature of this disease is that a range of different mutations in ribosomal proteins results in similar disease phenotypes primarily characterized by erythrocyte abnormalities and macrocytic anemia, while most other cell types are minimally affected. Previously, we analyzed the erythrocyte membrane proteomes of several DBA patients and identified several proteins that are not typically associated with this cell type that suggested inflammatory mechanisms contribute to the pathogenesis of DBA.  In this study, we evaluated the erythrocyte cytosolic proteome of DBA patients through in-depth analysis of hemoglobin-depleted erythrocyte cytosol.  The simple, reproducible, hemoglobin depletion using nickel columns enabled in-depth analysis of over 1000 cytosolic erythrocyte proteins with minimal subsequent fractionation of the proteome.  Label-free quantitation and statistical analysis identified 29 proteins that were significantly changed in DBA patients compared to matched healthy control donors.  Some of the proteins that were significantly increased in DBA erythrocyte cytoplasm included three proteasome subunit beta proteins that make up the immunoproteasome and proteins induced by interferon-γ such as n-myc interactor and interferon-induced 25 kDa protein [NMI and IFI35 respectively].  Pathway analysis confirmed the presence of an inflammatory signature with erythrocytes of DBA patients and predicted key upstream regulators including mitogen activated kinase 1, interferon-γ, tumor suppressor p53, and tumor necrosis factor.  These results show that erythrocytes in DBA patients are intrinsically different from those in healthy controls which may be due to an inflammatory response resulting from the inherent molecular defect of ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency or changes in the bone marrow microenvironment that leads to red cell aplasia in DBA patients.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, we first validated the utility of Ni-NTA columns to effectively and reproducibly deplete hemoglobin in a manner that is amenable to an in-depth analysis of the erythrocyte cytosol proteome of clinical blood specimens.  Effects of varying degrees of fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis parameters on depth of analysis of the Hb-depleted cytosolic erythrocyte proteome as well as reproducibility of Hb-depletion using nickel columns were assessed using in-gel trypsin digestion.  For preliminary analyses of the total erythrocyte cytoplasm as well as the Hb-depleted and Hb-enriched fractions of cytoplasm, 13 µg of protein was run to one cm on a 10-well 10% Bis-Tris SDS PAGE gel with MOPS buffer.  For further optimization of Hb-depleted fractions and comparison of Hb-depleted erythrocyte cytoplasm from DBA patients and healthy donors, 25 and 30 μg of protein, respectively, was run to one cm on a 10% Bis-Tris SDS PAGE gel with MES buffer Briefly, gel lanes were cut into 12, 1-mm slices (to account for gel swelling) and three adjacent slices from the same sample lane were pooled for in-gel protein reduction and alkylation with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and iodoacetimide, respectively, followed by trypsin digestion with 0.8 µg sequence grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) for 16 hours at 37°C.  Final protein digests were pooled for analysis of one or multiple fractions and stored at -20 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nanoAcquity HPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) and a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  For each analysis, five µL of tryptic digest was loaded onto a 180 µm x 20 mm trap column packed with 5 µm Symmetry C18 resin (Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q H2¬O [Millipore, Billerica, MA]) followed by separation on a 75 µm x 250 mm analytical column packed with 1.7 µm BEH130 C18 resin (Waters).  Peptides were eluted with either a four or eight hour chromatographic gradient using solvent A and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For the four hour gradient peptides were eluted using 5-28% B over 170 minutes, 28-50% B over 50 minutes, 50-80% B over 10 minutes, constant 80% B for 10 minutes, and 80-5% B over five minutes.  A 30 minute blank gradient was run in between each sample injection to minimize carryover. Full scans were carried out from 400-2000 m/z with 60,000 resolution.  MS2 data were acquired in data-dependent mode of the top six most intense ions with dynamic exclusion enabled for 60 s, monoisotopic precursor selection enabled, and single charged ions rejected.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed through the MaxQuant Software package (Ver. 1.4.0.8).  Proteins were identified with the Andromeda search engine within the MaxQuant program using the human UniRef 100 database (Ver. March 2013) that was expanded to include common environmental contaminants.  The search was performed with full tryptic specificity, two missed cleavages, and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications.  The protein and peptide false discovery rates were both set to 1%, as determined by the Andromeda software using a reverse database, with actual false discovery rates of 0.96% and 0.93% % for the Hb-depletion preliminary dataset and DBA study, respectively.  For preliminary analysis of the utility and reproducibility of Hb-depletion, label-free quantitation was enabled with no matching between runs.   For triplicate analysis of Hb-depleted cytosol and for the large-scale experiment of DBA patients and controls, label-free quantitation was performed with match between runs enabled with a one minute matching time window and a 20 minute alignment time window to align features between all samples and allow for quantitation of matching peaks in which no MS/MS was acquired..  Initial data filtering and analysis was done using Perseus software to remove reverse hits, proteins identified only by modified peptides, contaminants (trypsin, keratins, etc) and low confidence proteins identified by only one peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a rare, congenital erythrocyte aplasia that is usually caused by haploinsufficiency of ribosomal proteins due to diverse mutations in one of several ribosomal genes. A striking feature of this disease is that a range of different mutations in ribosomal proteins results in similar disease phenotypes primarily characterized by erythrocyte abnormalities and macrocytic anemia, while most other cell types in the body are minimally affected. Previously, we analyzed the erythrocyte membrane proteomes of several DBA patients and identified several proteins that are not typically associated with this cell type and that suggested inflammatory mechanisms contribute to the pathogenesis of DBA. In this study, we evaluated the erythrocyte cytosolic proteome of DBA patients through in-depth analysis of hemoglobin-depleted erythrocyte cytosols. Simple, reproducible, hemoglobin depletion using nickel columns enabled in-depth analysis of over 1000 cytosolic erythrocyte proteins with only moderate total analysis time per proteome. Label-free quantitation and statistical analysis identified 29 proteins with significantly altered abundance levels in DBA patients compared to matched healthy control donors. Proteins that were significantly increased in DBA erythrocyte cytoplasms included three proteasome subunit beta proteins that make up the immunoproteasome and proteins induced by interferon-&#x3b3; such as n-myc interactor and interferon-induced 35 kDa protein [NMI and IFI35 respectively]. Pathway analysis confirmed the presence of an inflammatory signature in erythrocytes of DBA patients and predicted key upstream regulators including mitogen activated kinase 1, interferon-&#x3b3;, tumor suppressor p53, and tumor necrosis factor. These results show that erythrocytes in DBA patients are intrinsically different from those in healthy controls which may be due to an inflammatory response resulting from the inherent molecular defect of ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency or changes in the bone marrow microenvironment that leads to red cell aplasia in DBA patients.

### Keywords
Human, Erythrocyte, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Wistar Institute Philadelphia, PA USA
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Esther Pesciotta

### Lab Head
Dr David W. Speicher
The Wistar Institute Philadelphia, PA USA


