### Accession
PXD026296

### Title
Adverse stem cell features in a single AML sample predict clinical outcome in AML patient cohorts

### Description
Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) suffer dismal prognosis and the most adverse subpopulation within each tumor determines patient’s prognosis.  To better understand challenging features in AML, we studied individual stem cells from a single AML sample, complementing genomic with in vivo functional studies. Primary tumor cells from an AML patient’s first and second relapse were transplanted into NSG mice to establish serially transplantable patient derived xenografts (PDX). In an innovative approach, twelve derivative PDX clones were generated thereof, each derived from a single AML stem cell as proven by molecular barcoding, and were color-marked to facilitate multiplex competitive in vivo assays. PDX clones consisted of four different genomic clusters; one cluster displayed resistance against Cytarabine treatment, while two other clusters harbored increased stem cell potential, indicating that stemness and treatment resistance had evolved independently in the sample. In vivo functional data correlated closely with the phylogenetic tree calculated from exome data. The Cytarabine-resistant cluster was characterized by a distinct gene expression profile, and a score thereof predicted outcome in large clinical patient data cohorts. Taken together, we provide proof of concept that intra-sample heterogeneity mimics inter-sample heterogeneity in AML. Stem cell disparities within a single sample allow insights into adverse characteristics of general importance for AML.

### Sample Protocol
FACS sorted human AML-PDX cells were lysed in 1%SDC buffer (1%SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 40mM CAA and 10mM TCEP), incubated on ice for 20 minutes, boiled at 95°C, sonicated for 10mins on a Biorupter plus and heated again for 5minutes at 95°C ( Kulak, N.A., Nature Method 2014 ). Proteins in the sample were digested overnight at 37°C with LysC (1:100 ratio) and Trypsin (1:100 ratio). To the peptides 5x volume Isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed to stop the digestion. The peptides were de-salted on equilibrated styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips, washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Purified peptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (2%ACN, 0.1% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data analysis  DIA raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys, Cat. No. Sw-3001, version 13.12.20021743655) using the default settings for targeted DIA analysis. A project-specific spectral library from PDX samples (8 fractions, DDA data) encompassing 149,249 precursors, corresponding to 8489 protein groups was generated utilizing pulser against the human Uniprot reference proteome database (version August 2018, containing 21,039 entries) and used. Data export was filtered by ‘No Decoy’ and ‘Quantification Data Filtering’ for peptide and protein quantifications. Proteome data visualization  We performed data analysis using the open source Perseus environment (version1.5.2.11). DIA analysis achieved data completeness upto 99% per sample. Missing values were imputed by data imputation by normal distribution (Gaussian distribution width=0.5, downshift=1.5) to provide signals for low abundant proteins under the postulation that the low signals is due to detection limit of the MS measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients suffer dismal prognosis upon treatment resistance. To study functional heterogeneity of resistance, we generated serially transplantable patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models from one patient with AML and twelve clones thereof, each derived from a single stem cell, as proven by genetic barcoding. Transcriptome and exome sequencing segregated clones according to their origin from relapse one or two. Undetectable for sequencing, multiplex fluorochrome-guided competitive in vivo treatment trials identified a subset of relapse two clones as uniquely resistant to cytarabine treatment. Transcriptional and proteomic profiles obtained from resistant PDX clones and refractory AML patients defined a 16-gene score that was predictive of clinical outcome in a large independent patient cohort. Thus, we identified novel genes related to cytarabine resistance and provide proof of concept that intra-tumor heterogeneity reflects inter-tumor heterogeneity in AML.

### Keywords
Resistance, Aml, Pdx, Stem cells, Transcriptome, Proteome

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr.Matthias Mann
MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry


