### Accession
PXD023001

### Title
Assessing the biomolecular landscape and dynamics of systemically circulating lipid-carrying particles

### Description
Separating lipid-carrying particles from body fluids is challenging and complicates studies of extracellular vesicles (EV) and lipoprotein particles (LPP) as disease biomarkers. In this study, we assess the biomolecular composition and dynamics of systemically circulating matched EV and LPP by analyzing serial blood plasma samples from breast cancer, ovarian cancer and HIV patients (n=36). Particles were separated through combined size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and equilibrium density gradient centrifugation. After the analytical validity of our method is demonstrated, we reveal that EV carry a unique, dynamic and condition-dependent protein composition and RNA profile, which is not directly measurable in LPP extracts and total blood plasma, respectively. Our study extends the knowledge on the compositional nature of the EV protein corona and provides a catalog of proteins associated with systemically circulating EV and LPP. We anticipate that this research will steer the further development of EV-based biomarkers to detect and monitor disease.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 0.4% SDS, followed by the addition of Amphipol A8-35 (CliniSciences, Nanterre, France). After acidification to pH 3 with formic acid, Amphipol A8-35 precipitates and a protein pellet is formed. This pellet was re-dissolved in 100 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.9, followed by overnight digestion with 2.5 µg trypsin at 37 °C. After digestion, the sample was acidified, resulting in Amphipol A8-35 precipitation while peptides stay in solution. The peptide mixture was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer using a 240 min gradient run. The MS/MS data were searched using the MaxQuant software against a database containing the Swiss-Prot “Homo sapiens” entries (version 08/2016: 20 198 sequences). Filtering for contaminating proteins, reverse identification and identification by site was used. Proteins with minimum one unique peptide were included. Identification was carried out at a confidence level of 99%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
Identified protein lists were analysed and visualized using the Perseus software version 1.5.4.1. Proteins showing valid values in at least 66.67% of at least one group were selected. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. For selected analyses, intensities were transformed to z-scores. Differences of the mean were evaluated by Student’s t-test with permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) estimation and q-values smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Volcano plots were generated using the Perseus software with S0 set at 0.1. Principle component analyses were performed using Past3 software. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering heat maps, using 1-Pearson correlation, were generated using the Morpheus tool. Protein annotation and gene ontology analysis was implemented using UniProt, GeneCards and the DAVID database. Functional pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the ClueGo plug-in and data were visualized using Cytoscape. Identification of LDL and HDL-associated proteins was obtained using the LDL/HDL proteome database from the Davidson/Shah lab.

### Publication Abstract
Separating extracellular vesicles (EV) from blood plasma is challenging and complicates their biological understanding and biomarker development. In this study, we fractionate blood plasma by combining size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and OptiPrep density gradient centrifugation to study clinical context-dependent and time-dependent variations in the biomolecular landscape of systemically circulating EV. Using pooled blood plasma samples from breast cancer patients, we first demonstrate the technical repeatability of blood plasma fractionation. Using serial blood plasma samples from HIV and ovarian cancer patients (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;10) we next show that EV carry a clinical context-dependent and/or time-dependent protein and small RNA composition, including miRNA and tRNA. In addition, differential analysis of blood plasma fractions provides a catalogue of putative proteins not associated with systemically circulating EV. In conclusion, the implementation of blood plasma fractionation allows to advance the biological understanding and biomarker development of systemically circulating EV.

### Keywords
Hiv, Extracellular vesicles, Cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Radiation Oncology and Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Cancer Research Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr An Hendrix
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Radiation Oncology and Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Cancer Research Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.


