### Accession
PXD038964

### Title
Comparative phyloproteomics identifies conserved plasmodesmal proteins

### Description
Plasmodesmata are cytosolic bridges, lined by the plasma membrane and traversed by endoplasmic reticulum, connecting cells and tissues, and critical for many aspects of plant biology. While plasmodesmata are notoriously difficult to extract, tissue fractionation and proteomic analyses can yield valuable knowledge of their composition. Here we have generated two novel proteomes to expand tissue and taxonomic representation of plasmodesmata: one from mature Arabidopsis leaves and one from the moss Physcomitrium patens and leveraged these and existing data to perform a comparative analysis to identify evolutionarily conserved protein families that are associated with plasmodesmata. Thus, we identified b-1,3-glucanases, C2 lipid-binding proteins and tetraspanins as core plasmodesmal components that likely serve as essential structural or functional components. Our approach has not only identified elements of a conserved plasmodesmal proteome, but also demonstrated the added power offered by comparative analysis for recalcitrant samples. Conserved plasmodesmal proteins establish a basis upon which ancient plasmodesmal function can be further investigated to determine the essential roles these structures play in multicellular organism physiology in the green lineages. 

### Sample Protocol
For plasmodesmal extraction, Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 plants were grown on soil in short day conditions (10 h light / 14 h dark) at 22°C. Leaves were harvested five weeks after germination. Physcomitrium (Physcomitrella) patens tissues for generating plasmodesmal fractions was grown on BCD-AT medium in long day conditions (16 h light / 8 h dark) at 25 °C. Protonemal tissue was grown on top of nitrocellulose membrane for 1 week, whereas gametophore tissue was grown directly on the medium for 4 weeks.  Plasmodesmata were extracted from expanded rosette leaves of 5-week-old Arabidopsis plants and a mix of Physcomitrium patens protonemal and gametophore tissue. To fully homogenise differentiated tissue, we extracted plasmodesmata according to Cheval et al. (2020). First, frozen mature tissue was ground into a powder in liquid nitrogen and suspended with extraction buffer (EB: 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 × cOmplete™ ULTRA protease inhibitors (Sigma), 1 mM PMSF, 1% (w/v) PVP-40kDa (Sigma)) and ultrasonicated for 1 minute in six 10-second pulses with a five second pause between each pulse (Soniprep 150 Plus, MSE). The sample was passed twice through a high-pressure homogenizer (EmulsiFlex™-B15, Avestin) at 80 PSI. Triton X-100 (10% v/v) was added dropwise to the resultant homogenate to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) to disrupt residual chloroplasts and cell walls were collected by centrifugation at 400g. The cell wall pellet was washed three times (four for P. patens samples) with EB (15 mL) and centrifuged at 400g.  The cleaned cell wall pellet was incubated in an equal volume of cellulase buffer (CB: 20 mM MES-KOH pH 5.5, 100 mM NaCl, 2% w/v Cellulase R-10 (Yakult Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Japan), 1 × cOmplete™ ULTRA protease inhibitors (Sigma), 1 mM PMSF) for 1 h at 37°C, 200 rpm. Undigested cell wall was removed by centrifugation at 5000g, and the supernatant collected as the plasmodesmal membrane containing fraction. The cell wall pellet was washed again with CB to extract residual plasmodesmal membranes and the soluble fraction was ultracentrifuged at 135,000g for 1 h. The membrane pellet was resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 1×cOmplete™ ULTRA EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Sigma), 1 mM PMSF, 0.2% (v/v) IPEGAL®CA-630 (Sigma).     Plasmodesmal samples were run 5 mm into a 1.5 mm thick 10% polyacrylamide Tris resolving gel (containing 0.1% SDS) without a stacking gel, in a glycine 0.1% SDS running buffer. The gel was washed in dH2O and then the band was excised. The bands were washed four times in 20% acetonitrile at 40°C for 15 minutes to remove detergents, and then stored at 4°C with 100 µL of dH2O.     Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by the Cambridge Centre of Proteomics. 1D gel bands were cut into 1 mm2 pieces, destained, reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to enzymatic digestion with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano-Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 µm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 A pore size, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 15 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 90 minutes (the total run time including column washing and re-equilibration was 120 minutes).    The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70,000 and scanned between m/z 380 - 1,500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, Normalised collision energy (NCE): 25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17,500. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds was employed.  

### Data Protocol
Post-run, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files and the files were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK, version 2.6.0) and searched against the Cambridge Centre of Proteomics database, including common contaminant sequences containing non-specific proteins such as keratins and trypsin. Variable modifications of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were applied, as well as a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C). The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. A significance threshold value of p < 0.05 and a peptide cut-off score of 20 were also applied. All data (DAT files) were then imported into the Scaffold program (Version 4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc, Portland, OR). Proteins were classed as positively identified when the peptide and protein identification probability thresholds were greater than 95% (Leijon et al., 2018) and proteins were identified in at least two replicates.     GO Analysis    Gene ontology (GO) was used to test gene lists for cellular localisation enrichment (Ashburner et al., 2000). Cellular localisation GO term overrepresentation test was performed, using the Panther database (release 01/07/2022) (Mi et al., 2019; Thomas et al., 2003) and GO Ontology database (released 13/10/2022) with a Fisher’s exact test and FDR reported. P. patens genes were annotated bioinformatically using phylogenetic backpropagation of GO terms via the Panther database (Gaudet et al., 2011). Graphs were drawn using ggplot2 in R (v4.0.0) (Wickham, 2016).    Bioinformatic analysis    HMMER v3.3 (hmmer.org) was used for sequence similarity searches (Eddy, 1998). The P. patens plasmodesmal proteome was downloaded as peptide sequences from UniProt and used as the reference database for a ‘phmmer’ search against which the A. thaliana UniProt proteome was run (UP000006548, accessed 24/04/2020) (Cheng et al., 2017). Protein matches were filtered at either E < 1 x 10-100 or E < 1 x 10-50 as stated in the text.     Orthofinder (v2.2.6) was used to create de novo orthogroups (Emms and Kelly, 2015, 2019). Plasmodesmal proteome protein sequences were downloaded using UniProt, TAIR (Araport11), and Phytozome v12.1 (Populus trichocarpa v3.1). Orthofinder was run on these sequences with default settings.     Phylogenetic analysis    A peptide sequence was downloaded from UniProt for each protein within an orthogroup. The protein FASTA sequences were aligned with Clustal Omega (v1.2.4, (Sievers et al., 2011)) to build a consensus sequence. The consensus sequence, in Stockholm format, was used as the basis for a hmmsearch (EBI, HmmerWeb version 2.41.1, (Potter et al., 2018)). A search was conducted against the EMBL Reference Proteomes database restricted to A. thaliana (taxon id: 3702), P. patens (taxon id: 3218), and P. trichocarpa (taxon id: 3694) species sequences with the sequence E-value cut off 1 x 10-100, unless otherwise stated. Protein sequences were manually deduplicated for each gene.    The FASTA sequences for all identified homologues, from the hmmsearch, in all three species were downloaded and a bootstrapped non-rooted phylogenetic was generated using the ‘standard_trimmed_phyml_bootstrap’ ete workflow (v3.1.1, (Huerta-Cepas et al., 2016)). In this workflow, sequences are aligned with Clustal Omega, trimmed with TrimAI (Capella-Gutiérrez et al., 2009), and a phylogeny determined with 100 bootstraps using PhyML (Guindon et al., 2010). Trees were drawn using ggtree in R (v4.0.0) (Yu et al., 2017).   Molecular phylogeny for P. patens PD associated protein families (Figure S4) was determined using the maximum likelihood method (JTT matrix-based model) after sequences were aligned using MUSCLE ran on MEGA (v7). A discrete Gamma distribution with 5 categories was used to model evolutionary rate differences among sites. All positions with less than 80% site coverage were eliminated. 

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodesmata are cytosolic bridges, lined by the plasma membrane and traversed by endoplasmic reticulum; plasmodesmata connect cells and tissues, and are critical for many aspects of plant biology. While plasmodesmata are notoriously difficult to extract, tissue fractionation and proteomic analyses can yield valuable knowledge of their composition. Here we have generated two novel proteomes to expand tissue and taxonomic representation of plasmodesmata: one from mature Arabidopsis leaves and one from the moss Physcomitrium patens, and leveraged these and existing data to perform a comparative analysis to identify evolutionarily conserved protein families that are associated with plasmodesmata. Thus, we identified &#x3b2;-1,3-glucanases, C2 lipid-binding proteins, and tetraspanins as core plasmodesmal components that probably serve as essential structural or functional components. Our approach has not only identified elements of a conserved plasmodesmal proteome, but also demonstrated the added power offered by comparative analysis for recalcitrant samples. Conserved plasmodesmal proteins establish a basis upon which ancient plasmodesmal function can be further investigated to determine the essential roles these structures play in multicellular organism physiology in the green lineages.

### Keywords
Physcomitrium, Arabidopsis, Plasmodesmata, Phyloproteomics

### Affiliations
Crop Genetics, John Innes Centre, Norwich, United Kingdom
Crop Genetics John Innes Centre Norfolk United Kingdom

### Submitter
Matthew Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Faulkner
Crop Genetics John Innes Centre Norfolk United Kingdom


