### Accession
PXD035632

### Title
Absolute quantification of cellular levels of photosynthesis-related proteins in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
We quantified proteins in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 given the general importance of cyanobacteria for global photosynthesis, for synthetic biology and biotechnology research, and their ancestral relationship to the chloroplasts of plants.  Four mass spectrometry methods were used to quantify 97 cellular components involved in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll, carotenoid and bilin pigments, membrane assembly, the light reactions of photosynthesis, fixation of carbon dioxide and nitrogen, and hydrogen and sulfur metabolism. One quantification method was calibrated with artificial 15N-labelled proteins comprising concatenated proteotypic tryptic peptides and the other three methods were label-free (DDA-iBAQ, DDA-Top3, DIA-Top3) calibrated with the Sigma UPS2 standard protein mixture. As expected, the quantification methods gave individual distributions of abundance levels for each target protein that, for statistical validity, were not combined into single central tendency and variation metrics. Instead, overlapping distributions were merged to provide consensus abundance ranges. Quantification, expressed as copy numbers per cell (cpc), spanned four orders of magnitude, representing the complete abundance range from <1000 to >100,000 cpc of the proteins representing the complexes and pathways that were the focus of this study.

### Sample Protocol
Cell growth. Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 cells were grown under photoautotrophic conditions in a rotary shaking incubator at 150 rpm under moderate light conditions (30 µmol photons m-2 s-1) at 30 °C in liquid BG11. 3 replicate 80 mL cultures were harvested at OD750 = 0.6-0.7 and cells were counted in a hemocytometer. Preparation of artificial stable isotope-labelled internal standards. Artificial His-tagged 15N-labelled internal standard proteins were expressed in E. coli in M9 medium containing (15NH4)2SO4 as the sole nitrogen source and purified on a Ni-NTA column. Extraction and digestion of Synechocystis proteins for quantification. Cells (5.6 x 108) were solubilized in 100 µL 2% SDS, 60 mM DTT by vortexing with 100 µL 0.1 mm silica-zirconia beads. 3 samples of 1.6 x 108 cells were taken from each of the 3 replicate lysates and one set of samples was spiked with 15 pmol of the 15N standard proteins.  Proteins were extracted by precipitation using a Cytiva 2D clean-up kit then solubilised in 8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, reduced, S-carbamidomethylated and digested with pre-mixed trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C for 2 h. After dilution with 7.5 vol 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, digestion was continued for a further 6 h. Peptides were desalted on a C18 spin column, dried and re-dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile. Analysis by mass spectrometry. The samples containing SIL standards were analysed by nanoLC-MS (3 h gradient) at 400 ng/injection (3 technical repeats of each biological replicate in randomized order).  DDA parameters were as specified by Flannery et al. (2021) Plant J 105: 223-244.  The remaining two sample sets for LFQ were spiked with a tryptic digest of Sigma UPS2 so that each 400 ng Synechocystis peptide injection was supplemented with 42.4 ng of UPS2 peptides comprising 200 fmol of the highest concentration UPS2 proteins.  One of the UPS2 containing sample sets was analysed in triplicate (randomized order) by DDA as above, the other was analysed in triplicate (randomized order) by DIA using the ‘DIA60’ parameters described by Cole et al. (2019) Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 33: 897‐906.

### Data Protocol
The DDA MS data-files were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.3.30 using the default parameters, with the exceptions that the match between runs and iBAQ  options were enabled. Databases were (a) Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 Cyanobase proteome database (http://genome.kazusa.or.jp/cyanobase/Synechocystis; latest release 2003, 3672 entries) and (b) Sigma UPS2 standard protein database. Identification and quantification results generated by MaxQuant were manipulated in Perseus v. 1.5.3.2. SIL-DDA and LFQ-DIA analyses were processed using Skyline v. 4.1.0.18169.

### Publication Abstract
Quantifying cellular components is a basic and important step for understanding how a cell works, how it responds to environmental changes, and for re-engineering cells to produce valuable metabolites and increased biomass. We quantified proteins in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 given the general importance of cyanobacteria for global photosynthesis, for synthetic biology and biotechnology research, and their ancestral relationship to the chloroplasts of plants. Four mass spectrometry methods were used to quantify cellular components involved in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll, carotenoid and bilin pigments, membrane assembly, the light reactions of photosynthesis, fixation of carbon dioxide and nitrogen, and hydrogen and sulfur metabolism. Components of biosynthetic pathways, such as those for chlorophyll or for photosystem II assembly, range between 1000 and 10,000 copies per cell, but can be tenfold higher for CO<sub>2</sub> fixation enzymes. The most abundant subunits are those for photosystem I, with around 100,000 copies per cell, approximately 2 to fivefold higher than for photosystem II and ATP synthase, and 5-20&#xa0;fold more than for the cytochrome b<sub>6</sub>f complex. Disparities between numbers of pathway enzymes, between components of electron transfer chains, and between subunits within complexes indicate possible control points for biosynthetic processes, bioenergetic reactions and for the assembly of multisubunit complexes.

### Keywords
Chlorophyll, Photosystem, Assembly factor, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis, Electron transport, Photosynthesis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Hunter
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield


