### Accession
PXD021925

### Title
LPS Tolerance inhibits cellular respiration and induces global changes in the secretome

### Description
Inflammatory response plays an essential role in the resolution of infections. However, inflammation can be detrimental to the organism and cause irreparable damage, for example during sepsis, when a “cytokine storm” can lead to multiple organ failure and often ends in death. One of the strongest triggers of inflammatory response is bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), acting mostly through Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Prior or prolonged exposure to LPS, however, can induce the state of “endotoxin tolerance” where the macrophages and monocytes do not respond to new endotoxin challenge. The cellular mechanisms regulating this phenomenon remain elusive. Our comprehensive secreted protein analysis comparing LPS-tolerant and -responsive monocyte/macrophage-like cells combined with the extracellular flux analysis reveals the robust switch from the inflammatory to metabolic protein expression as well as points to the involvement of specific proteins that may regulate the change from the responsive to the tolerant state

### Sample Protocol
1 x 106 RAW264.7 cells were seeded in a well of a 12 well plate and grown at 37 °C for 24 h. To decrease the amount of non-specific protein in the media prior to stimulation, the cDMEM media was removed from the cell culture wells and replaced with cDMEM lacking FBS. To test the effect of multiple stimulations of the innate immune system, the RAW264.7 cells were treated in one of three ways. The first group contained control cells that received no LPS (Con) and were grown in cDMEM labeled with R0 and K0. The second group received a single stimulation with 100 ng/mL LPS 6 h prior to the collection of the media (LR) and were grown in cDMEM labeled with R+6 and K+4. The third group received two stimulations with 100 ng/mL LPS separated by 24 h with the second stimulation being 6 h prior to the sample collection (LT) and were grown in cDMEM labeled with R+10 and K+8. After the stimulations, the media were collected and equal parts of the three groups were combined into a 1.5 mL tube. Any cellular debris or detached cells were separated from the media by filtration using a 0.22 µm polysaccharide filter then the media was centrifuged at 400 xg for 5 min. Finally, the supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube and the proteins concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to dryness. Two sets of samples were prepared twice for 4 total biological replicates. The dried proteins were resuspended in 2 x SDS-PAGE loading buffer then the proteins denatured by boiling for 10 min. The proteins were separated using a 10 % Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel with MOPS buffer and run with 200 V for 40 min. The gel was fixed using 47.5 % methanol, 5 % glacial acetic acid for 30 min at room temperature then washed three times with ddH2O. The fixed proteins were stained with PageBlue protein staining solution for 1 hour at room temperature and then destained with ddH2O overnight at 4 °C. The lanes were cut from the gel using razor blades, sectioned into five equal units, and cubed into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. The gel pieces from each section were collected into 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes. 500 µL of acetonitrile (ACN) was added to the gel pieces and the tubes incubated at room temperature for 10 min before a brief centrifugation and removal of the supernatant. Next 50 µL of 10 mM dithriothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to the gel pieces and the tubes incubated at 56 °C for 30 min followed by a second incubation with ACN. Next 50 µL of 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CA) in 100 mM of ABC was added to the gel pieces and the tubes were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 20 min followed by a third incubation with ACN. Next the gel 100 µL of 50% ACN, 50 mM ABC was added to the gel pieces and the tubes were incubate at room temperature with occasional vortexing followed by a fourth incubation with ACN. The gel pieces were saturated with 13 ng/µL sequence-grade modified trypsin in 10 mM ABC, 10% ACN and the tubes were incubated at 37 °C overnight. To extract the peptides, 100 µL of 1:2 5% formic acid:acetonitrile were added to the gel pieces and the tubes incubated for 15 min in a 37 °C shaker. The tubes were centrifuged, briefly, and the supernatant collected in 1.5 mL tubes. At this point the peptides from the gel sections were recombined to make one sample per lane and the peptides concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Lastly, the samples were mixed with formic acid and ACN to generate peptide samples with 0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN.  Thermo Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF and Thermo UltiMate 3000 were used for LC-MS/MS experiments. Peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap 100 trap column (5 µm, 100 A, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm), washed with mobile phase A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and separated on a home packed C18 column (ProntoPEARL-120-2.2-C18AQ, 2.2 µm, 400 mm) at 40 ⁰C. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2 % to 35 % mobile phase B (0.1 % formic in acetonitrile) over 90 min. Gradient changes were followed at 91 min to 35 % B and then increased to 90 % B at 110 min. The gradient was changed back to 2 % of B at 125 min to equilibrate for 20 minutes prior to the next injection. Eluted peptides were ionized in positive ion polarity at a 2.3 kV of spraying voltage. MS1 full scans were recorded in the range of m/z 400 to 1,600 with a resolution of 100,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Automatic gain control was set at 5 x 105 with 500 ms of maximum injection time. Top 20 data dependent acquisition mode was used to maximize the number of MS2 spectra from each cycle. Higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) was used to fragment selected precursor ions with a normalized collision energy of 35 %. Tandem MS scans were performed in the ion trap mass analyzer with 40 ms maximum injection time, an ion full target value set at 3 x 104, and dynamic exclusion set to 45 sec. Each biological replicate was analyzed twice to create two technical replicates for each biological replicate or eight total replicates.

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) [18] and searched with the Andromeda search engine [19] against a mouse UniProt FASTA database (download date: 26.03.2019, 22 325 entries) supplemented with common contaminants and reverse sequences of all entries [20].  Andromeda search engine parameters were: type= three labels – light (Arg0, Lys0), medium – (Arg6, Lys4), and heavy – (Arg10, Lys8); fixed modification= carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications= oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine, and acetylation of protein N-terminus; minimum peptide length= 7; and max missed cleavages= 2.  The false-discovery rate was set to 0.01 at the PSM, peptide, and protein levels.  To analyze the relative amounts of each protein in the sample, the intensities of each identified protein were sorted to identify the ten lowest intensities measured in the samples.  These values were averaged and set as a base score for any missing intensity values in the data set with a random number ranging between half and double of the base score used to replace any missing values.  To identify those proteins with significant changes following LPS treatment, eight replicants were combined into a single data set and the results for each protein were analyzed by a two-tailed homoscedastic t-test in Excel to identify the proteins that had significant differences in their intensity following LPS treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory response plays an essential role in the resolution of infections. However, inflammation can be detrimental to an organism and cause irreparable damage. For example, during sepsis, a cytokine storm can lead to multiple organ failures and often results in death. One of the strongest triggers of the inflammatory response is bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS), acting mostly through Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Paradoxically, while exposure to LPS triggers a robust inflammatory response, repeated or prolonged exposure to LPS can induce a state of endotoxin tolerance, a phenomenon where macrophages and monocytes do not respond to new endotoxin challenges, and it is often associated with secondary infections and negative outcomes. The cellular mechanisms regulating this phenomenon remain elusive. We used metabolic measurements to confirm differences in the cellular metabolism of na&#xef;ve macrophages and that of macrophages responding to LPS stimulation or those in the LPS-tolerant state. In parallel, we performed an unbiased secretome survey using quantitative mass spectrometry during the induction of LPS tolerance, creating the first comprehensive secretome profile of endotoxin-tolerant cells. The secretome changes confirmed that LPS-tolerant macrophages have significantly decreased cellular metabolism and that the proteins secreted by LPS-tolerant macrophages have a strong association with cell survival, protein metabolism, and the metabolism of reactive oxygen species.

### Keywords
Lps tolerance, Raw 264.7, Secretome, Macrophages

### Affiliations
NIH-NIAID
Senior Investigator Chief, Functional Cellular Networks Section Laboratory of Immune System Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Joseph Gillen

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
Senior Investigator Chief, Functional Cellular Networks Section Laboratory of Immune System Biology National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA


