### Accession
PXD019957

### Title
Effects of Ang(1-7) on RDEB mouse model

### Description
Analysis of protein abundance changes in mouse paws comparing WT mice to RDEB- and RDEB-Ang(1-7)-treated mice

### Sample Protocol
Skin specimens or whole forepaws were obtained from three age-matched RDEB mice and three wild-type mice per time point. After sacrifice, the back skin was shaved and skin and paws snap-frozen. Tissue was homogenized as for western blot analyses and tissue homogenate boiled under harsh vortexing for 20 min in SDS–PAGE loading buffer with 1 mM DTT. Proteins were separated by 4–12% gradient SDS–PAGE. The gel lanes were cut into 10 equal slices. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and the resulting peptide mixtures were processed on STAGE tips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins and protein abundance assignment was performed with MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Expression proteomics, Paws, Skin, Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Prof. for Biochemistry and Cell Biology Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


