### Accession
PXD003186

### Title
N-Myristoyltransferase inhibition in HeLa

### Description
N-Myristoyltransferase (NMT) covalently attaches a C14-fatty acid to the N-terminal glycine of proteins and has been proposed as a therapeutic target in cancer. We used quantitative proteomics to map protein expression changes for more than 2700 proteins in response to treatment with an NMT inhibitor in HeLa cells, and observed down-regulation of proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, and up-regulation of many proteins involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response. This study defines the cellular response to NMT inhibition at the proteome level, and provides a knowledgebase for targeting specific cancers with NMT inhibitors, potentially in combination with other targeted agents.

### Sample Protocol
Following treatment with NMT inhibitor for 0, 1, 2 or 3 days (5 µM) adherent and floating cells were lysed in 4% SDS and 0.1 M DTT. Protein concentration was determined and the samples were spiked-in with a heavy spike-in standard prepared by lysing heavy HeLa cells in the same lysis buffer. The samples and spike-in standard were mixed in a 1:1 ratio. Samples were digested according to a Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol, which was performed using a 5 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (EMD Millipore). 30 μL of each sample (60 µg of lysate) were mixed with 200 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (Urea Buffer) in the spin filter and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min at 20 °C to remove SDS. The proteins were washed with 200 µL urea buffer to exchange any remaining SDS by urea. The proteins were alkylated with  iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT in the dark, washed with urea buffer (2 x) and with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) (5 x). Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation by the addition of 40 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) and of 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl. Where indicated, samples were fractionated to increase the number of identified proteins. Samples were acidified with TFA (1% (v/v) TFA) and loaded on the sorbent and washed with 0.2% (v/v) TFA in MilliQ water (2 x 60 µL) to de-salt the sample. Elution from the sorbent (SDB-RPS from 3M) with 60 µL 100 mM Ammonium formate, 40% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) Formic acid to give “fraction 1”, with 60 µL 5% (v/v) Ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) ACN to yield “fraction 2” followed by elution with 60 µL 5% (v/v) Ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) ACN to give “fraction 3”. Fractions were concentrated and peptides dissolved in 0.5% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water before being transferred into LC-MS sample vials. Non-fractionated samples were de-salted prior to LC-MS/MS using SDC-XC from 3M. Elution from the sorbent with 70% acetonitrile in water was followed by speed-vac-assisted solvent removal, reconstitution of peptides in 0.5% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water, and transferred into LC-MS sample vials.  LC-MS/MS analysis The analysis was performed as previously described using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1. Easy nLC-1000 was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5,61 and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against human Swissprot+Isoforms database (July 2013) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ mode was selected. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
N-Myristoyltransferase (NMT) covalently attaches a C14 fatty acid to the N-terminal glycine of proteins and has been proposed as a therapeutic target in cancer. We have recently shown that selective NMT inhibition leads to dose-responsive loss of N-myristoylation on more than 100 protein targets in cells, and cytotoxicity in cancer cells. N-myristoylation lies upstream of multiple pro-proliferative and oncogenic pathways, but to date the complex substrate specificity of NMT has limited determination of which diseases are most likely to respond to a selective NMT inhibitor. We describe here the phenotype of NMT inhibition in HeLa cells and show that cells die through apoptosis following or concurrent with accumulation in the G1 phase. We used quantitative proteomics to map protein expression changes for more than 2700 proteins in response to treatment with an NMT inhibitor in HeLa cells and observed down-regulation of proteins involved in cell cycle regulation and up-regulation of proteins involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response, with similar results in breast (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231) and colon (HCT116) cancer cell lines. This study describes the cellular response to NMT inhibition at the proteome level and provides a starting point for selective targeting of specific diseases with NMT inhibitors, potentially in combination with other targeted agents.

### Keywords
Hela, Q-exactive, N-myristoyltransferase inhibition, Spike-in silac

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Thinon

### Lab Head
Dr Ed Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, UK


