### Accession
PXD027439

### Title
High temporal resolution proteome and phosphoproteome profiling of stem cell-derived hepatocyte development

### Description
Primary human hepatocytes are widely used to evaluate liver toxicity of drugs, but they are scarce and demanding to culture. Stem cell-derived hepatocytes are increasingly discussed as alternatives. To obtain a better appreciation of the molecular processes during the differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells into hepatocytes, we employ a quantitative proteomic approach to follow the expression of 9,000 proteins, 12,000 phosphorylation sites, and 800 acetylation sites over time. The analysis reveals stage-specific markers, a major molecular switch between hepatic endoderm versus immature hepatocyte-like cells impacting e.g. metabolism, the cell cycle, kinase activity, and the expression of drug transporters. Comparing the proteomes of 2D and 3D-derived hepatocytes to fetal and adult liver, indicate a fetal-like status of the in vitro models and lower expression of important ADME/Tox proteins. The collective data enable constructing a molecular roadmap of hepatocyte development that serve as a valuable resource for future research.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, protein digestion and labeling Cells were harvested/isolated and washed twice with PBS (w/o CaCl2/MgCl2, Sigma). The cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 40 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor (cOmplete™, Roche) and 1x phosphatase inhibitor mix. Samples were frozen at -80 °C and thawed on ice before they were pelleted at 20.000 xg at 4 °C for 20 minutes. The protein concentration was measured via Bradford and 100 ug (for TkDA3-4 differentiations) or 70 ug (for the Ff-I01 differentiation) were further used for digesting. Therefore, samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 55 mM CAA for 30 minutes at RT in the dark. Next, 40 mM Tris was used to decrease the urea concentration below 1.6 M. The digestion was started by adding 1:100 (enzyme:protein) trypsin (Roche) and incubating at 37 °C for 3 h and 700 rpm on a thermoshaker. After the pre-incubation, more trypsin was added at a 1:100 (enzyme:protein) ratio and incubated overnight. After digestion, samples were acidified to a pH of 2-3 with formic acid and used for StageTip desalting like described previously (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The desalted samples were frozen and dried using a Speed-Vac. Next, the peptides were labeled with TMT like described previously (Zecha et al., 2019). Briefly, peptides were reconstituted in 20 ul of 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), 5 uL of 11.6 mM TMT reagent was added and incubated at RT shaking at 400 rpm. After 1 h, the labeling reaction was stopped using 2 µL of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma). Next, all channels were pooled and the reaction tubes were rinsed with 20 µL of 10% FA in 10% ACN and also combined to the pooled samples. The labeled peptides were frozen and dried using a Speed-Vac. The labeled peptides were further reconstituted in 0.1 % FA and loaded on pre-equilibrated 50 mg SepPak columns (Water Corp.). Unspecific binders were washed away with 0.1 % FA and peptides were eluted with 0.1 % FA in 50 % ACN and dried. Peptide enrichment, immunoprecipitation and off-line fractionation Next, phosphopeptides were enriched as described earlier (Ruprecht et al., 2017a). In brief, desalted samples were reconstituted in 0.07% TFA with 30% ACN and loaded onto a Fe3+-IMAC column (ProPac™ IMAC-10 4x50mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The unbound peptides were collected and further used as full proteome. The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 0.315% NH4OH and fractionated as described previously (Ruprecht et al., 2017b). In Brief, dried phosphopeptides were resuspended in 25 mM NH4FA, loaded onto StageTips (5 disks, diameter 1.5 mm C18 material, 3 M Empore) and eluted with 5%, 10%, 15%, 17.5% and 50% ACN in 25 mM NH4FA. The 5% and 50% fractions as well as the 17.5% and flowthrough were combined and all fractions were dried before data acquisition. The TkDA3-4 full proteome was further used for acetyl-IP according to the manufacturer´s protocol with some modifications. For this, the dried full proteome samples were reconstituted in PTMScan® IAP (immunoaffinity purification) buffer and incubated at 4°C for 1h with PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif (both Cell Signaling Technology) antibody beads. The unbound full proteome was dried and used for further offline fractionation. Acetylated peptides were eluted with 0.15% TFA and desalted via StageTips (3 disks, diameter 1.5 mm C18 material, 3 M Empore)(Rappsilber et al., 2007). Desalted samples were further dried and used for mass spectrometry measurements. The full proteome fractions were further deep fractionated via Trinity fractionation (only TkDA3-4 cells) or hPH reversed phase as described previously (Yu et al., 2017). For Trinity fractionation, samples were reconstituted in 10 mM NH4OAC (in water, pH 4.7) and loaded onto an Acclaim AmG C18 column (2.1x150 mm, Thermo Scientific) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted to 32 fractions by increasing the concentration of the elution buffer (10 mM NH4OAC in 95 % ACN, pH 5.4). For hPH fractionation, samples were reconstituted in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8) and loaded onto a C18 column (XBridge BEH130, 3.5 µm, 2.1x150mm, Waters Corp.). Peptides were eluted with increasing ACN concentration to 96 fractions and further pooled to 48 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis For data analysis and visualization, mostly Microsoft Excel, GraphPad Prism 5, RStudio (version [4.0.2]), and the Perseus software (Cox and Mann, 2012; Tyanova et al., 2016) (v. 1.6.2.3) were used. Firstly, all reversed hits and “only identified by site” protein entries were removed from the proteingroups.txt output. Then, the reporter intensities were log2 transformed and median-centered to the overall median of the respective dataset. Further, samples were adjusted with ComBat (Johnson et al., 2007) from the ´sva´ package (version [3.30.1]) to remove batch effects between replicates. Principal component analysis was performed on the intersection of the replicates with the ‘factoextra’ package (version [1.0.7]) and plotted with the ‘ggplot2’ package (version [3.3.2]). ANOVA test with multiple testing correction (Benjamini-Hochberg) was used to determine significance. A protein was classified as differentially expressed with an FDR<0.05 and a log2-fold-change>1 at one or more time points. For clustering, all differentially expressed proteins were row-wise z-scored and hierarchical clustered with the Perseus software. (All differentially expressed proteins were row-wise z-scored and hierarchically clustered using the Perseus software). The KEGG enrichment analysis was performed with the ‘clusterProfiler’ (Yu and He, 2016) package (version [3.16.0]) with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold set to 0.05. To derive transcription factor-target relationships, differentially expressed proteins from each time point (relative to iPSC) were processed with TRRUST (version 2). Phosphoproteomics and acetyl-IP data analysis Reverse hits were removed from the Maxquant output and filtered for class I (localisation probability>0.75) phosphosites or acetylsites, respectively. The reporter intensities were log2 transformed and median-centered using the correction factors from the corresponding full proteome data. Batch effect correction was performed with ComBat and differentially expressed phosphosites or acetylsites, respectively, were determined like for the full proteome dataset (ANOVA: FDR<0.05 and log2-fold-change>1). The differentially expressed phosphosites were further used for kinase-substrate relationship prediction with the networkin (Horn et al., 2014) web-tool.

### Publication Abstract
Primary human hepatocytes are widely used to evaluate liver toxicity of drugs, but they are scarce and demanding to culture. Stem cell-derived hepatocytes are increasingly discussed as alternatives. To obtain a better appreciation of the molecular processes during the differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells into hepatocytes, we employ a quantitative proteomic approach to follow the expression of 9,000 proteins, 12,000 phosphorylation sites, and 800 acetylation sites over time. The analysis reveals stage-specific markers, a major molecular switch between hepatic endoderm versus immature hepatocyte-like cells impacting, e.g., metabolism, the cell cycle, kinase activity, and the expression of drug transporters. Comparing the proteomes of two- (2D) and three-dimensional (3D)-derived hepatocytes with fetal and adult liver indicates a fetal-like status of the in&#xa0;vitro models and lower expression of important ADME/Tox proteins. The collective data enable constructing a molecular roadmap of hepatocyte development that serves as a valuable resource for future research.

### Keywords
Hepatocyte differentiation, Phosphoproteomics, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Stem cell-derived organoids, 2d versus 3d differentiation

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Krumm

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich, Germany


