### Accession
PXD032299

### Title
Discovery and validation of serum glycoprotein biomarker panel for detection of high grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
We aimed to discover and validate a panel of serum biomarkers for high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) using our lectin-magnetic bead array-coupled proteomics platform. Serum from age-matched women with HGSOC, benign tumours or healthy controls were analysed in discovery (UKCTOCS, n=30 and UKOPS, n=30) and validation (Australian Ovarian Cancer Study, n=95) cohorts using shotgun and targeted proteomics, respectively. A 7-lectin discovery screen shortlisted 60 candidate proteins and 3 lectins for validation, which revealed elevated levels of AAL, SNA or STL-binding FIBB, CO9, ITIH3, HPT, A1AT, AACT in HGSOC, while IBP3, A2MG, PON1, CHLE and ALS were reduced. Multimarker panels were developed using generalized regression with lasso estimation and leave-one-out cross-validation. The best performing panel comprised of 13 peptides from Solanum Tuberosum lectin (STL)-binding proteins with 96.3% area under the receiver operating curve, 97.7% specificity and 78.6% sensitivity for distinguishing HGSOC from benign and healthy groups. The peptides robust in cross-validations were from IBP3, KNG1, CO9, THRB, HPTR, HPT, FINC, FA10, GELS. The validated serum biomarkers show promise for early detection of HGSOC and should be further evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
Patient serum samples (n=60) were subjected to lectin mediated glycoprotein capture using 7 select lectins and the lectin magnetic bead array (LeMBA) protocol, as previously described (Shah, AK et al 2015, Molecular and Cellular Proteomics). Briefly, samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g at 4 °C for 15 min to remove cellular debris and the supernatant protein concentration was determined using standard bicinchoninic acid assay. To minimise batch effects, bulk serum denaturation was performed for the entire DDA experiment. 800 µg (10 µg/µl) of  each serum sample along with spiked-in 10 pmol chick ovalbumin (internal standard) was denatured in buffer containing 1% v/v SDS and 5% v/v triton. Serum proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 30 min and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. The denatured serum proteins are diluted in LeMBA binding buffer (20 mM TRIS + 300 mM NaCl + 1 mM CaCl2 + 1 mM MnCl2 + 1% Triton + 1 unit protease inhibitor cocktail) to yield a final protein concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. 50 µg denatured serum sample is added to 50 µg lectin conjugated beads and serum glycoprotein capture is performed at 4 °C for 1 hour. Beads are washed several times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to minimise the detergent, reducing and alkylating agent concentrations. 1 g of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Invitrogen, Australia) is added to the beads and on-bead trypsin digestion is facilitated at 37 C for 18 h. The trypsin was inactivated with 1% v/v formic acid (FA; Merck, USA) and the digested peptides were collected, dried down in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% v/v FA to a final concentration of 1 g/l for mass spectrometry analysis  Shotgun proteomics using data-dependent acquisition was performed on a SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer coupled to a Shimadzu LC-20AD Prominence nano liquid chromatography system. 2 g digested peptides were injected onto a Protecol C18 analytical column (200 Å, 3 m, 150 mm x 150 m, Trojan Scientific, Australia) connected to a Protecol guard column (Polar 120 Å, 3 m, 10 mm x 300 m, Trojan Scientific, Australia) and the sample injection order was randomised in the worklist. Column compartment was maintained at 45 °C. The peptides were eluted using mobile phase A (0.1% v/v FA) over the specified gradient of mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile, 5% v/v water, 0.1% v/v FA) for 60 min at a flow rate of 1.2 µl/min (5% B at 3 min; 30% B at 37 min; 50% B at 45 min; 100% B at 47min; 100% B at 51 min; 5% B at 53 min until end of run). The nanospray ion source was set as follows: ion source gas 1 at 35 psi, curtain gas at 30 psi, ion spray floating voltage at 2400 V and interface heater temperature at 180 °C. Data acquisition was performed using the information dependent acquisition (IDA) Top 30 method. The MS1 spectra was acquired in positive polarity within the mass range = m/z 350 — 1250 Da, with the accumulation time of 250 ms. The MS/MS spectra were acquired using collision induced dissociation (CID) within the mass range = m/z 100 — 1500 Da with the following parameters: charge states +2 to +5, accumulation time= 100 ms, dynamic exclusion =15 sec and rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw ion spectra for each lectin batch were searched for protein IDs against the reviewed Uniprot human proteome database (20,365 proteins, accession date 01/01/2020) using MaxQuant software, v. 1.6.6.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nature Biotechnology). MaxQuant parameters were set as follows: Digestion = trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications were set as methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation; Label free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with minimum ratio count set to 2; unique and razor peptides were used for protein identification; match between runs was set as TRUE; and false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01. The generated protein list was filtered to remove contaminants, reverse identified protein IDs, proteins with <2 peptide IDs and score <5. The filtered dataset was imported into R v software v1.4.1103 for further data processing and statistical analyses. Proteins which were missing in < 25% of all samples were considered missing at random and imputed using localized least square regression (llsimpute) as described elsewhere (Välikangas et al., 2017). Proteins missing in > 25% were imputed with the minimum detected value (values drawn randomly from a normal distribution centered at sample minimum and with SD estimated from non-missing proteins). Log2 transformed data was analyzed using the R limma package to identify statistically significant proteins (p value <0.1) that are either up- or down-regulated in HGOSC.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lectin, Ovarian cancer screening, Stl, Glycosylation, Lemba

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,  Precision & Systems Biomedicine, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
300 Herston Road, Herston QLD 4006

### Submitter
Thomas Stoll

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,  Precision & Systems Biomedicine, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia


