### Accession
PXD033086

### Title
PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES FROM FASCIOLA HEPATICA HATCHING EGGS AND JUVENILES IN CULTURE

### Description
The identification of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in Fasciola hepatica has provided a new way to understand parasite-host communication. Most of the studies on EVs have focused on the adult stage of F. hepatica, but recently, the presence of EVs from different developmental stages has been reported. To better understand the role of EVs in the infection process and immune response modulation, the protein cargo of EVs from embryonated eggs and newly-excysted juvenile (NEJs) flukes cultured up to 28 days, has been analyzed. EVs were isolated by size exclusion chromatography and evaluated by nanoparticle tracking analysis and transmission electron microscopy. LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of EVs revealed the presence of 23 different proteins from embryonated egg-derived EVs and 29 different proteins from NEJ-derived EVs. Most of the identified proteins had been previously described in EVs from F. hepatica adults, including cytoskeletal proteins, glycolytic enzymes, stress-related proteins and tetraspanins. Nevertheless, EVs from hatching eggs and NEJs exhibited qualitative differences in composition, when compared to EVs form adults, including the absence of cathepsin cysteine peptidases. The differential content of the EVs released by the different developmental stages of the parasite reflect the intense activity of NEJs at this early stage, with several proteins involved in membrane traffic and cell physiology. This new set of identified proteins could help to understand key metabolic, biochemical and molecular mechanisms mediated by EVs that take place upon egg hatching and after parasite excystment.

### Sample Protocol
Before sample processing, a 1:1 combination of two different types of carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (Thermo Scientific Sera-Mag SpeedBeads™) were used to remove contaminants. Beads were rinsed three times in 1mL of water, placing the beads on a magnetics rack (MagneSphere, Promega, cat. no. Z5342) and removing the supernatant each time. Then, 500 L of water were added to the beads for storage at 4ºC as a 20 g/L stock concentration of beads. To prepare the samples, purified extracellular vesicles were dried and dissolved in 30 L of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). 4 L of beads were added to each sample and then, immediately, acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 70% (v/v). The sample/bead mixture was briefly vortex, incubated for 20 min at RT and placed on a magnetic rack for 2 min, discarding the supernatant. The beads were then washed twice with 200 L of 70% EtOH, and once with 180 L of ACN, incubating the beads on the magnetic rack for 30 s and discarding the supernatant each time, allowing them to dry for 2 min to ensure complete removal of ACN. For elution, the washed beads were resuspended in 45 L of 50 mM ABC buffer, and treated overnight with 500 ng trypsin (Promega) in a final volume of 50 L at 37ºC. Digestions were stopped with 60 L of Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich) 10% (final pH=1). The tubes were centrifuged for 1 min to pellet the beads, and the supernatants containing peptides were collected using a plate magnet. Peptide mixtures were concentrated by speed vacuum to 10 L. The final peptide mixtures were analyzed by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) in a nanoESI qQTOF 6600plus TripleTOF (Sciex) mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoLC Ekspert nanoLC-425 (Eksigent). First, 5 µL of the tryptic peptides were loaded to a trap column (3 µm C18-CL, 350 m x 0.5mm; Eksigent), and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 µL/min for 5 min. The cleaned peptides were then eluted onto an analytical column (3µm C18-CL 120 Ᾰ, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent) as described previously (Cwiklinski et al., 2015). The final elution of the peptides was carried out with a linear gradient of 15 to 40 % of solution B (ACN, 0.1% FA) in A (0.1% FA) for 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The eluted peptides were ionized in an Optiflow Source < 1 µL Nano (Sciex) applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 175 °C. Acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode (DDA) with survey MS1 scans from 350 to 1400 m/z during 250 ms.  The MS2 experiments were acquired from 100 to 1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode with the quadrupole resolution set to ‘LOW’. The proteomic analysis was performed in the proteomics facility of the SCSIE, Universitat de València

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak lists directly from 6600 plus TripleTOF wiff files.  The Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) of ProteinPilot v 5.0 was used to search the Uniprot_trematoda database (200604, 362615 proteins). The parameters used were: Trypsin specificity, IAM cys-alkylation, no taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to rapid with FDR analysis. The protein grouping was done using the Pro-group algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in <i>Fasciola hepatica</i> has provided a new way to understand parasite-host communication. Most of the studies on EVs have focused on the adult stage of <i>F. hepatica</i>, but recently, the presence of EVs from different developmental stages has been reported. To better understand the potential role of EVs in the biology of the parasite and in the infection process, the protein cargo of EVs from embryonated eggs and newly-excysted juvenile (NEJs) flukes cultured up to 28 days, has been analyzed. EVs were isolated by size exclusion chromatography and evaluated by nanoparticle tracking analysis and transmission electron microscopy. LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of EVs revealed the presence of 23 different proteins from embryonated egg-derived EVs and 29 different proteins from NEJ-derived EVs. Most of the identified proteins had been previously described in EVs from <i>F. hepatica</i> adults, including cytoskeletal proteins, glycolytic enzymes, stress-related proteins and tetraspanins. Nevertheless, EVs from hatching eggs and NEJs exhibited qualitative differences in composition, when compared to EVs form adults, including the absence of cathepsin cysteine peptidases. The differential content of the EVs released by the different developmental stages of the parasite reflect the intense activity of NEJs at this early stage, with several proteins involved in membrane traffic and cell physiology. This new set of identified proteins could help to understand key metabolic, biochemical and molecular mechanisms mediated by EVs that take place upon egg hatching and after parasite excystment.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; fasciola hepatica juveniles; fasciola hepatica eggs; helminth proteomics

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular,  Facultat de Ciències Biològiques, Universitat de València, Burjassot (Valencia), Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Dolores Bernal
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular,  Facultat de Ciències Biològiques, Universitat de València, Burjassot (Valencia), Spain


