### Accession
PXD014631

### Title
KLF4 binding is involved in the organization and regulation of 3D enhancer networks during acquisition and maintenance of pluripotency.

### Description
Cell  fate  transitions  are  accompanied  by  global  transcriptional,  epigenetic and topological   changes   driven   by   transcription   factors   (TFs),   as   is   strikingly exemplified by reprogramming somatic cells to pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) via expression of OCT4, KLF4, SOX2 and cMYC. How TFs orchestrate the complex molecular  changes  around  their  target  gene  loci  in  a  temporal  manner  remains incompletely understood.  Here,  using  KLF4  as  a  paradigm,  we  provide  the  first TF-centric  view  of  chromatin  reorganization  and  its  association  to  3D  enhancer rewiring  and  transcriptional  changes  of  linked  genes  during  reprogramming  of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) to PSCs. Inducible depletion of KLF factors in PSCs caused a genome-wide decrease in the connectivity of enhancers, while disruption  of individual  KLF4  binding  sites  from  PSC-specific  enhancers  was sufficient   to   impair   enhancer-promoter   contacts   and   reduce   expression   of associated   genes.   Our   study   provides   an   integrative   view   of   the   complex activities  of  a  lineage-specifying  TF  during  a  controlled  cell  fate  transition  and offers novel insights into the order and nature of molecular events that follow TF binding.

### Sample Protocol
RIME  was performed in 3 replicates for KLF4 and 2 for IgG. 50 million V6.5 cells grown in 2i conditions were used for each replicate. Cells were fixed, lysed, sonicated and incubated with the respective antibody-bound beads. The samples were then washed ten times in RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 1 mM EDTA, 0.7% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate, 1% (vol/vol) NP-40 and 0.5M LiC) and five times in 100mM AMBIC solution. On-bead digests with trypsin was carried out. Peptides were acidified with 100% Formic Acid to a final concentration of 2% and then desalted using C18 resin self-packed STAGE Tip micro-columns. Samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 5% FA for analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer by nano-electrospray as they eluted off a self-packed 40 cm, 75 μm (ID) reverse-phase column packed with 1.8 μm, 120 Å pore size, SEPAX C18 resin. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5-25% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 350 nl/min for 85 min. For each scan cycle, one high mass resolution full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120K, AGC value of 500000, in a m/z scan range of 375-1400, max acquisition time of 100ms and up to 20 parent ions were chosen based on their intensity for collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy=35%) and MS/MS fragment ion scans at low mass resolution in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled to exclude ions that had already been selected for MS/MS in the previous 40 sec. Ions with a charge of +1 and those whose charge state could not be assigned were also excluded. All scans were collected in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched using SEQUEST (version 28 revision 13) against a composite database containing all Swiss-Prot reviewed mouse protein sequences (downloaded from www.uniprot.org April 1, 2016) and their reversed complement, using the following parameters: a precursor mass tolerance of ±25ppm; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; tryptic digestion; up to two missed cleavages; static modifications of carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.0214); dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.9949). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to 1% FDR using the target-decoy strategy [3] combined with linear discriminant analysis using several different parameters including Xcorr, ΔCn’, precursor mass error, observed ion charge state, and predicted solution charge state. Linear discriminant models were calculated for each LC-MS/MS run using peptide matches to forward and reversed protein sequences as positive and negative training data. PSMs within each run were sorted in descending order by discriminant score and filtered to a 1% FDR as revealed by the number of decoy sequences remaining in the data set. The data were further filtered to control protein level FDRs. Peptides were combined and assembled into proteins.  Protein scores were derived from the product of all LDA peptide probabilities, sorted by rank, and filtered to 1% FDR as described for peptides. We required all peptides to have a signal-to-noise (SN) ≧ 10. Protein ratios were calculated as the log2 ratio of sum SN for all peptides corresponding to each protein for experimental and control samples. Where proteins were detected in only one of two conditions, we imputed a value of 1 for ratio calculations.

### Publication Abstract
Cell fate transitions are accompanied by global transcriptional, epigenetic and topological changes driven by transcription factors, as is exemplified by reprogramming somatic cells to pluripotent stem cells through the expression of OCT4, KLF4, SOX2 and cMYC. How transcription factors orchestrate the complex molecular changes around their target gene loci remains incompletely understood. Here, using KLF4 as a paradigm, we provide a transcription-factor-centric view of chromatin reorganization and its association with three-dimensional enhancer rewiring and transcriptional changes during the reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts to pluripotent stem cells. Inducible depletion of KLF factors in PSCs caused a genome-wide decrease in enhancer connectivity, whereas disruption of individual KLF4 binding sites within pluripotent-stem-cell-specific enhancers was sufficient to impair enhancer-promoter contacts and reduce the expression of associated genes. Our study provides an integrative view of the complex activities of a lineage-specifying transcription factor and offers novel insights into the nature of the molecular events that follow transcription factor binding.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Ipscs, Stem cells, Rime, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medical College
Department of Biochemistry
Weill Cornell Medical College

### Submitter
Noah Dephoure

### Lab Head
Dr Noah Dephoure
Weill Cornell Medical College


