### Accession
PXD016580

### Title
Phosphorylation ratio of pT vs pY ERK in MEK phosphorylation reaction determined by mass spectrometry

### Description
The purpose of this experiment is to determine the phosphorylation ratio of pT vs pY ERK present in ERK phosphorylation reaction by activated MEK E203K or MEK WildType. Aliquots were collected at 3 minutes 15 seconds, the time at which the mono-phosphorylated ERK is at its maximal. To determine the ratio between pT and pY ERK, synthetic AQUA peptides corresponding to the pY- and the pT-phosphorylated ERK were spiked into the sample. The two peptides have identical mass but they can be umabiguguously distinguished by their elution times and fragmentation spectra.

### Sample Protocol
From a reaction of ERK phosphorylation by activated MEK E203K, 20μL of sample was collected at 3 minutes 15 seconds. The reaction was stopped by adding the sample to 60 μL 10M Urea. To remove salts and glycerol, a TCA precipitation was performed with the following procedure: 8 μL of chilled 0.15% N-Laurylsarcosine sodium and 8 μL of chilled 100% TCA were added to the sample on ice and mixed by inverting the tube a few times. After 15 minutes, the sample was centrifuged at 4oC for 10 minutes and the supernatant was removed. 0.4mL of 100% methanol was added and the solution was vortexed for 10 seconds. The supernatant was removed after centrifugation and another 0.4mL of 100% methanol was added, the solution vortexed, centrifuged and the supernatant removed. The resulting protein pellet was air dried and subsequently resolubilized in 10 μL of 6M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl).  Synthetic AQUA peptides were ordered from JPT Peptide Technologies. These peptides have heavy arginine incorporated (+10.00826859 Da) and correspond to the tryptic peptides of the pY-phosphorylated, and the pT-phosphorylated forms of ERK. 3uL of each AQUA (14μM in HPLC water) was added to the sample and the sample was diluted to 2M GuHCl with 10mM EPPS ph8.5 and digested overnight at 22°C with 10ng/ μL lysC (Wako, 2μg/ μL stock in HPLC water). The next morning, the sample was further diluted to 0.5M GuHCl with 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 and an additional 10ng/ μL LysC and 20 ng/ μL Trypsin (Promega) were added. The sample was incubated overnight at 37°C. All solvent was removed in vacuo and resuspended in 5% phosphoric acid. To desalt, stage-tip was performed, and the sample was resuspended in 40 μL 10% TFE, 1% TCA. 1μL was analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) was coupled with an Easy nLC 1200 high pressure liquid chromatography HPLC (Thermo Fisher) with an autosampler. For each run, injected peptides were separated on a 100µm inner diameter microcapillary column with ~0.5cm of 5µm BEH C18 beads (Waters) and 30cm of ~1.7µm BEH C18 beads (Waters).  A 16-36% ACN gradient in 0.125% formic acid and 2% DMSO was applied over 40 minutes at 350nL/min. Ion transfer tube was maintained at 300°C and electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 2.6 kV through a microtee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a survey scan using the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120k with a scan range of 500 – 850 m/z with an RF Lens (%) of 30, AGC target of 1.0E6 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Charge states between 2+ and 6+ were included. A dynamic exclusion window of 5 seconds with a mass tolerance of +/- 10 ppm was used. Peptides were fragmented using 30% HCD collision energy. MS2 spectrum was acquired using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15k with an AGC target of 5.0e4 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms.  The Gygi Lab GFY software licensed from Harvard was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the Thermo RAW file to the mzXML format, and to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z. We used RawFileReader libraries from Thermo, version 4.0.26 to convert the raw files into mzXML file format. Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against the appropriate proteome reference dataset acquired from UniProt (Homo sapiens with Proteome ID UP000005640, Organism ID 9606, Protein count 74349; Escherichia coli (strain K12) with Proteome ID UP000000625, Organism ID 83333, Protein count 4391; both downloaded in June,2017) including 114 common contaminants like human Keratins and Trypsin [47,48]. The target-decoy strategy was used to construct reversed sequences in order to estimate the false discovery rate on the peptide level [49]. SEQUEST searchers were performed using a 20ppm precursor ion tolerance where both n and c-termini were required to be consistent with the protease specificity of Lys-C and Trypsin. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2- spectrum was set at 0.02 Th.  N-ethyl maleimide (+125.047679 Da) was set as a static modification on cysteine residues. Oxidation of methionine (+ 15.99492 Da), heavy arginine (+10.00826859 Da), and phosphorylation at serine, tyrosine, and threonine (+79.9663304104 Da) were set as variable modifications. A peptide level MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% was obtained by applying the target decoy strategy with linear discriminant analysis. The linear discriminant analysis used the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and ΔXCorr, charge state, peptide length and absolute peptide mass accuracy. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as the positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as the negative training set. Peptides of at least seven amino acids were rank ordered by linear discriminant analysis score and were filtered to the desired cutoff. Peptides were assigned to proteins and filtered with 0.5% FDR on the protein level using the “picked” protein FDR approach [50]. Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Kinase reaction, Recombinant

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Princeton University, Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics

### Submitter
Eyan Yeung

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wühr
Princeton University, Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics


