### Accession
PXD007828

### Title
PPARs and c-Myc regulate metabolism of renal tubules

### Description
Different segments of renal tubules have distinct metabolic features and functions, and defective metabolism in renal tubules is involved in the pathobiology of kidney diseases. However, the mechanisms underlying the metabolic regulation in renal tubules remain to be defined. We demonstrated that the renal proximal tubule (PT) has high expression of fatty acid and lipid metabolism enzymes, which is transcriptionally upregulated by abundantly expressed peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)/γ to support active lipid metabolism. In contrast, the renal distal tubule (DT) has elevated glycolytic enzyme expression corresponding with high rates of glycolysis, and this increased expression is mediated by abundantly expressed c-Myc. In addition, Nrf2 upregulated glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, and NADP-dependent malic enzyme 1 expression for NADPH production and antioxidation in the DT. Highly expressed PPARγ transcriptionally enhanced expression of the protease iRhom2 in the PT, which suppressed epidermal growth factor (EGF) expression and secretion, inhibiting EGF receptor activation-dependent glycolytic gene expression and maintaining the low level of glycolysis. PPARγ inhibition reduced iRhom2 expression and increased EGF and GLUT1 expression in the PT in mice, resulting in hypertrophy of renal tubules and inhibited kidney functions, which can be rescued by inhibition of glycolysis via treatment with 2-deoxy-D-glucose. These findings delineate instrumental molecular mechanisms underlying the active lipid metabolism and suppressed glycolysis in the PT and active glycolysis in the DT and reveal critical roles for PPARs and c-Myc in maintaining metabolic homeostasis in the kidney

### Sample Protocol
Renal Proximal and distal tubules were separated from C57/BL6 male mouse using a method adapted from a previous publication (Gesek et al., 1987). Briefly, the kidneys were instantly put in the ice-cold  modified Krebs-Henseleit buffer (KHB) (118 mM NaCl, 4.0 mM KCl, 1.0 mM KH2P04, 27.2 mM NaHC03, 1.25 mM CaCl2, 1.20 mM MgCI2, 5.0 mM glucose, and 10 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine- N’-2-ethanesulfonic acid [HEPES]), and the capsules were stripped. The renal cortices were excised, minced, and incubated in 10 ml KHB-enzyme solution (9 ml KHB, 1ml collagenase I) for 35 min at 37℃. The tubules were collected by centrifugation at 750 g for 2 min and then filtered through a 100 m mesh and a 74 m mesh to remove the undissociated tissues and the glomeruli, respectively. Separation of the tubules was achieved by Percoll gradient centrifugation. Suspended tubules in 35% isosmotic Percoll solution were centrifuged at 4℃ for 10 min at 17,540 g. The upper bands were enriched with distal tubules, and the lower bands were enriched with proximal tubules. The proximal and distal fractions were washed three times to remove Percoll and were then stored at -80℃.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric files were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment (version 1.4.1.2)(Cox et al., 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the decoy UniProt- Mus musculus database (77,129 entries), which contains forward and reverse sequences and is concatenated with 262 frequently observed contaminants including human keratins, bovine serum proteins, and proteases. An initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 PPM was performed for the purpose of mass recalibration. The main search was performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The reporter ions were set at TMT 6plex. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were included as the variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as the fix modification. The maximal number of miscleavage was set at 2, and the minimal length of peptide was set to 7 amino acids. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pparγ; ppar; c-myc; nrf2; lipid metabolism; glycolysis; renal proximal tubules; renal distal tubules; kidney

### Affiliations
Peking University
The Division of Molecular Nephrology, The M.O.E. Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, The School of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China.

### Submitter
Zhongshi Lyu

### Lab Head
Dr Qin Zhou
The Division of Molecular Nephrology, The M.O.E. Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, The School of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China.


