### Accession
PXD011773

### Title
Temporal proteome analyses of the alternative rubber crop Taraxacum koksaghyz

### Description
Taraxacum koksaghyz is currently one of the most investigated plants as a potential source of natural rubber. This poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) polymer and further valuable secondary metabolites are produced in laticifer cells, which exist as a network of elongated tubules throughout the plant and have a milky cytoplasm known as latex. However, a detailed analysis of the overall laticifer system and a deeper knowledge about the interaction with the surrounding tissues has not been performed. Therefore, we used a bacterial ribonuclease for the development of transgenic dandelion plants with omitted latex production. Comprehensive histological, biochemical and proteomic analyses served to characterize these plants. Thereby, we were able to generate a molecular map based on the protein expression pattern of laticifers and whole Taraxacum koksaghyz roots at different stages of plant development. This enables us to understand the interplay and tissue specificity of different biosynthesis routes and narrow down biological functions of latex.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using an adapted filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol. To obtain the total protein content from Taraxacum koksaghyz roots, 50 mg finely ground root powder were extracted with 400 µl hot protein extraction buffer (4 % SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) for 5 min at 95 °C. The extracts were centrifuged twice at 18,000 x g for 30 min to remove cell debris. Protein extracts (80 µg) were 8-fold diluted with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and the sample was transferred to 0.5 mL 30k MWCO centrifugal filter devices (Vivacon 500 30K, Sartorius). Repeated washes, alkylation with chloroacetamide, and digestion with trypsin were performed. Digested peptides were desalted and fractionated using Stagetips.Dried peptides were redissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis. Samples (0.5 µg) were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 20 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The column was kept at 50°C in a column oven throughout the run. Peptides were eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5 % to 98 % solvent B (solvent A 0 % ACN, 0.5 % FA; solvent B 80 % ACN, 0.5 % FA) at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a Top15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1759 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM, maximum IT of 55 ms and a target value of 3x106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 1x105 ions at a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, maximum IT of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, ≥6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8, http://www.maxquant.org/). MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against a dandelion database (Lin 2017) with added Barstar and BaRNase sequence. Sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were automatically added during the search. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Label-free quantification was enabled with a LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Match between runs was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Taraxacum koksaghyz has been identified as one of the most promising alternative rubber crops. Its high-quality rubber is produced in the latex of laticifers, a specialized cell type that is organized in a network of elongated tubules throughout the entire plant body. In order to gain insights into the physiological role(s) of latex and hence laticifer biology, we examine the effects of barnase-induced latex RNA degradation on the metabolite and protein compositions in the roots. We established high-quality datasets that enabled precise discrimination between cellular and physiological processes in laticifers and non-laticifer cell types of roots at different vegetative stages. We identified numerous latex-specific proteins, including a perilipin-like protein that has not been studied in plants yet. The barnase-expressing plants revealed a phenotype that did not exude latex, which may provide a valuable genetic basis for future studies of plant-environment interactions concerning latex and also help to clarify the evolution and arbitrary distribution of latex throughout the plant kingdom. The overview of temporal changes in composition and protein abundance provided by our data opens the way for a deeper understanding of the molecular interactions, reactions, and network relationships that underlie the different metabolic pathways in the roots of this potential rubber crop.

### Keywords
Barnase, Latex-deficient plant, Articulated laticifers, Taraxacum koksaghyz

### Affiliations
University of Muenster
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology  University of Muenster

### Submitter
Iris Finkemeier

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Iris Finkemeier
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology  University of Muenster


