### Accession
PXD016683

### Title
Proteomic analysis of APC7 KO mouse Cerebella

### Description
A proteomic comparison of the cerebella of APC7 KO mice versus controls using TMT11-plex reagents

### Sample Protocol
Frozen mouse cerebella were processed using the streamlined TMT labelling protocol. Samples were lysed in 8M urea in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease (Pierce A32953) and phosphatase (Pierce A32957) inhibitors, and passed through a 21-guage needle 10x. Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP, alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5mM DTT, followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation of 150ug protein (11-plex) or 100ug (16-plex). Pellets were reconstituted in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5, digested overnight with LysC (Wako 129-02541) at 1:100 while shaking at room temperature, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce 90305) at 1:100 while shaking at 37°C. Anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell AS017-0100) was added to ~30%, followed by labelling with TMT11 (Thermo A37727) reagent. 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure labeling efficiency was >97% and that the samples are mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labelled peptide samples were de-salted using a 200mg Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054925), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Samples were then reconstituted in 5% ACN 10mM ammonium bicarbonate for basic reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent 300extend-C18 column (3.5μm, 4.6x250mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13% to 42% of Buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) four alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Assuming adjacent fractions contain overlapping peaks, only 12 non-adjacent samples were analyzed by the mass spectrometer. Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt Mouse database (December 2018), using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (11-plex: +229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labelling channels. Lastly, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.

### Publication Abstract
Neurodevelopmental cognitive disorders provide insights into mechanisms of human brain development. Here, we report an intellectual disability syndrome caused by the loss of APC7, a core component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase promoting complex (APC). In mechanistic studies, we uncover a critical role for APC7 during the recruitment and ubiquitination of APC substrates. In proteomics analyses of the brain from mice harboring the patient-specific APC7 mutation, we identify the chromatin-associated protein Ki-67 as an APC7-dependent substrate of the APC in neurons. Conditional knockout of the APC coactivator protein Cdh1, but not Cdc20, leads to the accumulation of Ki-67 protein in neurons in&#xa0;vivo, suggesting that APC7 is required for the function of Cdh1-APC in the brain. Deregulated neuronal Ki-67 upon APC7 loss localizes predominantly to constitutive heterochromatin. Our findings define an essential function for APC7 and Cdh1-APC in neuronal heterochromatin regulation, with implications for understanding human brain development and disease.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Mouse, Tmt, Apc7

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology


