### Accession
PXD016606

### Title
Identification of Arabidopsis NAI2 complex

### Description
ER bodies are ~10-µm-long, spindle-shaped structures that occur in Brassicaceae plants. They are distributed throughout the epidermal cells of cotyledons and hypocotyls, but subsequently disappear with seedling growth, while they constitutively develop in the epidermal cells of roots. NAI2 is an ER body protein responsible for ER body formation. To understand molecular mechanism of ER body formation by NAI2, we generated transgenic plants that expressed NAI2-GFP under control of the native NAI2 promoter, and conducted immunoprecipitation with anti-GFP antibodies and detected with mass

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation:  Ten-day-old seedlings of GFP-h and ProNAI2:NAI2g-sGFP/nai2-2 were ground with three-time volume of extraction buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, protein inhibitor (complete, EDTA-free; Roche), and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)] to fresh weight. The extracts were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 Celsius degree. The supernatants (1.5 mL each) were subjected to immunoprecipitation with 50 μL of anti-GFP microbeads (μMACS GFP tag protein isolation kit, Milteny Biotech), and then were applied to a column (μ column, Milteny Biotech). Pure immunoprecipitates were eluted with 70 μL of 2x SDS sample buffer.  SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion of protein samples: SDS-PAGE was carried out according to the method described by Laemmli 47. Protein samples were partially separated on a slab gel (~1 cm). In-gel digestion was performed essentially as described by Rosenfeld 48. Each lane was excised and was chopped into small pieces. Proteins in the gel pieces were digested for 16 h at 37 °C in a reaction buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0) containing 0.01 mg/mL trypsin (Promega).  Protein mass spectroscopy: Samples were analyzed by nano-flow reverse phase liquid chromatography followed by tandem MS, using a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).A capillary reverse-phase HPLC-MS/MS system was composed of a Dionex U3000 gradient pump equipped with a VICI CHEMINERT valve, and a Q Exactive equipped with a Dream Spray nano-electrospray ionization (NSI) source (AMR, Tokyo, Japan). Samples were automatically injected using a PAL System autosampler (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland) and a peptide L-trap column (Trap and Elute mode, Chemical Evaluation Research Institute, Tokyo) attached to an injector valve for desalinating and concentrating peptides. After washing the trap with MS-grade water containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (solvent C), the peptides were loaded onto a separation capillary C18 reverse-phase column (NTCC-360/100-3-125, 125×0.1 mm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo). The eluents used were: A, 100% water containing 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, and B, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid. The column was developed at a flow rate of 0.5 μL min-1 with an acetonitrile concentration gradient of 5% B to 40% B for 100 min, then 40% B to 95% B for 1 min, 95% B for 3 min, 95% B to 5% B for 1 min, and finally re-equilibrating with 5% B for 10 min. Xcalibur 3.0.63 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to record peptide spectra over a mass range of m/z 350–1800. MS spectra were recorded followed by 10 data-dependent high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra generated from the 10 highest intensity precursor ions. Multiply-charged peptides were chosen for MS/MS experiments due to their good fragmentation characteristics.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were interpreted and peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Searches were performed using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Arabidopsis thaliana (TAIR TaxID=3702) peptide sequence database. Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme selected with two maximum missing cleavage sites, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for peptide tolerance, 0.02 Da for MS/MS tolerance, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modification of oxidation (M). Peptide identifications were based on a significant Xcorr values (high confidence filter). Peptide identification and modification information returned from SEQUEST were manually inspected and filtered to obtain confirmed peptide identification and modification lists of HCD MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Brassicaceae plants have a dual-cell type of chemical defense against herbivory. Here, we show a novel single-cell defense involving endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived organelles (ER bodies) and the vacuoles. We identify various glucosinolates as endogenous substrates of the ER-body &#x3b2;-glucosidases BGLU23 and BGLU21. Woodlice strongly prefer to eat seedlings of bglu23 bglu21 or a glucosinolate-deficient mutant over wild-type seedlings, confirming that the &#x3b2;-glucosidases have a role in chemical defense: production of toxic compounds upon organellar damage. Deficiency of the Brassicaceae-specific protein NAI2 prevents ER-body formation, which results in a loss of BGLU23 and a loss of resistance to woodlice. Hence, NAI2 that interacts with BGLU23 is essential for sequestering BGLU23 in ER bodies and preventing its degradation. Artificial expression of NAI2 and BGLU23 in non-Brassicaceae plants results in the formation of ER bodies, indicating that acquisition of NAI2 by Brassicaceae plants is a key step in developing their single-cell defense system.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Er body, Nai2

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University
Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian Univerisity

### Submitter
Kenji Yamada

### Lab Head
Dr Kenji Yamada
Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian Univerisity


