### Accession
PXD008200

### Title
Combined 15N-Labelling and TandemMOAC Quantifies Phosphorylation of MAP Kinase Substrates Downstream of MKK7 in Arabidopsis

### Description
Reversible protein phosphorylation is a widespread posttranslational modification that plays a key role in eukaryotic signal transduction. Due to the large dynamic range of protein abundance, low stoichiometry and transient nature of protein phosphorylation, the detection and accurate quantification of substrate phosphorylation by protein kinases remains a challenge. Here, we combine tandem metal-oxide affinity chromatography (tandemMOAC) with stable isotope 15N metabolic labeling for the mass spectrometry measurement and accurate quantification of low abundant, transiently phosphorylated peptides. Since tandemMOAC is not biased towards the enrichment of acidophilic, basophilic or proline-directed kinase substrates, the method is applicable to identify targets of members of all three classes of protein kinases. Using this phosphoproteomics approach, we identified several mitogen-activated protein kinase (MPK) substrates downstream of the MKK7-MPK3/6 phosphorylation cascade of Arabidopsis. The MKK7-MPK3/6 module is involved in the regulation of plant development and plant basal and systemic immune responses but little is known about downstream cascade components. The identification and validation of dynamin-related protein (DRP) 2 as a novel phosphorylation substrate of the MKK7-MPK3/6 module establishes a novel link between MPK signaling and clathrin-mediated vesicle trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth and treatment Seedlings of Arabidopsis thaliana pER8::cMYC-MKK7EE were grown in 50 mL MES-buffered, half-strenght Murashige and Skoog medium with 4.70 mM potassium nitrate and 5.15 mM ammonium nitrate. Nitrogen salts were supplied either in normal 14N form or in 15N-enriched form (> 98% 15N atom % K15NO3, 15NH415NO3). Medium was supplemented with 2.5 g/L sucrose. Plants were grown at 22°C in continuous light (70 µE/m2/sec). Twelve-day-old seedlings were treated with β-estradiol (1 µM) in ethanol or with ethanol as the control and collected 6 h after treatment.  Protein extraction and MOAC-enrichment of phosphoproteins Prior to protein extraction and fractionation, ground tissue powder of 14N and 15N-labeled was mixed in a 1:1 ratio. Phenolic total protein extraction and enrichment of phosphorylated proteins was performed as described before (Hoehenwarter et al., 2013). Protein concentration was determined by BioRad protein assay kit with BSA as the standard. Protein digestion, peptide desalting and MOAC-enrichment of phosphopeptides Enrichment of phosphopeptides by MOAC was essentially done as described (Hoehenwarter et al., 2013). Briefly, 500 µg MOAC-enriched phosphoproteins were trypsin digested (Poroszyme immobilized trypsin (1/100 v/w)) overnight before protein digests were desalted using a self-packed graphite (500 mg) spin column with a polyethylene filter of 10 µM pore size (MoBiTec). Meanwhile, graphite was equilibrated by washing twice with 500 µL of 1 M ammonia, once with 500 µL acetonitrile (ACN) and twice with 500 µL 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Meanwhile phosphoprotein digestion mixture was acidified by adding 10% (v/v) TFA to bring the final concentration to 1.25% (v/v) TFA and centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000 x g before loading on the column. Graphite was washed twice with 500 µL 1% (v/v) TFA before peptides were eluted twice with 200 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in 50% (v/v) ACN. Eluted peptides were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator. After dissolving peptides in 100 µL buffer A (phthalic acid-saturated 50% (v/v) ACN, 2.5% (v/v) TFA) they were loaded onto a TiO2 column (12.5 mg) pre-equilibrated with buffer A (25 mg TiO2 per 1 mg peptides). After phosphopeptide binding, TiO2 was washed twice with 250 µL buffer A, twice with 250 µL 50% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and twice with 250 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted three times with 100 µL 5% (v/v) ammonia, eluates were pooled, dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until MS-analysis.  Mass spectrometry Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS) of phosphorylated peptides was described in detail (Thomas et al., 2015). In brief, peptides were separated using C18 reverse phase chemistry employing a pre-column (EASY column SC001, length 2 cm, inner diameter (ID) 100 μm, particle size 5 μm) in line with an EASY column SC200 with a length of 10 cm, ID of 75 μm and a particle size of 3 μm (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted into a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 180 min gradient increasing from 5% to 35% ACN in ddH2O and electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The source voltage was set to 1.9 kV, the S Lens RF level to 50%. The delta multipole offset was -7.00. Measurements employed a data dependent acquisition (DDA) scan strategy wherein up to 20 of the most abundant ions with a minimum signal of 1,000 recorded in an MS survey scan were isolated and subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID). The AGC target value was set to 1e06 and the maximum injection time (max IT) to 500 ms in the Orbitrap. The parameters were set to 1e04 and 100 ms in the LTQ with an isolation width of 2 Da for precursor isolation and MS/MS scanning. Multi stage activation (MSA) was applied to further dissociate fragment ion peaks resulting from neutral loss of the phosphate moiety by dissociation of the high energy phosphate bond to generate b- and y- fragment ion series rich in peptide sequence information. Neutral loss masses were 24.49, 32.66, 49, 65.3, 98, 147, 195.94 and 293.91. The repeat count was set to 1 and the repeat duration to 30s. The exclusion duration was set to 40s and the exclusion width to 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of phosphorylated peptides Procedures were described in detail previously and performed with Mascot Distiller v. 2.5.1.0 linked to an in-house Mascot server v.2.5.0 (Thomas et al., 2015). To determine the level of 15N incorporation into peptides, mass spectrometry data was used to search the TAIR10 database with common contaminants amended (35394 sequences and 14486974 residues) with the enzyme set to trypsin/P. The tolerated precursor and fragment ion mass errors were 7 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues were set as variable modifications. The quantitation option was set to 15N metabolic. Peptides and proteins were identified and extracted ion currents (XIC) of naturally occurring and heavy isotope incorporated peptide pairs were fit to calculated ion currents of the respective peptide pairs with the corrections option iteratively set to impurity 15N 96%, 97%, 98%, 98.5% and 99%. R2 values of all XIC to calculated ion current fits for all identified phosphopeptides for the set incorporation levels were extracted. The R2 distribution with the highest mode was used as an estimate of phosphopeptide 15N incorporation. The results of the search, XIC extraction and fitting obtained with the respective incorporation level was then used to identify and quantify phosphopeptides by calculating the XIC peak area ratio of the naturally occurring and 15N incorporated peptides of all peptide pairs (light to heavy ratio, L/H).  Filtering and statistical analyses of phosphoproteomics data Only the highest ranking peptide annotation for each MS/MS spectrum was kept and used for peptide quantification. Peptide L/H ratios that were more than 100-fold different from the median across the replicates were considered outliers and excluded from further analysis with the Perseus software platform version 1.5.5.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Peptide quantification ratios were log2-transformed and subsequently median-normalized before a one-sample t-test (p<0.05) was performed on all phosphopeptides that were quantified in at least 4 sample replicates (Yang et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Reversible protein phosphorylation is a widespread posttranslational modification that plays a key role in eukaryotic signal transduction. Due to the dynamics of protein abundance, low stoichiometry and transient nature of protein phosphorylation, the detection and accurate quantification of substrate phosphorylation by protein kinases remains a challenge in phosphoproteome research. Here, we combine tandem metal-oxide affinity chromatography (tandemMOAC) with stable isotope <sup>15</sup>N metabolic labeling for the measurement and accurate quantification of low abundant, transiently phosphorylated peptides by mass spectrometry. Since tandemMOAC is not biased toward the enrichment of acidophilic, basophilic, or proline-directed kinase substrates, the method is applicable to identify targets of all these three types of protein kinases. The MKK7-MPK3/6 module, for example, is involved in the regulation of plant development and plant basal and systemic immune responses, but little is known about downstream cascade components. Using our here described phosphoproteomics approach we identified several MPK substrates downstream of the MKK7-MPK3/6 phosphorylation cascade in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. The identification and validation of dynamin-related protein 2 as a novel phosphorylation substrate of the MKK7-MPK3/6 module establishes a novel link between MPK signaling and clathrin-mediated vesicle trafficking.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, 15n labeling, Mapk, Mpk substrate, Tandem moac

### Affiliations
Proteome Analytics, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Wolfgang Hoehenwarter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Proteome Analytics, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry


