### Accession
PXD005601

### Title
mRNA-binding proteins of Leishmania donovani LC-MSMS

### Description
Leishmania are unicellular eukaryotes responsible for leishmaniasis in humans. Like other trypanosomatids, leishmania regulate protein coding gene expression almost exclusively at the post-transcriptional level with the help of RNA binding proteins (RBPs).  Due to the presence of polycystronic transcription units, leishmania do not regulate RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription initiation. Recent evidence suggests that the main control points in gene expression are mRNA degradation and translation. Protein-RNA interactions are involved in every aspect of RNA biology, such as mRNA splicing, polyadenylation, localization, degradation, and translation. A detailed picture of these interactions would likely prove to be highly informative in understanding leishmania biology and virulence. We developed a strategy involving covalent UV cross-linking of RBPs to mRNA in vivo, followed by interactome capture using oligo(dT) magnetic beads to define comprehensively the mRNA interactome of growing L. donovani amastigotes. The protein mass spectrometry analysis of captured proteins identified 81 mRNA interacting proteins which withstood very stringent washing conditions. Strikingly, we found that 49 of these mRNA interacting proteins had no orthologs or homologs in the human genome. Consequently, these may represent high quality candidates for selective drug targeting leading to novel therapeutics. These results show that this unbiased, systematic strategy has the promise to be applicable to study the mRNA interactome during various biological settings such as metabolic changes, stress (low pH environment, oxidative stress and nutrient deprivation) or drug treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Leishmania axenic amastigote culture were grown, with or without UV irradiation treatment, lysed, and performed Oligo(dT) capture. Resulting mRNA-protein complexes were treated with RNAse A and the protein were subjected to reduction and alkylation, followed by trypsin digestion and reductive dimethylation of different isotologue per treatment. The peptides were run on Bruker Impact II Qtof on a 90 minute separation gradient. Non-irradiated treatment was labelled with light version of dimethyl label (CH3) and irradiated treatment was labelled with medium version of dimethyl label (CHD2).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 against database comprised of protein sequences from Uniprot's Leishmania donovani and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmania are unicellular eukaryotes responsible for leishmaniasis in humans. Like other trypanosomatids, leishmania regulate protein coding gene expression almost exclusively at the post-transcriptional level with the help of RNA binding proteins (RBPs). Due to the presence of polycystronic transcription units, leishmania do not regulate RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription initiation. Recent evidence suggests that the main control points in gene expression are mRNA degradation and translation. Protein-RNA interactions are involved in every aspect of RNA biology, such as mRNA splicing, polyadenylation, localization, degradation, and translation. A detailed picture of these interactions would likely prove to be highly informative in understanding leishmania biology and virulence. We developed a strategy involving covalent UV cross-linking of RBPs to mRNA in vivo, followed by interactome capture using oligo(dT) magnetic beads to define comprehensively the mRNA interactome of growing L. donovani amastigotes. The protein mass spectrometry analysis of captured proteins identified 79 mRNA interacting proteins which withstood very stringent washing conditions. Strikingly, we found that 49 of these mRNA interacting proteins had no orthologs or homologs in the human genome. Consequently, these may represent high quality candidates for selective drug targeting leading to novel therapeutics. These results show that this unbiased, systematic strategy has the promise to be applicable to study the mRNA interactome during various biological settings such as metabolic changes, stress (low pH environment, oxidative stress and nutrient deprivation) or drug treatment.

### Keywords
Interactome capture, Lc-msms, Leishmania donovani, Mrna-binding proteins

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard James Foster
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada


