### Accession
PXD018947

### Title
Role of Coronin 1B in endothelial cells

### Description
Development and homeostasis of blood vessels critically depend on the regulation of endothelial cell-cell junctions. Perturbations in cell-cell junction organization and function results in developmental defects and vascular pathologies including chronic inflammation, edema and atherosclerosis. Although many aspects of blood vessel formation and homeostasis depend on cell-cell junctions, the molecular mechanisms that regulate their dynamic rearrangement are not fully understood. The VEcad-catenin complex, which constitute the molecular basis of the adherens junctions (AJ), is connected to the actin cytoskeleton and its function is regulated by cytoskeletal contraction and actin-driven plasma membrane protrusions. Junction-associated intermitted lamellipodia (JAIL) are small actin-driven protrusions at cell-cell junctions controlled by the actin related protein 2/3 (Arp2/3)-complex that contribute to the regulation of cell-cell junctions. JAIL drive VEcad dynamics within the cell-cell junction thereby being critical for monolayer integrity, cell migration and angiogenesis. The molecular mechanisms regulating JAIL during vessel development are not completely understood. Coronin 1B (Coro1B) is an actin binding protein that controls actin networks at classical lamellipodia via both Arp2/3 complex and cofilin-mediated pathways. The role of Coro1B in endothelial cell (ECs) is not fully understood.  In this study we demonstrate that Coro1B is a novel component and regulator of cell-cell junctions in ECs. Immunofluorescence studies show that Coro1B colocalizes with VEcad at cell-cell junctions in monolayers of ECs. Live-cell imaging reveal that Coro1B is recruited to, and operated at, actin-driven membrane protrusions at the cell-cell junctions. Coro1B recruitment to cell-cell junctions is regulated by cytoskeleton tension. By analyzing the Coro1B interactome, we identify integrin linked kinase (ILK) as new Coro1B-associated protein. Coro1B colocalizes with α-parvin, an interactor of ILK, at the leading edge of lamellipodia protrusions. Finally, functional experiments reveal that depletion of Coro1B causes defects in actin cytoskeleton and cell-cell junctions. In matrigel vessel network assays, depletion of Coro1B results in reduced network complexity, vessel number and vessel length. Together, our findings point towards a critical role for Coro1B in the dynamic remodeling of endothelial cell-cell junction and the assembly of vessel network.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) were incubated with protein lysate supernatants and processed with the iST Sample Preparation Kit (Preomics, Planegg) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using a 15-cm analytical column (75 μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q_Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts. MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, UP000005640_Hsapiens_170526; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 10 ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.

### Data Protocol
Identified proteins were considered as interaction partners if their MaxQuant iBAQ values were greater than log2 2-fold enrichment and p-value 0.05 when compared to the control. iBAQ values as reported by MaxQuant23 were processed using the bio conductor DEP library (version 1.6.0) as followed: control proteins and contaminates were removed. Intensity values were normalized using variance-stabilizing transformation. Missing values were imputed using the manual method in DEP function 'impute' with shift = 1.8 and scale = 0.3. Protein-wise robust enrichment was estimated using linear models and empirical Bayes statistics using limma implemented in the 'test_diff' function of DEP. The model formula included the experimental batch (replicate number) as random effect. Significant enrichment was defined by a false discovery rate (FDR) < 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell-cell junction, Actin, Coronin 1b, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Department of Physiological Sciences,  Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,  University of Barcelona and IDIBELL,  Barcelona (Spain) Phone: +34 93 402 90 88

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Eloi Montanez Miralles
Department of Physiological Sciences,  Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,  University of Barcelona and IDIBELL,  Barcelona (Spain) Phone: +34 93 402 90 88


