### Accession
PXD022471

### Title
Molecular biomarkers of neovascular age-related macular degeneration with incomplete response to anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment

### Description
The standard treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) consists of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF). However, for some patients, even maximal anti-VEGF treatment does notentirely suppress exudative activity. The goal of this study was to identify molecular biomarkers in nAMD with incomplete response to anti-VEGF treatment. Aqueous humor (AH) samples were collected from three groups of patients: 18 patients with nAMD responding incompletely to anti-VEGF, 19 patients affected by nAMD with normal treatment response, and 14 control patients without any retinopathy. Proteomic and multiplex analyses were performed on these samples. Proteomic analyses showed that nAMD patients with incomplete anti-VEGF response displayed an increased inflammatory response, complement activation, cytolysis, protein-lipid complex, and vasculature development pathways. Multiplex analyses revealed a significant increase of soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) [p=0.001], interleukin-6 (IL-6) [p=0.009], bioactive interleukin-12 (IL-12p40) [p=0.03], plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) [p=0.004], and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)[p=0.004] levels in incomplete responders in comparison to normal treatment response. Interestingly, The same biomarkers showed a high intercorrelation with r2 values between 0.58 and 0.94. In addition, we confirmed by AlphaLISA the increase of sVCAM-1 [p<0.0001] and IL-6 [p=0.043] in incomplete responder group. Incomplete responders in nAMD are associated with activated angiogenic and inflammatory pathways. The residual exudative activity of nAMD despite maximal anti-VEGF treatment may be related to both angiogenic and inflammatory responses requiring specific adjuvant therapy.

### Sample Protocol
The study used AH from three groups of participants: patients affected by nAMD with incomplete response to anti-VEGF treatment (group R); patients affected by nAMD with complete fluid resolution on monthly or less frequent anti-VEGFtreatment (group N); and control patients without any retinopathy (group C). Ten AH samples per group were processed in two separate batches of five for proteomic analyses. Proteins were digested according to a modified version of the iST protocol. Fifteen μL of modified iST buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate, 20 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA, 200 mM Tris; pH 8.6) was added to 15 μL of AH sample and heated at 95ºC for 5 min. Next, 10 μL of 160 mM chloroacetamide (in 10 mM Tris; pH 8.6) was added, and cysteines were alkylated for 45 mi at 25ºC in the dark. After 1:1 dilution with H2O, samples were digested with 0.2 μg of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and incubated at 37ºC for 1 hour, followed by the addition of a second enzyme (0.1 μg trypsin/LysC) and 1 hour of incubation. To extract deoxycholate, two volumes of ethyl acetate plus 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were added to one volume of sample; then, the mixture was vortexed for 2 min and centrifuged for 2 min at 5000 rpm. The bottom 123 aqueous fraction was loaded onto an equilibrated OASIS MCX μElution plate (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) prefilled with SCX0 buffer (20% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid, 0 M ammonium acetate) and centrifuged. The columns were washed once with 200μL ethylacetate plus 0.5% TFA and twice with 200 μL 2% MeCN plus 0.1% formic acid. Then, the peptide mixture was fractionated by sequential elution with 200 μL SCX200 buffer (20% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid, 200 mM ammonium acetate), 200 μL SCX500 buffer (20% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid, 500 mM ammonium acetate), and 200 μL basic elution buffer (80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% NH3). Tryptic peptide fractions, prepared as described above, were dried, and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide solutions were injected using an Ultimate RSLC 3000 nano high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm inner diameter [ID], 5 μm particles, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) before separation on a reverse-phase custom packed nanocolumn (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles; Reprosil Pur; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). A flow rate of 0.25 μL/min was used with a gradient of 4% to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (total time: 65 min). Full survey scans were performed at a resolution of 120,000, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize the acquisition of peptide tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra with a maximum cycle time of 0.6 s. The HCD fragmentation mode at a normalized collision energy of 32% and a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z were used; MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4), incorporating the Andromeda search engine. The UniProt human reference proteome database for January 2019 was used (73,950 sequences) and supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin (cleavage at K and R) was used as the enzyme parameter, allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. For protein quantitation, either the iBAQ or the LFQ label-free values were used. MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software for filtering, log2 transformation, normalization of values, statistical analyses, and Gene Ontology (GO) annotations. Statistics were performed using protein quantitation iBAQ values in the R statistical programming environment (version 3.6.1; https://www.r-project.org/). For analysis of the proteomics results, linear models (R function lm) adjusted for batches were used to identify differentially expressed proteins (p<0.1) to compare group N and group R and to compare groups C/N and group R. For these, overrepresentation tests were performed using the Bioconductor (http://www.Bioconductor.org) package ClusterProfiler.

### Publication Abstract
The standard treatment for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) consists of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF). However, for some patients, even maximal anti-VEGF treatment does not entirely suppress exudative activity. The goal of this study was to identify molecular biomarkers in nAMD with incomplete response to anti-VEGF treatment. Aqueous humor (AH) samples were collected from three groups of patients: 17 patients with nAMD responding incompletely to anti-VEGF (18 eyes), 17 patients affected by nAMD with normal treatment response (21 eyes), and 16 control patients without any retinopathy (16 eyes). Proteomic and multiplex analyses were performed on these samples. Proteomic analyses showed that nAMD patients with incomplete anti-VEGF response displayed an increased inflammatory response, complement activation, cytolysis, protein-lipid complex, and vasculature development pathways. Multiplex analyses revealed a significant increase of soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) [&#x2009;<i>p</i> = 0.001], interleukin-6 (IL-6) [&#x2009;<i>p</i> = 0.009], bioactive interleukin-12 (IL-12p40) [&#x2009;<i>p</i> = 0.03], plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) [&#x2009;<i>p</i> = 0.004], and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) [&#x2009;<i>p</i> = 0.004] levels in incomplete responders in comparison to normal responders. Interestingly, the same biomarkers showed a high intercorrelation with r2 values between 0.58 and 0.94. In addition, we confirmed by AlphaLISA the increase of sVCAM-1 [&#x2009;<i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001] and IL-6 [&#x2009;<i>p</i> = 0.043] in the incomplete responder group. Incomplete responders in nAMD are associated with activated angiogenic and inflammatory pathways. The residual exudative activity of nAMD despite maximal anti-VEGF treatment may be related to both angiogenic and inflammatory responses requiring specific adjuvant therapy. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD02247.

### Keywords
Human, Age-related macular degeneration, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Hopital Ophtalmique Jules-Gonin Group « Macular Degeneration and Diabetic Retinopathy » Av. de France 15 1002 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Raphael Roduit
Hopital Ophtalmique Jules-Gonin Group « Macular Degeneration and Diabetic Retinopathy » Av. de France 15 1002 Lausanne Switzerland


