### Accession
PXD007150

### Title
Hippocampal proteomic profiling following peripheral delivery of klotho fragment

### Description
We found that a klotho protein fragment (KL-F), administered peripherally, induced cognitive enhancement and neural resilience. Here we report a proteomic analysis of whole hippocampal homogenates from mice treated with vehicle or KL-F (10 µg/kg, i.p.) four hours prior to exploration in the small Y-maze. The proteomic results showed glutamate receptor signaling as the top enriched canonical pathway by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by Biognosys AG, Switzerland. Mouse hippocampus samples were lysed in Biognosys’ Lysis Buffer (30 µl/mg) with a TissueLyser II bead mill (Qiagen) using stainless steel grinding beads for 1.5 min at 30 Hz. Samples were treated with benzonase after lysis to reduce DNA contamination.  26.3 µl of each lysate were denatured using Biognosys’ Denature Buffer, reduced using Biognosys’ Reduction Solution for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated using Biognosys’ Alkylation Solution for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, digestion was carried out using 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted using C18 MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried down using a SpeedVac system. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µl LC solvent A (1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (FA)) and spiked with Biognosys’ iRT kit calibration peptides prior to mass spectrometric analyses. Peptide concentrations were determined using a UV/VIS Spectrometer (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech). For HPRP fractionation, 17 µl of resolved peptides per sample were pooled according to treatment. The two pools were each diluted 4x in 0.2 M ammonium formate (pH 10) and applied to C18 MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group). The peptides were then eluted with buffers containing 0.05 M ammonium formate and increasing acetonitrile concentrations (5 %, 10 %, 15 %, 20 %, 25 %, and 50 %) at a pH of 10. The eluates were dried down, resolved in 15 µl solvent A and spiked with Biognosys’ iRT kit calibration peptides prior to mass spectrometric analyses. The 5 % and 50 % fractions of each group were pooled. For the LC-MS/MS shotgun measurements, 1.5 µg (fractions 10 %, 15 %, 20 % and 25 %) or 3 µg (fraction 5% + 50 %) of peptides were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source.  LC solvents were A: 1 % acetonitrile in water with 0.1 % FA; B: 15 % water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % FA. The LC gradient was: 1 – 55 % solvent B in 120 minutes followed by 55 - 90 % B in 2 minutes and 90 % B for 12 minutes (total gradient length of 134 minutes). A modified TOP12 method from Kelstrup was used (Kelstrup et al., 2012).  For DIA LC-MS/MS measurements, 2 µg of peptides were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source.  LC solvents were A: 1 % acetonitrile in water with 0.1 % FA; B: 15 % water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % FA. The LC gradient was 1 – 55 % solvent B in 120 minutes followed by 55 - 90 % B in 2 minutes and 90 % B for 12 minutes (total gradient length was 134 minutes). A DIA method with one full range survey scan and 12 DIA windows was used.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data were analyzed using the MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 software (maxquant.org), the false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1 %. A mouse UniProt .fasta database (Mus musculus, 2015-08-28) was used, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and variable modifications (N-term acetylation, methionine oxidation). HRM mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Spectronaut 10 software (Biognosys). The false discovery rate on peptide level was set to 1 %, data was filtered using row based extraction. The assay library (protein inventory) generated in this project was used for the analysis.  The HRM measurements analyzed with Spectronaut were normalized using local regression normalization (Callister et al., 2006). Data post processing was carried out in the statistical package R (Dunn, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biognosys, Swath, Klotho, Dia, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG
Department of Neurology and Weill Institute for Neurosciences,  University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Jakob Vowinckel

### Lab Head
Dr Dena B. Dubal, MD, PhD
Department of Neurology and Weill Institute for Neurosciences,  University of California, San Francisco


