### Accession
PXD009004

### Title
Triflic acid-treatment enables LC-MS/MS analysis of insoluble bacterial biomass

### Description
Established bacterial proteome sample preparations, including sonication and bead beating, leave insoluble carbohydrate-rich cell envelope pellets with an abundance of vital proteins often overlooked or missed in LC-MS/MS analyses. Triflic acid selectively removes glycans and we demonstrate that in comparison to sonication alone, incubation of whole bacterial cells as well as post-sonication insoluble pellets yields membrane and cell envelope-associated proteins for LC-MS/MS detection. We provide a detailed side-by-side comparison of triflic acid and sonication preparations for Gram- (Pseudomonas aeruginosa), Gram+ (Bacillus subtilis), and a complex bacterial human distal gut microbiome sample. Further, human Jurkat cells that lack a peptidoglycan and are readily solubilized by established methods, reveal only subtle differences in measurable proteins by LC-MS/MS between sonication and triflic acid preparations. Critically, we show that our new triflic acid-based proteome preparation method is broadly applicable and greatly improves our ability to detect and quantitate bacterial cell envelope proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Single-Species Proteome Preparation with Sonication Overnight cultures of Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Bacillus subtilis (grown in 5 mL 2XYT media at 37 °C) and human Jurkat cells (grown in RPMI-1640 Medium with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum) were divided into 100-mg wet pellets. The cells were suspended in 500 μL PBS, pH 7.4 and sonicated in a Qsonica Q700 sonicator with cup horn attachment at 25% amplitude for 10 min at 4 °C. Insoluble cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 xg for 5 min at room temperature, and the supernatant was carefully removed and filtered through a PD MiniTrap G-25 size exclusion column to remove residual low molecular-weight contaminants. The flow-through (A-supernatant) was then quantified using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit.   Single-Species Proteome Preparation with Triflic Acid To prepare the C-whole cell samples, 100-mg aliquots of P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis, and Jurkat cells were suspended in 500 μL PBS, pH 7.4, frozen, and lyophilized overnight. 200 μL of 1:9 toluene:triflic acid (TA) was added to each lyophilized whole-cell sample at -80 °C (dry ice/acetone bath). Tubes containing the solutions were brought to 4 °C and gently agitated for 30-60 min with intermittent venting until the pellet was fully dissolved. Upon complete solubilization, the solution was refrozen at -80 °C (dry ice/acetone bath). The acid was quenched with 600 μL of a cold solution of 1:1:3 water:methanol:pyridine, and the tubes were inverted several times with frequent venting. The neutralized solution was diluted to 10 mL with 50% methanol/water and concentrated to 1 mL with a 3K MWCO centrifugal concentrator (Fisher Scientific, Amicon Ultra-15 3K, UFC900324). The sample was diluted to 10 mL with PBS, pH 7.4 and re-concentrated with a 3K MWCO concentrator. The remaining solution and protein were transferred to a microcentrifuge tube and lyophilized. The protein solid was resuspended in 200 μL of 5 M urea in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0 and sonicated until the protein dissolved. The solution’s protein concentration was quantified using the BCA assay. For the B. subtilis and P. aeruginosa pellet proteome preparations (B-pellet), the remaining insoluble, post-sonication pellets were dissolved with TA and prepared with the same methods.   Microbiome Sample Preparation  Fecal samples were suspended in PBS and mixed by vortexing until full suspension and uniformity. Samples were centrifuged at 100 xg for 1 min, and the cloudy supernatant was filtered through a 70-µm nylon cell strainer (Fisher Scientific, FalconTM #08-771-2) to remove large particles. The bacterial cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 8,000 xg for 5 min, rinsed twice with PBS, pH 7.4, and divided into 100-mg bacteria cell pellets (wet weight) for each sample. Bacteria pellets were suspended in PBS, pH 7.4, frozen, and lyophilized, and the TA protocol was followed. For the preparation of the microbiome supernatant, the supernatant after sonication was retained, frozen, and lyophilized overnight. The TA-based preparation method was then used.   Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added to all of the sample supernatants to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 15 min, followed by chloroacetamide treatment at a final concentration of 25 mM for 15 min in the dark. 100 μg protein per sample was diluted to a final volume of 500 μL with trypsin buffer, and 2 μg of trypsin was incubated with each sample overnight at 37° C under agitation.   Single-Species LC-MS/MS MudPIT Data Collection Peptides were loaded onto a biphasic column (250 μm fused silica, Agilent), with 3 cm of 5 μm Aqua C18 resin followed by 3 cm of Partisphere strong cation exchange (SCX) resin. Multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) was performed using a Thermo Finnigan LTQ Orbitrap. Peptides were eluted at a rate of 200 nL/min using a 6-step MudPIT program.  Microbiome LC-MS/MS Data Collection After trypsin digestion, the samples were clarified at 10,000 xg for 5 min to remove any particles or precipitate. The supernatant containing the tryptic peptides was carefully decanted, and 25 µL of formic acid was added to each sample. 40 µL of the peptide solution was desalted using ZipTips C18. The resulting peptide solution was dried and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% formic acid in water, and 10 µL of the peptide solution were used for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Single Species: Peptide and Protein Identification For the MS data of all samples, rawXtract 1.9.9.2 was used to extract precursor and fragmentation ion data in MS2 format from Xcalibur RAW files. Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2, Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc. San Diego, CA) was utilized for protein identification and quantification analyses, using PROLUCID/Sequest2,3 and DTASelect.3,4 Tandem mass spectra were extracted into the MS2 file format from the Xcalibur RAW files via RawXtract 1.9.9.2 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17). The MS2 spectra were scored against the protein library of each respective species from Uniprot proteome IDs, UP000001570 (Bacillus subtilis 168), UP000002438 (Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01), and UP000005640 (Homo sapiens), which include the sequence for each entry in the original database was reversed5 using PROLUCID/Sequest. The settings for peptide scoring include: (1) differential modifications of oxidized methionine (+15.9949 Da) and GlcNAc-tagged asparagine (+203.0794 Da), (2) a static modification for alkylated cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da), (3) precursor/peptide mass tolerance of 3,000.0 milli-amu, (4) and a fragment mass tolerance of 600 ppm. The search space included half- and fully tryptic peptide candidates with 2 missed cleavage events, and required a minimum of two peptides per protein. The ProLUCID search results were assembled and filtered using the DTASelect program with a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral counts (SC) determined from this pipeline were used as the basis of our quantitative analyses. Venn diagrams were generated based on the presence or absence of 1 or more SC in each protein.   Single Species Protein Differential Analysis:  The SC of each protein was divided by the total number of SC in the respective run, including the counts for reverse sequences and contaminants. The average of the total SC between technical triplicates was used as a multiplying factor to generate normalized SC. To detect shifts in the detection of specific proteins, differences between the normalized SC of a protein in each experimental group were calculated. If a protein was not detected, it was assigned a value of 0 normalized SC. Volcano plots and two-way, unpaired T-tests were generated using GraphPad Prism version ____. Proteins that had differences of >50 normalized SC between experimental groups with p-values <0.05 qualified as significantly enriched or significantly negatively enriched.     Microbiome Samples Analysis  Peptide and Protein Identification  The human microbiome samples’ MS2 spectra were scored using Blazmass 0.9993 against the peptides of the Comprehensive Protein Identification Library (ComPIL) database.6 Blazmass and ComPIL source code are open source (https://github.com/sandipchatterjee/blazmass_compil). Settings for peptide scoring include a variable modification of oxidized methionine (+15.9949 Da), a static modification for alkylated cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da), and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragmentation ion tolerance of 50 ppm. DTASelect 2.1.3 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17) was used for filtering with the requirements of 2 peptides per protein and a protein FDR of 1%. Protein loci were mapped to protein loci using a pre-clustered version of ComPIL. Each protein locus was annotated with all GO terms associated with any domain of all possible proteins that are in that locus.   Protein Differential Analysis:  Protein differential analysis was performed using DESeq2 1.16.1, which allows for testing for differential expression using SC data and provides methods designed for taking into account over-dispersion, features with low counts, and experiments with low numbers of replicates.7 This program has previously been applied to proteomic studies.8,9 Briefly, count data is modeled using the negative binomial distribution, and the mean-variance relationship is estimated. Variance is estimated using an information sharing approach, whereby a single feature’s (or protein locus’s) variance is estimated by taking into account variances of other protein locus measured in the same experiment. Feature significance calling and ranking is performed using estimated effect sizes, which takes into account the logarithmic fold change (LFC) of a protein locus between enriched and unenriched samples and the noisiness of the LFC estimate. Replicates were not merged, but were treated as replicates for the differential analysis. The PCA plot was generated using DESeq2 on the variance-stabilized (i.e. transformed) SC for each protein locus.

### Publication Abstract
The lysis and extraction of soluble bacterial proteins from cells is a common practice for proteomics analyses, but insoluble bacterial biomasses are often left behind. Here, we show that with triflic acid treatment, the insoluble bacterial biomass of Gram<sup>-</sup> and Gram<sup>+</sup> bacteria can be rendered soluble. We use LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomics to show that bacterial proteins in the soluble and insoluble postlysis fractions differ significantly. Additionally, in the case of Gram<sup>-</sup> Pseudomonas aeruginosa, triflic acid treatment enables the enrichment of cell-envelope-associated proteins. Finally, we apply triflic acid to a human microbiome sample to show that this treatment is robust and enables the identification of a new, complementary subset of proteins from a complex microbial mixture.

### Keywords
Triflic acid, Lc-ms/ms, Bacteria, Microbiome

### Affiliations
TSRI
Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA.

### Submitter
Ana Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Wolan
Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA.


