### Accession
PXD025775

### Title
Endosomal cAMP production impacts the broad cellular phosphoproteome

### Description
Endosomal signaling from G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) has emerged as a novel paradigm with important pharmacological and physiological implications. Yet, our knowledge of the functional consequences of activating intracellular GPCRs is incomplete. To address this gap, we combined an optogenetic approach for site-specific generation of the prototypical second messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP) with unbiased phosphoproteomic analysis. We identified 218 unique sites that either increased or decreased in phosphorylation upon cAMP production. We next determined that the compartment of signaling origin impacted the regulation of the entire repertoire of targets in that, remarkably, endosome-derived cAMP led to more robust changes in phosphorylation for all targets regardless of their annotated sub-cellular localization. Furthermore, we observed that proteins that are dephosphorylated in response to cAMP accumulation exhibited disproportionately strong bias towards endosomal over plasma membrane signaling. Through bioinformatics analysis, we established that this specific set of targets are substrates for protein phosphatase 2A, PP2A-B56δ, and propose compartmentalized activation of PP2A as the likely underlying mechanism. Altogether, our study extends the concept that endosomal signaling is a significant functional contributor to cellular responsiveness by establishing a unique role for localized cAMP production in defining categorically distinct phosphoresponses.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and bPAC stimulation. Cells stably expressing bPAC were grown to <80% confluence in 10-cm round cell culture dishes containing 10 ml of either “Light”-isotope containing medium (lysine- and arginine-depleted medium supplemented with regular lysine and arginine) or “Heavy”-isotope containing medium (supplemented with [13C] lysine and [13C,15N] arginine) for > 6 cell divisions. Two dishes (one “Light”, one “Heavy”) were used for each stimulation replicate. Prior to light stimulation, cells were washed once in PBS and twice in serum-free DMEM, and then grown in 10 ml serum-free DMEM for >16 hrs. Cells grown continuously in the dark served as unstimulated controls. To minimize the impact of SILAC-based labeling artifacts, SILAC medium swap experiments were done for a total of two biological replicates per bPAC cell line, whereby in replicate #1, “heavy”-medium labeled cells were photostimulated and “light”-medium labeled cells were left in the dark, and in replicate #2, “light”-medium labeled cells were photostimulated and “heavy”-medium labeled cells were left in the dark. Stimulation with a 5-min light pulse was carried out inside a tissue culture incubator, then cells were incubated in the dark for 5 min for a total of 10 min from start of photostimulation until lysis.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry. At the end of the 10-min interval, cells were lysed directly in 5 M Urea/0.2% N-dodecyl-maltoside, and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma phosphatase inhibitor 2 and 3), then sonicated using a Fisher sonicator at 12% amplitude for total of 20 seconds, alternating 10 s on, 10 s off, 10 s on, until lysates were clear. Prior to mixing, approximate concentration was estimated with a Nanodrop, and stimulated vs unstimulated samples were mixed at that point at a 1:1 ratio. Mixed samples were first reduced for 30 minutes with 10 mM TCEP, then alkylated for 30 minutes with 18 mM iodoacetamide and quenched with 18 mM DTT. Prior to trypsin digest, final urea concentration was adjusted to 2 M, then samples were digested overnight at 37°C on a rotator with modified trypsin (1:20 trypsin:sample ratio) (Promega). Peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 columns (Waters) and lyophilized to dryness in a speed-vac. Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out as previously described using in-house generated Fe3+-IMAC resin 13. Briefly, 1 mg of dried peptides were resuspended in 80% MeCN/0.2 % TFA and bound to Fe3+-IMAC resin. Beads were washed four times in 80% MeCN/0.1% TFA and twice in 0.5% formic acid, and phosphopeptides were eluted in 50% MeCN/0.2% formic acid, dried using speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and data analysis. Purified phosphopeptides resuspended in 0.1% formic acid were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometry system equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography and autosampler system. All samples were analyzed in technical duplicates. Samples were injected onto a C18 column (25 cm x 75 um I.D. packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 um particles) and subjected to a 4-hour gradient from 0.1% formic acid to 30% ACN/0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer collected one full scan at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap followed by 20 collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scans for the 20 most intense peaks from the full scan in the dual linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds with a repeat count of 1. Charge state screening was employed to reject analysis of singly charged species or species for which a charge could not be assigned. MaxQuant software package (version 1.3.0.5)27 was used to align the raw data files against a human protein sequence database downloaded from SwissProt/UniProt (03/06/2012). Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. MaxQuant was configured to generate and search against a reverse sequence database for false discovery rate calculations. The first search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 20 parts per million and the main search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 6 parts per million. Parameters were set as follows: 1) maximum 5 modifications per peptide, 2) maximum 2 missed cleavages per peptide, 3) maximum peptide charge of 7+. For MS/MS matching, the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and the following were allowed: 1) higher charge states, water and ammonia loss events, 2) a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and the top 6 peaks per 100 Da were analyzed. Only proteins and peptides falling below a false discovery rate of 1% were considered. Results were matched between runs with a time window of 2 minutes for technical duplicates. The data were condensed by a custom Perl script that takes the maximum intensity of any unique peptide and charge state between the two technical replicates, log-transformed using log base 2, and median-centered. For the “heavy”-labeled unstimulated/”light”-labeled photostimulated samples, the inverse values for all original log2 ratios were taken to aid the ease of averaging the biological replicates. To identify “cAMP target phosphopeptides”, we considered peptides with log2 values with 2 standard deviations above or below the sample mean in each of two Cyto-bPAC replicates (Dataset S1). Protein localization from the Human Protein Atlas28, inferred from antibody-based immunofluorescence microscopy, was manually curated further based on published reports. Significantly enriched Gene Ontology categories were identified with Panther29, and protein-protein interaction networks were generated using String database30 based on biochemical data and annotated interactions from curated databases with a threshold confidence score of 0.400. The resulting network data were visualized based on averaged Cyto-bPAC log2 values using the Cytoscape software31. Enrichment of amino acid motifs was determined with MotifX software32 in R using statistical cut-off p < 1.0x10-6 by Fisher’s exact test and minimal number of occurrences= 20. Average linkage hierarchical clustering was performed with the Cluster software33 using Euclidian distance as a similarity metric and visualized with Java TreeView34. To elucidate differentially modified phosphopeptides between sets of conditions, we considered only cAMP target phosphopeptides measured in all biological replicates for each pairwise comparison, and analyzed by multiple t-test using the adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg step-up procedure35, and FDR of 10% was used as cut-off (Dataset S2). To examine if there are location-specific differences in the distribution of upregulated and downregulated phosphosites, we carried out linear regression analysis of the abundance values between pairs of conditions, computed the residuals for the regression, and used unpaired t-test analysis assuming that the populations have the same standard deviation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gpcr- g protein-coupled receptor; silac- stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture; fe3+-nta imac- iron (iii)-nitrilotriacetic acid immobilized metal ion affinity; lc-ms/ms- liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; pka- protein kinase a; pde- phosphodiesterase; pp2a- protein phosphatase 2a, Camp- cyclic amp; bpac- bacterial photoactivatable adenylyl cyclase

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Mark von Zastrow
University of California San Francisco


