### Accession
PXD014551

### Title
Ovarian fluid proteome variation associates with sperm swimming speed in an externally fertilizing fish

### Description
Ovarian fluid was collected from 6 adult female Chinook salmon during their annual spawning run.  Two replicates were analyzed for each ovarian fluid sample fraction using 80 and 100 minute gradients, respectively.  Protein abundances were estimated using iTRAQ.

### Sample Protocol
All OF samples were processed by a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). In brief a sample volume of 100 µl of each ovarian fluid (females 1-6, corresponding to tags 113-118 in the iTRAQ data) containing 200 µg of protein was supplemented with 100 µl denaturing solution containing 0.2% SDS, 40 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 1-fold protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete EDTA-free, Roche). The samples were denatured for 20 min at 45°C and then supplemented with 200 µl of detergent depletion solution containing 8 M urea and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in water. Each sample was loaded onto 0.5 ml Microcon centrifugal ultrafiltration units (10 kDa cut-off, Millipore) and washed three times with detergent depletion solution. Samples were then reduced and alkylated on-filter according to the manual for the 8-plex iTRAQ kit. The samples were then buffer-exchanged into 200 mM TEAB by three consecutive washing steps. An aliquot of each sample was taken for protein measurement using the Bradford method. An aliquot of each sample containing 80 µg of protein was normalized to a volume of 40 µl with 100 mM TEAB and supplemented with 4 µg of trypsin in 5 µl of water. Proteins were digested over-night at 37°C and boosted with additional 4 µg of trypsin in the morning. After an incubation of 4 hours peptides were labeled with the iTRAQ reagents (8plex kit) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were then pooled, dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and purified by solid phase extraction (SPE) on sep-pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Peptides of the pooled iTRAQ labeled sample were subjected to off-gel isoelectric focusing (IEF) using a 3000 OFFGEL Frationator (Agilent) and fractionated into 24 fractions along a pH gradient of 4 to 10 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each fraction was purified by SPE on sep-pak C18 cartridges, dried to completeness and reconstituted in 20 µl of 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water. Fraction were then analysed in duplicates by nanoflow liquid chromatography-coupled LTQ Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry. Therefore 5 µl aliquots were loaded onto an in-house packed emitter tip column (75 µm ID PicoTip fused silca tubing packed with Luna C-18 material of 3µm bead size (Phenomenex) on a length of 15 cm) and peptides separated by a gradient of ACN in 0.2% aqueous FA. The gradient was developed in three steps, from i) 5-35% ACN ii) 35-55% ACN and iii) 55-95% ACN. The total gradient length including loading, washing and re-equilibration steps was 80 min for the first replicate and 100 min for the second replicate. The Orbitrap analyzer was operated in full MS mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 followed by eight data-dependent MS/MS scans. The eight data-dependent scans were performed as four collision induced dissociation (CID) scans on the four strongest precursor ions for peptide identification followed by four high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) scans on the same four precursor ions for reporter ion quantification. CID fragment ions were detected in the LTQ ion trap and HCD fragment ions in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400. Dynamic exclusion was enabled allowing two and three repeated fragmentation analyses on the same precursor ions during a 60 seconds time window for the first and second replicate measurement respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed and analyzed using the PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Spectra were filtered to retain charge 2-8 and searched against the Oncorhynchus tshawytscha (assembly Otsh_v1.0) proteome following filtering to retain the longest isoform of each protein using the PeaksDB search algorithm. Parent mass error tolerance was set to 10.0 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance to 0.2 Da. Monoisotopic precursor mass search was employed with the cleavage enzyme set to Trypsin, allowing for up to 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ 8plex modification for lysine and N-terminal were set as fixed modifications. Up to 3 variable PTMs per peptide were allowed, which included oxydation (M), deamidation (NQ) and iTRAQ 8plex (Y). PeaksPTM and SPIDER searches were then used to identify additional PTMs and peptide matches with single amino acid substitutions. Filtering criteria included -10LogP >= 23.7 (1% FDR) for peptides and -10LogP >= 20 (1.1% FDR) for proteins. Absolute normalized iTRAQ peak intensities were obtained from PEAKS Q, with a quantification mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, using -10LogP >= 23.7 (1% FDR) as the PSM filtering criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm velocity is a key trait that predicts the outcome of sperm competition. By promoting or impeding sperm velocity, females can control fertilization via postcopulatory cryptic female choice. In Chinook salmon, ovarian fluid (OF), which surrounds the ova, mediates sperm velocity according to male and female identity, biasing the outcome of sperm competition towards males with faster sperm. Past investigations have revealed proteome variation in OF, but the specific components of OF that differentially mediate sperm velocity have yet to be characterized. Here we use quantitative proteomics to investigate whether OF protein composition explains variation in sperm velocity and fertilization success. We found that OF proteomes from six females robustly clustered into two groups and that these groups are distinguished by the abundance of a restricted set of proteins significantly associated with sperm velocity. Exposure of sperm to OF from females in group I had faster sperm compared to sperm exposed to the OF of group II females. Overall, OF proteins that distinguished between these groups were enriched for vitellogenin and calcium ion interactions. Our findings suggest that these proteins may form the functional basis for cryptic female choice via the biochemical and physiological mediation of sperm velocity.

### Keywords
Ovarian fluid, Oncorhynchus tshawytscha, Chinook salmon, Itraq, Coelomic fluid

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Syracuse University

### Submitter
Kirill Borziak

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Syracuse University


