### Accession
PXD023961

### Title
Comparative proteomics reveals the anaerobic lifestyle of meat-spoiling Pseudomonas species

### Description
The ability of certain Pseudomonas (P.) species to grow or persist in anoxic habitats by either denitrification, acetate fermentation or arginine fermentation has been described in several studies as a special property. Previously, we had isolated strains belonging to the species P. lundensis, P. weihenstephanensis and P. fragi from anoxic MAP minced beef and further proved their anaerobic growth in vitro on agar plates. This follow-up study investigated the anaerobic growth of two strains per respective species in situ on inoculated chicken breast fillet under 100% N2 modified atmosphere. We were able to prove anaerobic growth of all six strains on chicken breast fillet with cell division rates of 0.2-0.8 /day. Furthermore, we characterized the anaerobic metabolic lifestyle of these Pseudomonas strains by comparative proteomics, upon their cultivation in meat simulation media, which were constantly gassed with either air or 100% N2 atmospheres. From these proteomic predictions, and respective complementation by physiological experiments, we conclude that the Pseudomonas strains P. fragi, P. weihenstephanensis, P. lundensis exhibit a similar anaerobic lifestyle and employ arginine fermentation via the arginine deiminase (ADI) pathway to grow anaerobically also on MAP meats. Furthermore, glucose fermentation to ethanol via the ED-pathway is predicted to enable long term survival but no true growth, while respiratory growth with nitrate as alternative electron acceptor or glucose fermentation to acetate could be excluded due to absence of essential genes. The citric acid cycle is partially bypassed by the glyoxylate shunt, functioning as the gluconeogenetic route without production of NADH2 under carbon limiting conditions as e.g. in packaged meats. Triggered by an altered redox balance, we also detected upregulation of enzymes involved in protein folding as well as disulphide bonds isomerization under anoxic conditions as a counteracting mechanism to reduce protein misfolding. Hence, this study reveals the mechanisms enabling anaerobic grow and persistence of common meat-spoiling Pseudomonas species, and further complements the hitherto limited knowledge of the anaerobic lifestyle of Pseudomonas species in general.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental design of the proteomic study. In order to exclude interfering background microbiota and high numbers of detected meat proteins, all strains were cultivated in vitro in sterile glass bottles containing 400 ml of a meat simulation (MS) media as previously employed and described by Kolbeck et al. (2019). In detail, MS media consists of 12.5 g/l meat extract, 0.05 mM Tween80, 0.5% glycerol and 2 µg/ml hemin chloride adjusted to a pH of 5.8 with 100% lactic acid. MS medium was inoculated with an optical density of 0.1 at 590 nm with freshly prepared and washed precultures as described above. Bacteria were cultivated for 48 hours, 120 rpm at 25 °C ± 2 °C. During cultivation, MS media were constantly aerated with either 100% N2 or air. Growth of the strains was monitored over whole cultivation period and samples for proteomic were taken at logarithmic growth phase.   Proteomic sample preparation. Sample preparation was performed as described in detail previously (Kolbeck et al., 2019a). Briefly, bacterial cells were resuspended in 8M urea lysis buffer and lysed by beads beating. Total protein concentrations were determined using the BCA method. 100 µg of protein extract were reduced with 10 mM DTT and carbamidomethylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide. Subsequently, proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C. Digested peptide samples were desalted and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For full proteome analyses 0.5 µg of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in HPLC grade water with 0.1% formic acid. After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water and 5% (v/v) DMSO) contained 5% DMSO to boost MS intensity. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec (full proteome).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification by MaxQuant. Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016a). MS2 spectra were searched against the NCBI proteome databased of P. lundensis TMW2.1732 (JACJCQ000000000), P. lundensis TMW2.2076 (JAAEBS000000000), P. weihenstephanensis TMW2.2077 (JAAEBW000000000), P. weihenstephanensis TMW2.1728 (JAAEBV000000000), P. fragi TMW2.2081 (JAAEBQ000000000) and P. fragi TMW2.2082 (JAAEBR000000000), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. For full proteome analyses carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.  Proteomic data interpretation. The open-source software Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016b) was used for statistical data analysis. Therefore, proteins were filtered for high-confidence (false-discovery rate cutoff < 1% based on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level, removal of reverse, contaminant and “only-identified by site” proteins) and grouped into biological replicates”. Label free quantification (LFQ) values were log2 transformed and a Welch t-test was performed revealing statistic significantly differential regulated proteins between the two cultivation conditions air and N2 (p<0.01 and log2> 2). All obtained proteins were further confirmed by manual sequence searches using the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) provided by NCBI (Altschul et al., 1990). Different annotation programs (NCBI, TIGR, SEED, KEGG) as well as manual curation was applied to group the identified proteins into functional categories, revealing whole metabolic pathways being differentially regulated between oxic and anoxic cultivation of our Pseudomonas strains.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of certain <i>Pseudomonas</i> (<i>P.</i>) species to grow or persist in anoxic habitats by either denitrification, acetate fermentation, or arginine fermentation has been described in several studies as a special property. Previously, we had isolated strains belonging to the species <i>P. lundensis</i>, <i>P. weihenstephanensis</i>, and <i>P. fragi</i> from anoxic modified atmosphere packaged (MAP) minced beef and further proved their anaerobic growth <i>in vitro</i> on agar plates. This follow-up study investigated the anaerobic growth of two strains per respective species <i>in situ</i> on inoculated chicken breast filet under 100% N<sub>2</sub> modified atmosphere. We were able to prove anaerobic growth of all six strains on chicken breast filet with cell division rates of 0.2-0.8/day. Furthermore, we characterized the anaerobic metabolic lifestyle of these <i>Pseudomonas</i> strains by comparative proteomics, upon their cultivation in meat simulation media, which were constantly gassed with either air or 100% N<sub>2</sub> atmospheres. From these proteomic predictions, and respective complementation by physiological experiments, we conclude that the <i>Pseudomonas</i> strains <i>P. fragi</i>, <i>P. weihenstephanensis</i>, <i>P. lundensis</i> exhibit a similar anaerobic lifestyle and employ arginine fermentation via the arginine deiminase (ADI) pathway to grow anaerobically also on MAP meats. Furthermore, glucose fermentation to ethanol via the ED-pathway is predicted to enable long term survival but no true growth, while respiratory growth with nitrate as alternative electron acceptor or glucose fermentation to acetate could be excluded due to absence of essential genes. The citric acid cycle is partially bypassed by the glyoxylate shunt, functioning as the gluconeogenetic route without production of NADH<sub>2</sub> under carbon limiting conditions as e.g., in packaged meats. Triggered by an altered redox balance, we also detected upregulation of enzymes involved in protein folding as well as disulfide bonds isomerization under anoxic conditions as a counteracting mechanism to reduce protein misfolding. Hence, this study reveals the mechanisms enabling anaerobic grow and persistence of common meat-spoiling <i>Pseudomonas</i> species, and further complements the hitherto limited knowledge of the anaerobic lifestyle of <i>Pseudomonas</i> species in general.

### Keywords
Meat-spoilage pseudomonas species, Proteomic, Entner-doudoroff pathway, Modified atmosphere packaging, Redox stress, Arginine fermentation

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


