### Accession
PXD035664

### Title
Mutational screens highlight glycosylation as a modulator of colony-stimulating factor 3 receptor (CSF3R) activity

### Description
The colony-stimulating factor 3 receptor (CSF3R) controls the growth of neutrophils, the most abundant type of white blood cell. In healthy neutrophils, signaling is dependent on CSF3R binding to its ligand, CSF3. A single amino acid mutation in CSF3R, T618I, instead allows for constitutive, ligand-independent cell growth and leads to a rare type of cancer called chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL). However, the disease mechanism is not well understood. Here, we investigated why this threonine to isoleucine substitution is the predominant mutation in CNL and how it leads to uncontrolled neutrophil growth. Using protein domain mapping, we demonstrated that the single CSF3R domain containing residue 618 is sufficient for ligand-independent activity. We then applied an unbiased mutational screening strategy focused on this domain and found that activating mutations are enriched at sites normally occupied by asparagine, threonine, and serine residues – the three amino acids which are commonly glycosylated. We confirmed glycosylation at multiple CSF3R residues by mass spectrometry, including the presence of GalNAc and Gal-GalNAc glycans at wild-type threonine 618. Using the same approach applied to other cell surface receptors, we identified an activating mutation, S489F, in the interleukin-31 receptor alpha chain (IL-31Rα). Combined, these results suggest a role for glycosylated hotspot residues in regulating receptor signaling, mutation of which can lead to ligand-independent, uncontrolled activity and human disease.

### Sample Protocol
The sequence for the wild-type CSF3R 5FnIII domain (residues 530-626) with the CSF3R signal peptide (residues 1-24) and a C-terminal 6xHis tag was cloned into a pAdd2 mammalian expression vector at the EcoRI and XhoI sites by Gibson assembly, as described above. Expi293F cells were transfected with the pAdd2 5FnIII construct using the ExpiFectamine 293 kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific A14524) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. 6 days after transfection, the supernatant was centrifuged at 300xg for 5 minutes, adjusted to a pH of 8 with NaOH, centrifuged again at 3700xg for 20 minutes, and filtered with a 0.22 μm bottle-top filter (EMD Millipore S2GPT02RE). His-tagged CSF3R protein was enriched by nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) agarose (Qiagen 30210) and further purified by size-exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 10/300 GL column (Cytiva 17517401) with an AKTA Pure system (Cytiva). After purification, 7 μg of wild-type 5FnIII protein was incubated overnight at 37 ˚C in a final volume of 30 μL with 7 U of both SialEXO sialidase (Genovis G1-SM1-020) and OpeRATOR (Genovis G2-OP1-20) enzymes diluted in 20 mM Tris pH 7.5. After 18 hours, the sample was diluted to 50 μL with ammonium bicarbonate buffer and incubated at 37 ˚C with 2 μL of PNGase F (New England Biolabs P0705S) diluted 1:100 in ammonium bicarbonate for an additional 7 hours. The sample was combined with 69 μL of ammonium bicarbonate along with 1 μL of 1% ProteaseMax surfactant (Promega V2072) for a total volume of 100 μL, and incubated at 25 ˚C overnight. After 18 hours, 0.3 μL of acetic acid was added to the sample before desalting with a C18 tip (Agilent A57203). The C18 tip was washed three times with 200 μL of methanol, then three times with 5% formic acid. The sample was applied to the tip for 30 seconds, then collected and reloaded for a total of 6 times. The tip was washed three times with 200 μL of 5% formic acid, then eluted three times with 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid. The sample was dried in a CentriVap Complete vacuum concentrator (Labconco) at 40 ˚C, resuspended in 5 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and frozen at -20 ˚C until analysis. For N-glycoproteomics, wild-type 5FnIII protein was resuspended in 100 mM Tris, and 2.5 uL of IMPa O-glycoprotease (New England Biolabs) was added for an incubation at 37 ˚C for 2 hours, followed by addition of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively. One microgram of either trypsin (Promega) or chymotrypsin (Promega) were added and digests were incubated overnight at 37 ˚C. The next day digested peptides were desalted using a 10 mg Strata-X cartridge (Phenomenex) by conditioning the cartridge with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 1 mL 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water. Peptides were acidified with formic acid and then loaded on to the cartridge, followed by a 1 mL wash with 0.2% FA in water. Peptides were eluted with 400 uL of 0.2% FA in 80% ACN, were dried via lyophilization, and were resuspended in 0.2% FA.  Because of low expression yields for the single IL-31Rα FnIII domain, the full extracellular domain of IL-31Rα (ACROBiosystems ILA-H52H7) was incubated in a similar fashion as described above. 20 μg of the full IL-31Rα extracellular domain was resuspended in 100 mM Tris, and 2.5 uL of IMPa O-glycoprotease (New England Biolabs) was added for an incubation at 37 ˚C for 2 hours, followed by addition of TCEP and chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively. One microgram of chymotrypsin (Promega) was added incubated overnight at 37 ˚C. The next day digested peptides were desalted using the Strata-X cartridge protocol described above prior to drying via lyophilization. Desalted peptides were resuspended in 100 mM Tris and 1 μL of a 1:20 dilution of PNGaseF (New England Biolabs) was added for a 3-hour incubation at 37 ˚C. Again, peptides were desalted, dried, and then resuspended in 0.2% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Byonic by Protein Metrics against directed databases containing the recombinant protein of interest. Search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 m/z for HCD MS2s, 0.35 m/z for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-term acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. O-glycans were also set as variable modifications (common 2), using the “O-glycan 6 most common” database. Cysteine carbaminomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. All peptides were manually validated and/or sequenced using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). HCD was used to confirm that the peptides were glycosylated and ETD spectra were used for site-localization of glycosylation sites. N-glycoproteomic files from wild-type 5FnIII were searched using Byonic by Protein Metrics against directed databases containing CSF3R. Search parameters included fully specific cleavage specificity C-terminal to F, Y, W, and L residues, and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for product ions. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation (rare 2) with a total rare max of 2, and a library of 183 N-glycans (common 1) with a total common max of 2. A fixed modification was cysteine carbaminomethylation. Hits were filtered and manually validated with Xcalibur as previously described. O-glycoproteomic files from IL-31Rα were processed using O-Pair Search45 with directed databases containing IL-31Rα. Settings were the “Glyco Search” selection with an O-glycan database of 22 glycans and the “Maximum OGlycan Allowed” at 4. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation. Additional parameters were mass tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for product ions, with a minimum score allowed of 3. A protease setting of IMPa-Chymotrypsin was created with N-terminal cleavage to S and T residues and C-terminal cleavage to F, Y, W, and L residues with fully specific parameters. Filters included only target matches (T) and a q-value <0.01, and sequences of interest were then manually inspected and validated.

### Publication Abstract
The colony-stimulating factor 3 receptor (CSF3R) controls the growth of neutrophils, the most abundant type of white blood cell. In healthy neutrophils, signaling is dependent on CSF3R binding to its ligand, CSF3. A single amino acid mutation in CSF3R, T618I, instead allows for constitutive, ligand-independent cell growth and leads to a rare type of cancer called chronic neutrophilic leukemia. However, the disease mechanism is not well understood. Here, we investigated why this threonine to isoleucine substitution is the predominant mutation in chronic neutrophilic leukemia and how it leads to uncontrolled neutrophil growth. Using protein domain mapping, we demonstrated that the single CSF3R domain containing residue 618 is sufficient for ligand-independent activity. We then applied an unbiased mutational screening strategy focused on this domain and found that activating mutations are enriched at sites normally occupied by asparagine, threonine, and serine residues-the three amino acids which are commonly glycosylated. We confirmed glycosylation at multiple CSF3R residues by mass spectrometry, including the presence of GalNAc and Gal-GalNAc glycans at WT threonine 618. Using the same approach applied to other cell surface receptors, we identified an activating mutation, S489F, in the interleukin-31 receptor alpha chain. Combined, these results suggest a role for glycosylated hotspot residues in regulating receptor signaling, mutation of which can lead to ligand-independent, uncontrolled activity and human disease.

### Keywords
Mutagenesis, Receptor, Glycoprotein, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University

### Submitter
Michael Hollander

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn R. Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University


