### Accession
PXD034863

### Title
Outer membrane utilisomes mediate oligosaccharide uptake in gut Bacteroidetes

### Description
Bacteroidetes are abundant members of the human microbiota, and species occupying the distal gut are capable of utilising a myriad of diet- and host-derived glycans. Transport of glycans across the outer membrane (OM) of these bacteria is mediated by SusCD protein complexes. Additionally, cell surface-exposed lipoproteins, namely surface glycan binding proteins and glycoside hydrolases, play critical roles in the capture and processing of large glycan chains into transport-competent substrates. Here we show that, for the levan and dextran utilisation systems of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, the additional OM components assemble on the core SusCD transporter, forming stable glycan utilising machines which we term ‘utilisomes’. Single particle electron cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures in the absence and presence of substrate reveal concerted conformational changes that rationalise the role of each component for efficient nutrient capture, as well as providing a direct demonstration of the pedal bin mechanism of substrate capture in the intact utilisome.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteriodes thetaiotaomicron outer membrane protein samples were suspended in 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.5, and subsequently processed for proteomic analysis using the suspension trapping (S-Trap) sample preparation method (ProtiFi, Huntington NY). Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Peptides were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 2% to 30% B in 110 min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. The precursor ion full scan was performed in the Orbitrap (OT) in the range of 350-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC)target of 3E6, and an ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the OT using the Top 20 precursors fragmented by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Precursors were isolated using the quadrupole using a 1.6 m/z isolation width. An HCD collision energy of 25% was used, the AGC target was set to 2E5 and an ion injection time of 50 ms was allowed. Dynamic exclusion of ions was implemented using a 45 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 1.8 kV and capillary temperature of 280°C was used.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0, and searched against the Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron Uniprot proteome database (UP000001414) downloaded on 22 September 2020. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N- terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteroidetes are abundant members of the human microbiota, utilizing a myriad of diet- and host-derived glycans in the distal gut<sup>1</sup>. Glycan uptake across the bacterial outer membrane of these bacteria is mediated by SusCD protein complexes, comprising a membrane-embedded barrel and a lipoprotein lid, which is thought to open and close to facilitate substrate binding and transport. However, surface-exposed glycan-binding proteins and glycoside hydrolases also play critical roles in the capture, processing and transport of large glycan chains. The interactions between these components in the outer membrane are poorly understood, despite being crucial for nutrient acquisition by our colonic microbiota. Here we show that for both the levan and dextran utilization systems of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, the additional outer membrane components assemble on the core SusCD transporter, forming stable glycan-utilizing machines that we term utilisomes. Single-particle cryogenic electron microscopy structures in the absence and presence of substrate reveal concerted conformational changes that demonstrate the mechanism of substrate capture, and rationalize the role of each component in the utilisome.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Gut bacteroidetes, Glycan utilisation, Outer membrane proteome

### Affiliations
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom


