### Accession
PXD023451

### Title
Nucleolar TFIIE plays a role in ribosomal biogenesis and performance

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a highly energy-demanding process in eukaryotes which requires the concerted action of all three RNA polymerases. In RNA polymerase II transcription, the general transcription factor TFIIH is recruited by TFIIE to the initiation site of protein-coding genes. Distinct mutations in TFIIH and TFIIE give rise to the degenerative disorder trichothiodystrophy (TTD).  Here we uncovered an unexpected role of TFIIE in ribosomal RNA synthesis by RNA polymerase I. With high resolution microscopy we detected TFIIE in the nucleolus where TFIIE binds to actively transcribed rDNA. Mutations in TFIIE affects gene-occupancy of RNA polymerase I, rRNA maturation, ribosomal assembly and performance. In consequence, the elevated translational error rate with imbalanced protein synthesis and turnover results in an increase in heat-sensitive proteins. Collectively, mutations in TFIIE – due to impaired ribosomal biogenesis and translational accuracy – lead to a loss of protein homeostasis (proteostasis) which can partly explain the clinical phenotype in TTD.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosomes from NP-TTD cell line TTD218UT and reconstituted cell line 218 UT TFIIEb were analyzed using quantitative proteomics. Per sample ca. 10 µg of isolated ribosomes were resuspended in 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM magnesium acetate and 100 mM ammonium acetate. The samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega). The generated peptides were desalted and measured on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 50 minutes linear gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% (v/v) DMSO; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) was applied. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against a Uniprot-derived human reference proteome (UP000005640, 20,353 reviewed entries, downloaded 17.7.2020) supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. To compare relative protein abundances between the ribosome samples label free quantification (LFQ) values were used.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome biogenesis is a highly energy-demanding process in eukaryotes which requires the concerted action of all three RNA polymerases. In RNA polymerase II transcription, the general transcription factor TFIIH is recruited by TFIIE to the initiation site of protein-coding genes. Distinct mutations in TFIIH and TFIIE give rise to the degenerative disorder trichothiodystrophy (TTD). Here, we uncovered an unexpected role of TFIIE in ribosomal RNA synthesis by RNA polymerase I. With high resolution microscopy we detected TFIIE in the nucleolus where TFIIE binds to actively transcribed rDNA. Mutations in TFIIE affects gene-occupancy of RNA polymerase I, rRNA maturation, ribosomal assembly and performance. In consequence, the elevated translational error rate with imbalanced protein synthesis and turnover results in an increase in heat-sensitive proteins. Collectively, mutations in TFIIE-due to impaired ribosomal biogenesis and translational accuracy-lead to a loss of protein homeostasis (proteostasis) which can partly explain the clinical phenotype in TTD.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase i, Ribosome, Proteostasis, Tfiie, Translational fidelity

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM)
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM)


