### Accession
PXD040999

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics reveals aberrant expression levels of LRG, C9, FN, A1AT and AGP in the plasma of patients with colorectal cancer

### Description
Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the major causes of cancer-related death worldwide. Although commercial biomarkers of CRC are currently available, they are still lacking in terms of sensitivity and specificity; thus, searching for reliable blood-based biomarkers are important for the primary screening of CRC.  Methods: Plasma samples of patients with non-metastatic (NM) and metastatic (M) CRC and healthy controls were fractionated using MARS-14 immunoaffinity chromatography. The flow-through and elute fractions representing low- and high-abundant proteins, respectively, were analyzed by label-free quantitative proteomics mass spectrometry. The functional analysis of the proteins with greater than 1.5-fold differential expression level between the CRC and the healthy control groups were analyzed for their biological processes and molecular functions. In addition, the levels of plasma proteins showing large alterations in CRC patients were confirmed by immunoblotting using two independent cohorts. Moreover, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was performed for individual and combinations of biomarker candidates so as to evaluate the diagnostic performance of biomarker candidates. Results: From 163 refined identifications, five proteins were up-regulated and two proteins were down-regulated in NM-CRC while eight proteins were up-regulated and three proteins were down-regulated in M-CRC, respectively. Altered plasma proteins in NM-CRC were mainly involved in complement activation, while those in M-CRC were clustered in acute-phase response, complement activation, and inflammatory response. Results from the study- and validation-cohorts indicate that the levels of LRG, C9, AGP1, and A1AT were statistically increased, while FN level was statistically decreased in CRC patients compared to healthy controls, with most alterations found in a metastatic stage-dependent manner. ROC analysis revealed that FN exhibited the best diagnostic performance to discriminate CRC patients and healthy controls while AGP1 showed the best discrimination between the disease stages in both cohorts. The combined biomarker candidates, FN+A1AT+AGP1, exhibited perfect discriminatory power to discriminate between the CRC population and healthy controls whereas LRG+A1AT+AGP1 was likely to be the best panel to discriminate the metastatic stages in both cohorts.  Conclusions: This study identified and quantified distinct plasma proteome profiles of CRC patients. Selected CRC biomarker candidates including FN, LRG, C9, A1AT, and AGP1 may be further applied for screening larger cohorts.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled plasma derived from healthy individuals (N), non-metastatic colorectal cancer (NM) and metastatic colorectal cancer (M) patients were fractionated by immunoaffinity chromatography column (MARS-14, Agilent Technologies) into Flow-through (FT) and Elute (EL) fractions. Each fraction was overnight-digested by trypsin, peptide clean up using C18 reverse chromatography, and subjected to nanoflow liquid chromatography (300 nL/min, 70 min of 1-50% acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1% formic acid) tandem mass spectrometry (amaZon speed ETD, Bruker Daltonics) in CID mode.

### Data Protocol
Label-free relative quantification was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics 3.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, USA.) Three technical replicated LC-MS/MS data of each group (N, NM, and M) were aligned and filtered for peptide ions in the range of 50-3000 m/z, retention time of 5-60 minutes, and charge states of 2+, 3+, and 4+. The peak list was exported to perform MS/MS identification against the UniProt human proteome database (release 2019_03) using in-house MASCOT Server v.2.4.0 (Matrix Science, USA). The search parameters were set as follows: 1.2 Da and 0.6 Da for peptide mass tolerance and MS/MS ion mass tolerance respectively; #13C as 0; instrument type as ESI-TRAP; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl at cysteine residue; variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal carbamidomethylation; 1 missed cleavage allowance; enzyme as trypsin; the limit of peptide charges as 2+, 3+, and 4+; and including decoy database. Identity threshold of the search results was adjusted to yield 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The identified peptide ions were imported back to the Progenesis QI to synchronize with their related ion intensity data. Peptide identification was refined with the score cut-off corresponding to 1% FDR. The results were exported for further refining to exclude uncertain peptide identification with the followings criteria: deletion of non-unique sequences and conflicting sequences (sequences from an MS/MS identification that could be assigned to more than one sequence); and spectral count less than 2 MS runs across all MS runs. The proteins containing at least 2 peptides were accounted for relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Blood-based biomarkers, Affinity chromatography, Colorectal cancer, Mars-14

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Thailand
Chulabhorn Research Institute

### Submitter
Chris Verathamjamras

### Lab Head
Dr Jisnuson Svasti
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Thailand


