### Accession
PXD011072

### Title
Tomato xylem sap proteome composition following endophyte- and R-gene mediated resistance towards Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici inoculation.

### Description
Xylem sap proteome studies on susceptible or resistant tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) inoculated with endophytic and/or pathogenic strains of Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici were conducted to get insights into the molecular differences between endophyte- and R-gene-mediated resistance (EMR and RMR). The EMR and RMR proteomes were compared to each other and to the mock control. Interestingly, specific PR-5 isoforms were found to exclusively accumulate during endophyte or genetic resistance, providing excellent markers to distinguish both resistance types at the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
Four-weeks-old susceptible C32 tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum) were inoculated with microconidia of Fusarium oxysporum Fo47, F. oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici (Fol), a mix of both fungal strains, or water (mock). Also resistant KG324 tomato plants were inoculated with Fol, or water. Two-weeks-post infection xylem sap was collected. Proteins were concentrated using Amicon ultra-15 filter units and trichloroacetic acid/aceton-precipitation. The pellet was resuspended in SDS loading buffer and loaded on a protein gel, run shortly and stained with Coomassie PageBlue. Proteins were reduced, and alkylated and each sample was excised from the gel and further chopped off into pieces of approximately 1 mm2. Finally, proteins were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance (<i>R</i>) genes and endophytic organisms can both protect plants against pathogens. Although the outcome of both processes is the same, little is known about the commonalities and differences between both immune responses. Here we set out to phenotypically characterize both responses in the tomato-Fusarium pathosystem, and to identify markers to distinguish these responses at the molecular level. As endophyte <i>Fusarium oxysporum</i> (Fo) strain Fo47 was employed, which confers protection against various pathogens, including the vascular wilt fungus <i>F. oxysporum</i> f.sp. <i>lycopersici</i> (Fol). As <i>R</i>-gene conferring Fol resistance, the <i>I-2</i> gene of tomato (<i>Solanum lycopersicum</i>) was used. Fol colonizes the xylem vessels of susceptible and <i>I-2</i> resistant tomato plants, but only causes disease in the former. Fol was found to colonize the vasculature of endophyte-colonized plants, and could be isolated from stems of non-diseased plants co-inoculated with Fo47 and Fol. Because the xylem vessels form the main interface between plant and pathogen, the xylem sap proteomes during <i>R</i> gene- and Endophyte-Mediated Resistance (RMR and EMR) were compared using label-free quantitative nLC-MS/MS. Surprisingly, both proteomes were remarkably similar to the mock, revealing only one or two differentially accumulated proteins in the respective resistant interactions. Whereas in <i>I-2</i> plants the accumulation of the pathogenesis-related protein PR-5x was strongly induced by Fol, the endophyte triggered induction of both NP24, another PR-5 isoform, and of a &#x3b2;-glucanase in the presence of Fol. Notably, over 54% of the identified xylem sap proteins have a predicted intracellular localization, which implies that these might be present in exosomes. In conclusion, whereas both resistance mechanisms permit the pathogen to colonize the vasculature, this does not result in disease and this resistance coincides with specific induction of two distinct PR-5 isoforms and a &#x3b2;-glucanase.

### Keywords
Np24, Pr-5x, Fusarium wilt disease, Proteomics, Endophyte, Exosomes, Biocontrol

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


