### Accession
PXD011998

### Title
Using SWATH-MS to unveil hCSCs response to hCM I/R injury paracrine factors

### Description
Human Cardiac/Progenitod Stem Cells (hCSCs) transplantation is arising as a novel therapy option for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) patients. The majority of the studies reported point to paracrine signaling as the main effector in hCSCs activation and regenerative capacity. However, the mechanisms of action of these cells in response to AMI paracrine context are still poorly understood. In the present study, a quantitative proteomics analysis (SWATH-MS) was employed to investigate hCSC response to paracrine factors released by human cardiomyocytes (hCMs) in response to an in vitro AMI Ischemia/Reperfusion (I/R) injury. A total of 714 proteins were quantified, from which 86 were differentially expressed, including 63 proteins up-regulated and 23 down-regulated in hCSCs exposed to hCM I/R injury conditioned media vs hCSCs exposed to control hCM conditioned media. Bioinformatics functional analysis revealed up-regulation of proteins involved with endocytosis, paracrine signaling, proliferation, migration and stress response. This work provides an insight into hCSC biology in response to paracrine cues derived from hCMs upon I/R injury, and the data generated herein constitutes a rich resource for further studies aiming at potentiating the regenerative properties of these cells.

### Sample Protocol
hCSCs were plated at 1,5x104 cell/cm2 in complete CM001-R medium. After 24h, medium was exchanged by hiPSC-CM conditioned media.  A control with non conditioned basal CM001-R (without FBS) was maintained in parallel. Cells were cultured at 37°C in humidified incubators (5% CO2, 3% O2). After 3 days in culture with hiPSC-CM conditioned media, hCSCs were harvested (Tryple™ Select Enzyme for 5 minutes at 37°C) and washed twice with DPBS by centrifugation. Cell pellets were placed at −80 °C until further proteomic analysis. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 7.8); 250 mM Sucrose; 2 mM EDTA] with protease inhibitors and incubated on ice for 10 min. Cells were lysed with 30 passes through the 301/2 Gauge needle at 4 °C. The cell debris, unbroken nuclei, and other membrane proteins were pelleted and removed by centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C and total protein amount in the supernatant was quantified using a Microplate BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were digested in gel: protein bands were distained with 50% (v/V) acetonitrile, reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide 55 mM, and digested at 37 °C with 6.7 μg/mL trypsin.   Each sample tryptic peptides (2.5 μg) was used for information-dependent acquisition (IDA) analysis by NanoLC-MS using TripleTOF 6600 (ABSciex). A reversed phase nanoLC with a trap and elution configuration, using a Nano cHiPLC Trap column (200 μm × 0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) and nano column (75 μm × 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) was performed.  Water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B) were used. Samples were loaded in the trap column at a flow rate of 2 μL/min for 10 min using 100% (v/v) solvent A. Peptide separation was performed in the nano column at a flow rate of 300 μL/min applying a 90 min linear gradient of 5% to 30% (v/v) of solvent B. IDA scanning full spectra (400–2000 m/z) for 250 ms. The top 40 ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS scans (150–1800 m/z for 50 ms each) using a total cycle time of 2.3 s. The selection criteria for parent ions included a charge state between +2 and +5, and counts above a minimum threshold of 125 counts per second. Ions were excluded from further MS/MS analysis for 12 s. Fragmentation was performed using rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 5. The spectral library was created by combining all IDA raw files using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0 ABSciex) with the Paragon algorithm and with the following search parameters: search against Homo sapiens from Uniprot/SwissProt database (version 03/2018); trypsin digestion; iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation; through identification efforts. After a false discovery rate (FDR) analysis, only FDR<1% were considered. The output of these searches, in the form of a group file was used as the reference spectral library.  For quantitative analysis, 2.5 μg of each sample were subjected to three SWATH runs. Similar chromatographic conditions to the previously described IDA run were used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a cyclic product ion data independent acquisition (DIA). A variable windows calculator (SWATH Variable Window Calculator_V1.0, AB SCIEX) and SWATH acquisition method editor (AB SCIEX) were used to setup the SWATH acquisition. A set of 32 overlapping windows (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 400 – 1200 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected for 96 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.172 s. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 15 was used.

### Data Protocol
The spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of DIA samples were performed using PeakView v.2.1 (AB SCIEX; Framingham, US) with the reference spectral library. For data extraction the following parameters were used: six peptides/protein, six transitions/peptide, peptide confidence level of >99%, FDR threshold of 1%, excluded shared peptides, and extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 10 min and width set at 20 ppm. A total of 714 proteins were quantified under these conditions.  To identify differentially expressed proteins, student’s T test analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism6 (GraphPad Software Inc., California, USA). Resulting p values and fold changes were used to define up- and down- regulated proteins. Differentially expressed proteins were defined as those which showed a fold change greater than 1.5 (up-regulated) or lower than 0.67 (down-regulated) and p values lower or equal to 0.05. Hierarchical clustering heat map analysis was performed using Perseus software environment. Pathway analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, Quiagen, Germany) by uploading the entire quantified protein list (only proteins with p value≤0.05) and the respective fold change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human cardiac stem cells, Acute myocardial infarctio, Human induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes., Myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury

### Affiliations
iBET/ ITQB-NOVA
ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. da República, 2780-157, Oeiras, Portugal; iBET- Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12 2780-901 Oeiras, Portugal

### Submitter
Maria Sebastião

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Marques Alves
ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. da República, 2780-157, Oeiras, Portugal; iBET- Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12 2780-901 Oeiras, Portugal


