### Accession
PXD000367

### Title
Proteomic analysis of outer membrane vesicles from the probiotic strain Escherichia coli Nissle 1917

### Description
Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (EcN) is a probiotic used for treatment of intestinal disorders. EcN improves gastrointestinal homeostasis and microbiota balance; however little is known about how this probiotic delivers effector molecules to the host. Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are constitutively produced by gram-negative bacteria and have a relevant role in bacteria-host interactions. Here we performed proteomic analysis of EcN OMVs. Using 1D SDSD-PAGE and highly sensitive LC-MS/MS analysis we identified 192 EcN vesicular proteins with high confidence in three independent experiments. Of these proteins, 18 were encoded by strain-linked genes and 57 were common to pathogen-derived OMVs. These proteins may contribute to the ability of this probiotic to colonize the human gut as they fulfil functions related to adhesion to host tissues, immune modulation or bacterial survival in host niches. This study describes the first global OMV proteome of a probiotic strain and provides evidence that probiotic-derived OMVs contain proteins that can target these vesicles to the host and mediate their beneficial effects on intestinal function.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (EcN) is a probiotic used for the treatment of intestinal disorders. EcN improves gastrointestinal homeostasis and microbiota balance; however, little is known about how this probiotic delivers effector molecules to the host. Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are constitutively produced by Gram-negative bacteria and have a relevant role in bacteria-host interactions. Using 1D SDS-PAGE and highly sensitive LC-MS/MS analysis we identified in this study 192 EcN vesicular proteins with high confidence in three independent biological replicates. Of these proteins, 18 were encoded by strain-linked genes and 57 were common to pathogen-derived OMVs. These proteins may contribute to the ability of this probiotic to colonize the human gut as they fulfil functions related to adhesion, immune modulation or bacterial survival in host niches. This study describes the first global OMV proteome of a probiotic strain and provides evidence that probiotic-derived OMVs contain proteins that can target these vesicles to the host and mediate their beneficial effects on intestinal function. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000367 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000367).

### Keywords
Probiotics, Outer membrane vesicles, Escherichia coli nissle 1917

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform

### Submitter
Eliandre de Oliveira

### Lab Head


