### Accession
PXD003449

### Title
Comparative Transcriptomics and Proteomics on Pi Depleted Arabidopsis Roots

### Description
Plant adaptation to limited phosphate (Pi) availability comprises a wide range of strategies to conserve and remobilize internal Pi stores and to enhance Pi acquisition. Vigorous restructuring of root system architecture provides a developmental strategy for topsoil exploration and Pi scavenging. Changes in external Pi availability are locally sensed at the root tip and adjust root growth by modulating cell expansion and cell division. The functionally interacting Arabidopsis genes, LPR1/LPR2 and PDR2, are key components of root Pi sensing.  A series of genome-wide studies revealed insight into transcriptional changes upon Pi starvation and provided a comprehensive overview of gene expression patterns in roots and photosynthetic tissues.  In this study, we combined genome-wide transcriptome and proteome profiling in Pi-starved roots of wild-type, pdr2 and lpr1lpr2 seedlings. A comparative analysis of the datasets, combined with physiological and cell biological experiments, reveals a network regulating local root Fe uptake, storage and distribution upon Pi limitation. We further highlight expressional changes of several cell wall-modifying enzymes and provide evidence for a dynamic adjustment of the pectin network at sites of local Fe accumulation within the root meristem.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 100 mg of root tissue and ground to a fine powder under liquid nitrogen. The tissue was suspended in 300 µl of ice-cold extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.5; 1% (w/v) SDS; 5% glycerol (v/v); 5 mM EDTA; 0.5% ß-mercaptoethanol added fresh (v/v); 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail for Plant Cell Lystae (SIGMA Product No. P9599, v/v, added fresh)) and mixed vigorously for 30 min at 4°C. 300 µl of water-saturated phenol were added and mixing was prolonged for 30 minutes. The suspension was centrifuged at 10,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The phenol phase was transferred to a new reaction tube and an equal volume of re-extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5; 20 mM KCl; 10 mM EDTA; 0.5% ß-mercaptoethanol added fresh(v/v)) was added. The homogenate was mixed vigorously for 15 min at 4°C and centrifuged as above. Proteins were precipitated from the phenol phase at -20°C overnight by adding 10 volumes of 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 6,000g at 4°C for 10 min. The protein pellet was washed twice with 10 ml 20% 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 80% acetone and air dried for 30 minutes at room temperature. The protein pellet was dissolved in 100 µl of 8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the protein content was determined with the 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the instructions. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 mM Tris-HCl and alkylated with an excess of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 100 mM Tris-HCl. Proteins were digested with trypsin at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight. The protein digest was desalted using reverse phase solid phase extraction chromatography in STAGE tips. The C18 matrix was conditioned with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA in ddH2O and equilibrated with 0.1% FA in ddH2O. Bound peptides were washed with 0.1% FA in ddH2O, eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA in ddH2O and dried to completion in a vacuum concentrator. The peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. The samples were measured in random order. One µg of peptides were injected into an EASY-nLC II nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using C18 reverse phase chemistry employing a pre-column (EASY column SC001, length 2 cm, ID 100 µm, particle size 5 µm) in line with an EASY column SC200 with a length of 10 cm, an inner diameter (ID) of 75 µm and a particle size of 3 µm (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted into a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 300 min gradient increasing from 5% to 40% acetonitrile in ddH2O and electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The source voltage was set to 1.9 kV, the S-Lens RF level to 50%. The delta multipole offset was -7.00. The instrument method consisted of one survey (full) scan of the entire ion population in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by up to 20 data dependent CID product ion scans of selected precursor ions in the linear quadrupole ion trap (LTQ). A single micro scan per mass spectrum was acquired in both mass analyzers. The AGC target value was set to 1e06 and the maximum injection time (max IT) to 500 ms in the Orbitrap. The parameters were set to 1e04 and 100 ms in the LTQ with an isolation width of 2 Da for precursor isolation and MS/MS scanning. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 s an exclusion duration of 90 s and a relative exclusion width of 10 ppm. Full scan mass spectra were internally calibrated on the fly using the 445.120024 Da lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was imported into Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (PD). Peak lists generated with a precursor signal to noise ratio of 1.5 with PD were used to search the TAIR10 database amended with common contaminants (35,394 sequences, 14,486,974 residues) with the Mascot algorithm v.2.5 on an in-house Mascot server. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and two missed cleavages were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The precursor tolerance was set to 7 ppm and the product ion mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A decoy database search was performed to determine the peptide false discovery rate (FDR). The search results were imported into the Scaffold Q+ software v.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Inc.). Peptide and protein FDRs were calculated and the identity thresholds set to 0.01% and 1% respectively to control the family wise error rate of peptide and protein identifications. The raw data was imported into Progenesis LC-MS v.4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics) for relative protein quantification between LC-MS analyses. The peptide ion signal peak landscapes of LC-MS analyses were aligned using the analysis as a reference that gave the highest minimum and maximum number of vectors in the aligned set of analyses when each analysis was used as a reference. Ratiometric normalization in log space to a selected reference analysis over all aligned peptide ion signals was performed. The summed intensities of peptide ion signal peak isotope envelopes over time were used as a measure of peptide abundance. A coefficient of variance (CV) of peptide abundance of less than 50% for a peptide in all LC-MS analyses of a biological condition (three replicate analyses of each of three biological replicates for a total of 9) was required for a peptide to be quantified. Protein abundance was inferred by the sum of all unique peptides mapping to a given protein (non-conflicting peptides). Protein abundance fold changes and corresponding p-values between the biological conditions were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Root, Arabidopsis, Phosphate, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Wolfgang Hoehenwarter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry


