### Accession
PXD021679

### Title
Identification of BAHCC1 protein interactors

### Description
Trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) regulates gene repression, cell-fate determination and differentiation. We report that a conserved Bromo-Adjacent Homology (BAH) module of BAHCC1 (BAHCC1BAH) ‘recognizes’ H3K27me3 specifically and enforces silencing of H3K27me3-demarcated genes in mammalian cells. Biochemical, structural and ChIP-seq-based analyses demonstrate that direct readout of H3K27me3 by BAHCC1 is achieved through a hydrophobic trimethyl-lysine-binding ‘cage’ formed by BAHCC1BAH, mediating co-localization of BAHCC1 and H3K27me3-marked genes. BAHCC1 is overexpressed in human acute leukemias and interacts with transcriptional co-repressors. In leukemia, depletion of BAHCC1, or disruption of the BAHCC1BAH:H3K27me3 interaction, causes de-repression of H3K27me3-targeted genes that are involved in tumor suppression and cell differentiation, leading to suppression of oncogenesis. In mice, introduction of a germ-line mutation at Bahcc1 to disrupt its H3K27me3 engagement causes partial postnatal lethality, supporting a role in development. This study unveils a novel H3K27me3-directed transduction pathway in mammals that relies on a conserved BAH ‘reader’.

### Sample Protocol
The nuclear extracts were prepared from the nuclei of HeLa stable cells carrying the BAHCC1-3×Flag-KI alleles, with non-tagged parental HeLa cells used as negative control. Following dialysis against low salt buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.90, 0.025% IGEPAL® CA-630, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF), nuclear extracts were centrifuged at high speed to remove precipitation and supernatants incubated with Flag beads (Sigma; M2). After extensive washing, resin and bound proteins from both experimental and negative control cells were submitted to the Proteomics Core facility, UNC School of Medicine for mass spectrometry-based protein identification. Proteins were digested on-bead with trypsin and cleaned with C18 spin columns (Pierce). Samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF. Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 65 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–32% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1600) was set to 120,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 5 × 104 ions. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer v2.1. Data were searched using Sequest against a reviewed Uniprot Human databased containing 20185 sequences (downloaded Apr 2017). Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus wer specified in Sequest as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Trimethylated histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) regulates gene repression, cell-fate determination and differentiation. We report that a conserved bromo-adjacent homology (BAH) module of BAHCC1 (BAHCC1<sup>BAH</sup>) 'recognizes' H3K27me3 specifically and enforces silencing of H3K27me3-demarcated genes in mammalian cells. Biochemical, structural and integrated chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing-based analyses demonstrate that direct readout of H3K27me3 by BAHCC1 is achieved through a hydrophobic trimethyl-L-lysine-binding 'cage' formed by BAHCC1<sup>BAH</sup>, mediating colocalization of BAHCC1 and H3K27me3-marked genes. BAHCC1 is highly expressed in human acute leukemia and interacts with transcriptional corepressors. In leukemia, depletion of BAHCC1, or disruption of the BAHCC1<sup>BAH</sup>-H3K27me3 interaction, causes derepression of H3K27me3-targeted genes that are involved in tumor suppression and cell differentiation, leading to suppression of oncogenesis. In mice, introduction of a germline mutation at Bahcc1 to disrupt its H3K27me3 engagement causes partial postnatal lethality, supporting a role in development. This study identifies an H3K27me3-directed transduction pathway in mammals that relies on a conserved BAH 'reader'.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Bahcc1

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Greg Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Wang
UNC-Chapel Hill


