### Accession
PXD011942

### Title
The relative intensity of RhPIP2;1 at Ser 273. Membrane proteins were extracted from mock (left) and dehydrated (right) leaves and were used for LC-MS analysis - Part 1

### Description
Plants have evolved sophisticated systems to respond to environmental changes, and growth arrest is a common strategy to enhance stress tolerance. Despite the growth-survival tradeoffs is essential for shaping plant productivity, the mechanisms balancing growth and survival remain largely unknown. Aquaporins play a crucial role in growth and stress responses by controlling water transport across membranes. Here, we present that RhPIP2;1, an aquaporin from rose (Rosa sp.), interacts with a membrane-tethered MYB protein, RhPTM. Water deficiency triggers nuclear translocation of RhPTM C-terminus. Silencing of RhPTM causes continuous growth under drought stress, and a consequent decrease in survival rate. RNA-seq indicates that RhPTM influences expression of genes related to carbohydrate metabolism. Water deficiency induces phosphorylation of RhPIP2;1 at Ser273, which is sufficient to promote nuclear translocation of RhPTM C-terminus. These results indicate that RhPIP2;1-RhPTM module serves as a critical player to orchestrate the tradeoff between growth and stress survival in rose.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS assay, membrane proteins were extracted using MinuteTM Plasma Membrane Protein Isolation Kit For Plants (Invent Biotech. Inc. Cat.SM-005-P, MN 55441, USA) and then fractionated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels, which were then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. Stained bands of interest were excised from the region of predicted molecular weight. For phosphorylation assay, the fully-expanded rose leaves were subjected to dehydration treatment for 60 min, and the untreated leaves were used as control.   Protein digestion was performed using FASP method with modifications 48. Briefly, 100 g protein was dissolved with 50 mM ABC (NH4HCO3), and was reduced with DTT (dithiothreitol) at 56 C for 45 min, and was alkylated with IAM (iodoacetamide) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The solution was transferred into a 10K ultrafiltration tube (Vivacon 500, Satrorius), and was spinned at 14000 g for 20 min. ABC solution (50 mM) was used to wash the protein for 3 times. Two microgram Lys-C (for phosphorylation assay of RhPIP2;1) or trypsin (for validation of anti-RhPTM antibody) in 50 L of 50 mM ABC was added and incubated at 37 C overnight. The ultrafiltration tube was spinned at 14000 g for 20 min with a new collection tube to collect digested peptides. ABC solution was added into the ultrafiltration tube to wash the digested peptide into the collection tube. The collected solution was diluted with 0.1% FA for nanoLC-MS analysis. nanoLC separation was achieved with a Waters (Milford, MA, USA) nanoAcquity nanoHPLC. The trap column was Thermo Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 m2 mm, C18, 3 m). The analytical column was homemade with 100 m I.D. fused silica capillary (Polymicro) filled with 20 cm of C18 stationary phase (Phenomenex, Aqua 3 m C18 125A ). A gradient elution program was used, with mobile phase increases linearly from 1% B to 35% B in 90 min. Mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water, B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. The MS instrument type is ESI-TRAP. nanospray ESI-MS was performed on a Thermo Q-Exactive high resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with 70000 MS scan resolution and 17500 MSMS scan resolution and top-10 MS/MS selection.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8)49. Tandem mass spectra were searched against protein sequence of RhPIP2;1 (for phosphorylation assay) or RhPTM (for validation of anti-RhPTM antibody). Lys-C/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 ppm for main search. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, and minimum score for modified peptides score was set > 40. Phosphosite localization was assessed using Andromeda algorithm and the localization probability was set > 0.75. The identified phosphopeptides was manually checked to confirm the confidence.’

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rose; lc-ms; phosphorylation; dehydration; membrane protein

### Affiliations
China Agricultural University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Development and Quality Control of Ornamental Crops, Department of Ornamental Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
shuai zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Junping Gao
Beijing Key Laboratory of Development and Quality Control of Ornamental Crops, Department of Ornamental Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China


