### Accession
PXD011269

### Title
GPR35 promotes glycolysis, proliferation and oncogenic signalling by engaging with the sodium potassium pump

### Description
We used human embryonic kidney HEK293T cells transfected with human GPR35 cDNAs as baits that were engineered to express Strep or hemagglutinin (HA) tags at the C terminus to perform an unbiased proteomics survey for GPR35 interaction partners.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with HA- and Strep-tagged constructs. Cells were lysed after 48 hours with lysis buffer (150 mM KCl, 0.5% CHAPS, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4)) containing Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific). Lysates were collected and incubated with 1 U/mL of Avidin to block endogenous biotin for 15 min at 4 °C. Strep-tagged protein was purified from 10 mg total protein using 1 mL StrepTactin columns (IBA Life Sciences). The purification procedure was carried out as recommended by the supplier and purified protein eluted with 5 mM Desthiobiotin. HA-tagged protein was purified using Pierce™ Anti-HA Magnetic Beads (ThermoFisher Scientific). The eluates were analysed via immunoblot and silver-stained SDS PAGE. SDS gels were submitted to the Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, University of Cambridge. The protein bands were excised, containing proteins reduced, alkylated and subsequently digested enzymatically.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against Uniprot Release May15 and common contaminants databases (Total sequences 167726) without taxonomic filter. The following parameters were used: Precursor tolerance 5 ppm, Fragment tolerance 0.1 Da, Enzyme: Trypsin, Maximum Missed Cleavage 2, Fixed modifications, "Carbamidomethyl (C)", Variable modifications,"Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y)".

### Publication Abstract
The sodium potassium pump (Na/K-ATPase) ensures the electrochemical gradient of a cell through an energy-dependent process that consumes about one-third of regenerated ATP. We report that the G protein-coupled receptor GPR35 interacted with the &#x3b1; chain of Na/K-ATPase and promotes its ion transport and Src signaling activity in a ligand-independent manner. Deletion of Gpr35 increased baseline Ca<sup>2+</sup> to maximal levels and reduced Src activation and overall metabolic activity in macrophages and intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). In contrast, a common T108M polymorphism in GPR35 was hypermorphic and had the opposite effects to Gpr35 deletion on Src activation and metabolic activity. The T108M polymorphism is associated with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis, inflammatory diseases with a high cancer risk. GPR35 promoted homeostatic IEC turnover, whereas Gpr35 deletion or inhibition by a selective pepducin prevented inflammation-associated and spontaneous intestinal tumorigenesis in mice. Thus, GPR35 acts as a central signaling and metabolic pacesetter, which reveals an unexpected role of Na/K-ATPase in macrophage and IEC biology.

### Keywords
Gpr35; na/k atpase;

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Georg Schneditz

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Kaser
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom


