### Accession
PXD002138

### Title
Comparative and quantitative proteomics reveals the adaptive strategies of oyster larvae to ocean acidification

### Description
Acidification of seawater due to anthropogenic CO2, called as ocean acidification (OA), makes most coastal environments unfavorable for oysters. This is a serious socio-economical issue for China which is accounting for >70% of the world’s edible oyster supply. Understanding of OA effects at proteome level could lead to a better aquaculture management. Here, we present an iTRAQ based protein profiling analysis for the detection and quantification of proteome change under OA in one of the early life stages of a commercially important oyster species, Crassostrea hongkongensis. The completion of the genome sequence for oysters enabled us to confidently quantify over 1500 proteins in the larval oyster. Over 10% of proteome was altered in response to OA process at pH 7.6. Analysis of differentially expressed proteins and their associated pathways indicated that up-regulation of calcification, metabolic processes, cytoskeletal functions, oxidative stress and cell signaling processes might have been used by larvae to acclimate under OA. Although the expressions of cytoskeletal and signal transduction proteins were down-regulated in response to OA, there was no marked alternation in developmental processes such as metamorphic success.  This study suggests that the estuarine edible oyster possess an adequate short-term adaptability or acclimation mechanism at proteome level to tolerate near-future OA scenario.

### Sample Protocol
The pediveliger samples were re-suspended in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 2% Bio-Lyte 3/10 ampholyte, protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated for 30 sec in continuous pulse mode followed by ice for 2 min thrice (power set to 3). The supernatant obtained after centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 20 min at 15oC was purified by adding cold (-20oC) acetone four times the sample volume, followed by incubation for 10 to 12 hours at -20oC and centrifugation. The purified proteins were then re-solubilized in HEPES buffer (8 M urea, 40 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and quantified using RC-DC kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).  Exactly 200 µg of acetone precipitated protein dissolved in 35 µl of dissolution buffer were reduced with 5 mM triscarboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 60 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10mM methylethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min. The samples were then digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with enzyme-protein ratio of 1:40 incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. The tryptic peptide digests were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, USA) and vacuum dried (SpeedVac, Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA, USA). The samples were re-suspended with 30 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) prior to labeling with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s guidelines (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA, USA). Samples with duplicates such as pH8.1_R1, pH8.1_R2, pH7.6_R1 and pH7.6_R2 were labelled with isobaric tags 114, 115, 116 and 117 respectively. The iTRAQ labelled samples were pooled and dried in a SpeedVac and then reconstituted in 100 µl of SCX buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, acetonitrile (ACN)/H2O 25/75 (v/v), pH 3.0). The peptide mixtures were subjected to a strong cation exchange chromatography using a PolySULFOETHY A column (200 mm × 4.6 mm, 200-Å pore size, 5 μm particle size, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA) for fractionation in a Waters Delta 600 HPLC unit (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min using a 60-min gradient comprised of 100% buffer A for 10 min, 0–30% SCX buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 500 mM KCl, ACN/H2O 25/75 (v/v), pH 3.0) for 25 min, 30–100% buffer B for 5 min and 100% buffer B for 10 min. Peptide elution was monitored at 214 nm UV absorbance. The fractions collected were combined to fifteen fractions prior to desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried in a SpeedVac. Each SCX fraction was dissolved in water and subjected to a reversed phase nano-LC-MS/MS consisting nano pump equipped with a 10-well-plate auto-sampler (Agilent Technologies, USA) coupling with Triple TOF 5600  system (AB SCIEX, Canada) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Canada). Peptide elution was applied with a 5-35% ACN gradient in 0.5% formic acid during 60 min gradient after loading on a 5cm reverse-phase C18 trap column.  The parameters of MS used were as follows: ion spray voltage, 2.8 kV; curtain gas, 20 psi; nebulizer gas, 6 psi; interface heater temperature, 125℃. For IDA, full scans were acquired within 250 ms over the range m/z 400-1250, followed by MS/MS scans of the 20 most abundant peaks that exceeded 125 counts per second and carried a charge between +2 to +5 in the range m/z 100—1500. The dynamic exclusion time of the acquired ions was set at 20 s. The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed using the Paragon algorithm in Protein Pilot 4.5 software (Applied Biosystems, USA). They were searched against a target-decoy Crasosstrea gigas annotated proteome containing 27,900 protein sequences (version 9)

### Data Protocol
Triple TOF 5600 data files were converted to (.mgf) files using default parameters of PeakView1.1 (AB SCIEX, Canada) before searched using Protein Pilot 4.5 version against Crasosstrea gigas annotated proteome database. Relative quantitation of proteins was done based on the relative intensities of reporter ions of peptides. Relative intensities of the two reporter ions for each of the peptide identifiers for a protein were used to average and to calculate percentage variability for relative quantitation for a given protein in low pH compared to control pH. Only unique peptides for each protein that were identified were used to assess relative protein content in the two samples. Hierarchical clustering heat map matrix was used to visualize the differential expressed proteins using Genesis 1.7.6. Log2 fold transformed data was used to display the similarity of protein expression among the treatments by the average linkage clustering method. WEGO software (Web Gene Ontology Annotation Plot) was then used to perform GO functional classification for the differentially expressed proteins, mapped to their respective GO terms

### Publication Abstract
Decreasing pH due to anthropogenic CO2 inputs, called ocean acidification (OA), can make coastal environments unfavorable for oysters. This is a serious socioeconomical issue for China which supplies &gt;70% of the world's edible oysters. Here, we present an iTRAQ-based protein profiling approach for the detection and quantification of proteome changes under OA in the early life stage of a commercially important oyster, Crassostrea hongkongensis. Availability of complete genome sequence for the pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) enabled us to confidently quantify over 1500 proteins in larval oysters. Over 7% of the proteome was altered in response to OA at pHNBS 7.6. Analysis of differentially expressed proteins and their associated functional pathways showed an upregulation of proteins involved in calcification, metabolic processes, and oxidative stress, each of which may be important in physiological adaptation of this species to OA. The downregulation of cytoskeletal and signal transduction proteins, on the other hand, might have impaired cellular dynamics and organelle development under OA. However, there were no significant detrimental effects in developmental processes such as metamorphic success. Implications of the differentially expressed proteins and metabolic pathways in the development of OA resistance in oyster larvae are discussed. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD002138 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002138).

### Keywords
Climate change, Oyster larvae, Ocean acidification, Itraq, Metamorphosis

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist, CSIR-NIO
Associate Professor, The Swire Institute of Marine Sciences and School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

### Submitter
Dineshram Ramadoss

### Lab Head
Dr V Thiagarajan
Associate Professor, The Swire Institute of Marine Sciences and School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong


