### Accession
PXD011681

### Title
Cross-omics analysis of archival human renal cell carcinoma biopsies to identify emerging treatment avenues

### Description
Renal cell cancer is among the most common forms of cancer in humans, with around 35,000 deaths attributed to kidney carcinoma in the European Union (EU) in 2012 alone. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) represents the most common form of kidney cancer and the most lethal of all genitourinary cancers. Here we apply omics technologies to archival core biopsies to investigate the biology underlying ccRCC. Knowledge of these underlying processes should be useful for the discovery and/or confirmation of novel therapeutic approaches and ccRCC biomarker development. From partial or full nephrectomies of 11 patients, paired core biopsies of ccRCC affected tissue and adjacent non-tumorous tissue were both sampled and subjected to proteomics analyses. We combined proteomics results with our published mRNA-seq from the same patients and with published miRNA-seq data from an overlapping patient cohort from our institution. Statistical analysis and pathway analysis were performed with JMP Genomics (SAS) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen), respectively. Proteomics analysis confirmed the involvement of metabolism and oxidative stress-related pathways in ccRCC, while the most affected pathways in the mRNA-seq data were related to the immune system. Unlike proteomics or mRNA-seq alone, a combinatorial cross-omics pathway analysis approach captured a broad spectrum of biological processes underlying ccRCC, such as mitochondrial damage, repression of apoptosis, and immune system pathways. Sirtuins, immunoproteasome genes and CD74 are proposed as potential targets for the treatment of ccRCC.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue preparation for proteomics Three whole biopsy sections (10 µm thickness) were taken from each biopsy and deparaffinized with xylene and ethanol. Proteins were then extracted from these combined sections as described previously (19, 20). Deparaffinized tissue sections were suspended in lysis solution (4 % SDS, 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8, 0.1M DTT) and heated to 99 degrees Celsius for one hour. The resulting lysate was subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described in detail elsewhere (43). Eluted peptides were desalted and cleaned using Oasis HLB Elution plates (Waters, Milford, MA, USA; www.waters.com).   LC-MS/MS (Proteomics) Resulting samples were then analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to a Dionex Ultimate NCR-3500RS LC system. Samples were dissolved in 2% ACN/0.1% FA and trapped on the pre-column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 µm i.d, 3 µm C18 beads) in loading buffer (0.1% TFA) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min for 5 minutes, before separation by reverse phase chromatography (PepMap RSLC, 25cm x 75 µm i.d. EASY-spray column, packed with 2µm C18 beads) at a flow of 200 nL/min. Solvent A and B were 0.1% FA (vol/vol) in water and 100% ACN, respectively. The gradient composition was 5% B from 0-5 minutes, which increased linearly to 8 % from 5-5.5 minutes, to 24 % from 5.5-115 minutes, to 35 % B from 115-140 minutes and to 90 % B from 140-155 min. Washing and conditioning of the column were performed from 155-170 minutes with 90 % B, and reduced to 5% B from 170-180 minutes. The MS instrument was equipped with an EASY-spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and was operated in data-dependent-acquisition mode. Instrument control was performed using Q-Exactive HF Tune 2.4 and Xcalibur 3.0. MS spectra were acquired in the scan range 375 - 1500 m/z with resolution R = 120,000 at m/z 200, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 100ms. The 12 most intense eluting peptides above intensity threshold 5E4, with charge states 2 or larger, were sequentially isolated to a target AGC value of 1eE, with resolution R = 30,000, an IT of 110 ms and a normalized collision energy of 28 %. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.3 and a dynamic exclusion of 25 seconds. Lock-mass internal calibration was used.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification Raw data from the MS was processed using Progenesis LC-MS software (version 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK; www.nonlinear.com) with default settings. Identified features were searched with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using the UniProt/SwissProt human protein database (downloaded from Uniprot August 2015; 20,197 entries; www.uniprot.org). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 p.p.m. and product mass tolerance at 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and false discovery rate was set at 1%.  Proteomics data analyses Proteins with at least two peptide counts were considered to be reliably detected and were included in further analysis. Raw data were further processed and statistically analyzed with JMP Genomics (v 8, SAS, North Carolina, USA; www.jmp.com). Raw data were first log2 transformed and any missing data were imputed by multivariate normal imputation. The multivariate normal imputation utility replaces missing data with predicted values based on the multivariate normal distribution, using least squares imputation. Multivariate normal imputation was run using a shrinkage estimator for the covariances, to improve the estimation of the covariance matrix (36). After quantile normalization Data were quantile normalized which makes and standardized, athe distributions of the samples the same on the basis of the quantiles of the samples (6), data were standardized to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1. For differential abundance assessment,  nd ANOVA was applied, using each sample’s patient ID as a blocking factor. Proteins were considered significant if they reached a minimum fold change of 2 and a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value of 0.05. Venn diagrams were generated in http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es.

### Publication Abstract
Renal cell cancer is among the most common forms of cancer in humans, with around 35,000 deaths attributed to kidney carcinoma in the European Union in 2012 alone. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) represents the most common form of kidney cancer and the most lethal of all genitourinary cancers. Here, we apply omics technologies to archival core biopsies to investigate the biology underlying ccRCC. Knowledge of these underlying processes should be useful for the discovery and/or confirmation of novel therapeutic approaches and ccRCC biomarker development. From partial or full nephrectomies of 11 patients, paired core biopsies of ccRCC-affected tissue and adjacent ("peritumorous") nontumor tissue were both sampled and subjected to proteomics analyses. We combined proteomics results with our published mRNA sequencing data from the same patients and with published miRNA sequencing data from an overlapping patient cohort from our institution. Statistical analysis and pathway analysis were performed with JMP Genomics and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), respectively. Proteomics analysis confirmed the involvement of metabolism and oxidative stress-related pathways in ccRCC, whereas the most affected pathways in the mRNA sequencing data were related to the immune system. Unlike proteomics or mRNA sequencing alone, a combinatorial cross-omics pathway analysis approach captured a broad spectrum of biological processes underlying ccRCC, such as mitochondrial damage, repression of apoptosis, and immune system pathways. Sirtuins, immunoproteasome genes, and CD74 are proposed as potential targets for the treatment of ccRCC.

### Keywords
Cd74, Cross-omics, Proteomics, Kidney cancer, Immunoproteasome

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Renal Research Group Department of Clinical Medicine University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Kenneth Finne

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Marti
Renal Research Group Department of Clinical Medicine University of Bergen, Norway


