### Accession
PXD034382

### Title
NRBF2 orchestrates autophagic flux and adult hippocampal neurogenesis in chronic stress-induced depression

### Description
By precisely dissected LC-MS/MS for proteomics and phosphoproteomics, we found that deletion of NRBF2 disrupts neurogenesis-related protein network in the DG, such as neurogenesis, cell development, cell morphogenesis, cellular homeostasis, and synaptic plasticity.

### Sample Protocol
TMT quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics sample preparation: the dentate gyrus from wild-type (WT) or NRBF2-/- mice was sonicated in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After centrifugation, the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After the trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column, reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB, labeled using a TMT kit, and then fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column. Phosphopeptides were enriched using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) microspheres. Mass spectrometry data were collected using a Q ExactiveTM HF-X Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography pump.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectral data were searched against Mouse Swissprot database. Expression of each protein or phosphopeptide in each sample were horizontally normalized, and converted into log2 values. The mean values were calculated as Mm (WT group) or Mt (NRBF2-/- group). Two-tailed t tests were used to evaluate the differences between WT and NRBF2 KO group. For each protein or phosphopeptide, p < 0.05 and Mt/Mm > 1.3 was considered as significantly upregulated, while p < 0.05 and Mt/Mm < 1/1.3 as significantly downregulated. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic data were combined in bioinformatics analysis. For Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, UniProt-GOA database were converted identified protein ID to UniProt IDs and then mapped to GO IDs. Then proteins were classified by GO annotation based on biological process. Two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to evaluate the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Dysfunctional autophagy and impairment of adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN) each contribute to the pathogenesis of major depressive disorder (MDD). However, whether dysfunctional autophagy is linked to aberrant AHN underlying MDD remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that the expression of nuclear receptor binding factor 2 (NRBF2), a component of autophagy-associated PIK3C3/VPS34-containing phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex, is attenuated in the dentate gyrus (DG) under chronic stress. NRBF2 deficiency inhibits the activity of the VPS34 complex and impairs autophagic flux in adult neural stem cells (aNSCs). Moreover, loss of NRBF2 disrupts the neurogenesis-related protein network and causes exhaustion of aNSC pool, leading to the depression-like phenotype. Strikingly, overexpressing NRBF2 in aNSCs of the DG is sufficient to rescue impaired AHN and depression-like phenotype of mice. Our findings reveal a significant role of NRBF2-dependent autophagy in preventing chronic stress-induced AHN impairment and suggest the therapeutic potential of targeting NRBF2 in MDD treatment.

### Keywords
Dentate gyrus, Mouse, Nrbf2, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of science and technology
Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan City, Hubei 430030, China

### Submitter
Shaoqi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-Guo Chen
Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan City, Hubei 430030, China


