### Accession
PXD010752

### Title
Autophagy the key player in trabecular meshwork death-mechanistic difference in early and advanced glaucoma

### Description
This study highlights the differential roles of apoptosis versus autophagy in cell death mechanism in the trabecular meshwork in primary adult glaucoma at various stages. This reflects the possible role of autophagy in causing glaucomatous damage in severe disease stages

### Sample Protocol
Excised tissues (trabecular meshwork- n=3 moderate POAG/PACG and 3  severe POAG/PACG) were dissolved in 150ul of chilled 6M Gn-HCL in 0.1M  Tris (pH 8.5) plus 1x protease inhibitors (Roche). Tissues were dissolved using tissue homogeniser and then these samples were sonicated at 60 amplitude, 10sec on and off for 5 minutes. Hogenized samples were boiled at 90 degrees C for 5 minutes and then centrifuged at 15,000rpm for 20 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was stored and marked  properly. Now 25µg of the sample was first reduced with 5mM TCEP Tris (2- carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and further alkylated with 50mM  iodoacetamide. The samples were diluted to 0.6 M final Gn-HCL concentration  with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin (1:50,  trypsin:lysate ratio) for 16 hours at 37°C. Digests were cleaned up using C18  silica cartridge (The Nest Group,Southborough, MA) according to the  manufacturer’s protocol and dried using speed vac. The dried pellet was  resuspended in Buffer-A (5 % acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid).  Mass Spectrometric analysis of peptide mixtures   All the experiments were performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo  Fisher Scientific) coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher  Scientific) equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1µg of the peptide  mixture was loaded on a precolumn and resolved using 15 cm Easy-spray with 2 µm C18-resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded with Buffer A     and eluted with a 0-40% gradient of Buffer-B (95% acetonitrile/0.1%formic  acid) at a flow rate of 300nl/min for 90 min.  MS data acquisition  The QExactive was operated using the Top10 HCD data-dependent acquisition  mode with a full scan resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. MS/MS scans were  acquired at a resolution of 17500 at m/z 400. Lock mass option was enabled for  polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM) ions (m/z = 445.120025) for internal  recalibration during the run. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent  top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the  survey scan.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification:  The data generated was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer2.2 and was  searched against Uniprot-Human database at an FDR of 1%. For Sequest HT  and MS Amanda 2.0 search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were  set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides,  i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of  “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of  two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR and determined using percolator node.  Relative protein quantification of the proteins were performed using Minora feature detector node of Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with default settings and considering only high PSM (peptide spectrum matches) confidence. Based on Uniprot accession number Pfam, KEGG pathways and GO annotations were assigned for the list of identified proteins. Perseus and R scripts were utilized for statistical and graphical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Pacg, Poag, Trabecular meshwork, Proteomics, Autophagy

### Affiliations
LV Prasad Eye Institute,MTC campus, Patia,Bhubaneswar, India
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Aparna Rao
LV Prasad Eye Institute,MTC campus, Patia,Bhubaneswar, India


