### Accession
PXD011606

### Title
Identification of HIPs in the islets of mice and non-diabetic human donors

### Description
Hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs) result from the linkage of an insulin C-peptide fragment and another peptide via a traditional peptide bond to generate a sequence that is not encoded in the genome. Here, we sought to identify HIPs naturally present in the pancreatic islets of non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, BALB/c mice, and non-diabetic human donors by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
400-500 islets were lysed and proteins were extracted by sonication and heating of islets in 50% trifluoroethanol. Supernatant was fractionated by size exclusion chromatography. Four fractions were collected in the low molecular weight range and liquid was removed by vacuum evaporation. Dried fractions were reconstituted in ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with the protease AspN (mouse islets) or GluC (human islets) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF using a nano-electrospray ionization source and collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Spectrum Mill software (Agilent). Mass tolerances were set at +/- 10 ppm for precursors and +/- 20 ppm for fragment ions. Spectra were first searched against the standard SwissProt database with no enzyme specified and no modifications. Hits were validated with the following parameters: score > 10, %SPI > 70, R1-R2 score > 2.5. Spectra that were not assigned a valid match were searched against a custom HIP database with the protease AspN (mouse samples) or GluC (human samples) specified, 2 missed cleavages allowed, and no modifications. Results were validated with the same parameters as before. Valid hits were exported from Spectrum Mill as pepXML files. NOD data are from three independent experiments, BALB/c data are from one experiment, and human data are from three independent experiments. For mouse islet experiments, islets harvested from multiple non-diabetic mice were pooled, and an islet pool from a different harvest was used for each experiment. Human islets were obtained from the commercial supplier Prodo or from the University of Alberta islet core, and islets from a different individual were used for each experiment. Each sample was analyzed twice by LC-MS/MS, with precursors confidently identified in the first run being excluded from selection as precursors in the second run. Data file names include an indication of sample source (NOD, BALB, or Hu/Alberta/Prodo (human islets)), fraction number (1 thru 4), and whether the file was from an initial or recursive run (second run in which an exclusion list was applied). Files from the same experiment are named similarly.

### Publication Abstract
We recently discovered hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs) as a novel class of post-translationally modified peptides in murine-derived beta cell tumors, and we demonstrated that these molecules are autoantigens in type 1 diabetes (T1D). A HIP consists of an insulin fragment linked to another secretory granule peptide via a peptide bond. We verified that autoreactive CD4 T cells in both mouse and human autoimmune diabetes recognize these modified peptides. Here, we use mass spectrometric analyses to confirm the presence of HIPs in both mouse and human pancreatic islets. We also present criteria for the confident identification of these peptides. This work supports the hypothesis that HIPs are autoantigens in human T1D and provides a foundation for future efforts to interrogate this previously unknown component of the beta cell proteome.

### Keywords
Hybrid insulin peptides (hips), Pancreatic islets

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Colorado
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Timothy Wiles

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Delong
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Colorado


