### Accession
PXD022219

### Title
Human kidney proteomics, glomerular and tubular cellular and matrix fractions

### Description
Glomerular and tubulointerstitial fractions were enriched from human kidneys samples. Ages of human kidney samples: 15, 29, 37, 61, 67 and 69 years of age. The glomerular and tubulointerstitial samples were processed to enrich for extracellular matrix components and the fractions analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Following SDS–PAGE, gel lanes were sliced and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin44 with modifications34. Peptide samples were analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters) coupled online to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a Symmetry C18 preparative column (20 mm × 180 μm, 5-μm particle size; Waters) and separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm, 1.7-μm particle size; Waters) using a 45-min linear gradient from 1% to 25% or 8%–33% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science). Peak list files were searched against a modified version of the Uniprot mouse database (April 2016 database selected for Mus musculus) for mouse datasets, or Uniprot human database (November 2015 database selected for Homo Sapiens) for human datasets. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and hydroxylation of proline and lysine were allowed as variable modifications. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS datasets were validated using rigorous statistical algorithms at both the peptide and protein level46,47 implemented in Scaffold (version 4.4.3; Proteome Software). Protein identifications were accepted upon assignment of at least two unique validated peptides with ≥90% probability, resulting in ≥99% probability at the protein level. These acceptance criteria resulted in an estimated protein false discovery rate of <0.1% for all datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Basement membranes (BMs) are complex macromolecular networks underlying all continuous layers of cells. Essential components include collagen IV and laminins, which are affected by human genetic variants leading to a range of debilitating conditions including kidney, muscle, and cerebrovascular phenotypes. We investigated the dynamics of BM assembly in human pluripotent stem cell-derived kidney organoids. We resolved their global BM composition and discovered a conserved temporal sequence in BM assembly that paralleled mammalian fetal kidneys. We identified the emergence of key BM isoforms, which were altered by a pathogenic variant in <i>COL4A5</i>. Integrating organoid, fetal, and adult kidney proteomes, we found dynamic regulation of BM composition through development to adulthood, and with single-cell transcriptomic analysis we mapped the cellular origins of BM components. Overall, we define the complex and dynamic nature of kidney organoid BM assembly and provide a platform for understanding its wider relevance in human development and disease.

### Keywords
Glomerular, Tubular, Tubulointerstitial, Kidney, Age

### Affiliations
University of Chester
Wellcome Senior Research Fellow I Lead for Integrated Clinical Academic Training I Honorary Consultant Paediatric Nephrologist   I  Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research   I  Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine   I  School of Biological Sciences  I  Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health I  The University of Manchester  I  Room C.3257, Michael Smith Building I  Oxford Road  I Manchester M13 9PT

### Submitter
UoC Randles

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Senior Research Fellow I Lead for Integrated Clinical Academic Training I Honorary Consultant Paediatric Nephrologist   I  Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research   I  Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine   I  School of Biological Sciences  I  Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health I  The University of Manchester  I  Room C.3257, Michael Smith Building I  Oxford Road  I Manchester M13 9PT


