### Accession
PXD012721

### Title
Dynamic BAF chromatin remodeling complex subunit inclusion promotes temporally distinct gene expression programs in cardiogenesis

### Description
Chromatin remodeling complexes instruct cellular differentiation and lineage specific transcription. The BRG1/BRM associated factor (BAF) complexes are important for several aspects of differentiation. We show that the catalytic subunit Brg1 has a specific role in cardiac precursors (CPs) to initiate cardiac gene expression programs and repress non-cardiac expression. Using immunoprecipitation immunopurification with mass spectrometry we determined the dynamic composition of BAF complexes during mammalian cardiac differentiation, identifying several cell-type specific subunits. We focused on the CP- and cardiomyocytes (CM)-enriched subunits BAF60c (SMARCD3) and BAF170 (SMARCC2). Baf60c and Baf170 co-regulate gene expression with Brg1 in CPs, and in CMs their loss results in broadly deregulated cardiac gene expression. BRG1, BAF60, and BAF170 modulate chromatin accessibility, to either promote accessibility at activated genes, while closing up chromatin at repressed genes. BAF60c and BAF170 are required for proper BAF complex composition, and BAF170 loss leads to retention of BRG1 at CP-specific enhancers. Thus, dynamic interdependent BAF complex subunit assembly modulates chromatin states and thereby participates in directing temporal gene expression programs in cardiogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins complexes were purified by FLAG affinity purification. Samples were digested with trypsin, then desalted on C18 spin columns. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite MS system. Complete methods are available in a publication with the same title as this project in Development.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched against the SwissProt human sequence database using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin remodeling complexes instruct cellular differentiation and lineage specific transcription. The BRG1/BRM-associated factor (BAF) complexes are important for several aspects of differentiation. We show that the catalytic subunit gene <i>Brg1</i> has a specific role in cardiac precursors (CPs) to initiate cardiac gene expression programs and repress non-cardiac expression. Using immunopurification with mass spectrometry, we have determined the dynamic composition of BAF complexes during mammalian cardiac differentiation, identifying several cell-type specific subunits. We focused on the CP- and cardiomyocyte (CM)-enriched subunits BAF60c (SMARCD3) and BAF170 (SMARCC2). <i>Baf60c</i> and <i>Baf170</i> co-regulate gene expression with <i>Brg1</i> in CPs, and in CMs their loss results in broadly deregulated cardiac gene expression. BRG1, BAF60c and BAF170 modulate chromatin accessibility, to promote accessibility at activated genes while closing chromatin at repressed genes. BAF60c and BAF170 are required for proper BAF complex composition, and BAF170 loss leads to retention of BRG1 at CP-specific sites. Thus, dynamic interdependent BAF complex subunit assembly modulates chromatin states and thereby participates in directing temporal gene expression programs in cardiogenesis.

### Keywords
Heart, Chromatin, Gene regulation, Differentiation

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
University of California San Francisco


