### Accession
PXD009763

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei grow CMM_Glu (glucose) and CMM_Gly/GlcNAc (glycerol) conditions.

### Description
The bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei (BSF), responsible for the sleeping sickness, primarily evaluate in the blood of its mammalian hosts. The skin and the adipose tissues were recently identified as additional major sites for the parasite proliferation and transmission through its insect vector blood ingestion. Glucose is the only carbon source used by the blood parasites to feed its central metabolism, however, the metabolic behavior of the tissue-adapted parasites has not yet been addressed. Since production of glycerol is an important primary function of adipocytes, we have adapted the BSF trypanosomes to glucose-depleted and glycerol-rich growth medium (CMM_Gly/GlcNAc) and compared its metabolism and proteome with standard glucose-rich growth conditions (CMM_Glu). BSF consume 2-times more oxygen per carbon consumed in CMM_Gly/GlcNAc and is 11.5-times more sensitive to SHAM, a specific inhibitor of the alternative oxidase, which is consistent with the expected absolute requirement of the mitochondrial respiratory chain activity to convert glycerol into dihydroxyacetone phosphate. Metabolomic analyses by mass spectrometry showed that 13C-labeled glycerol is incorporated into hexose phosphates through gluconeogenesis. After several weeks of growth in CMM_Gly/GlcNAc, BSF adapt their metabolism by increasing and decreasing the rate of glycerol and glucose consumption, respectively. As expected RNAi-mediated down-regulation of glycerol kinase expression abolished glycerol degradation and is lethal for BSF growth in CMM_Gly/GlcNAc. However, the glycerol kinase activity is 7.8-fold decreased in CMM_Gly/GlcNAc, as confirms by western blotting and proteomic analyses, which suggests that the huge excess of glycerol kinase, which is not necessary for glycerol metabolism, is required for another yet undetermined non-essential function in glucose rich-conditions. Altogether these data shows that BSF trypanosomes are well adapted to glycerol-rich conditions, which could be encountered by the parasite in extravascular niches, such as skin and adipose tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3x106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1x105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Trypanosoma brucei protein database (9 594 entries, TbruceiTREU927, release 33) from http://tritrypdb.org website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI (version 2.0 ; Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to fifty landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with FDR<1%, see above) were imported into Progenesis. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation of quantification at protein level. A minimum of two peptides matched to a protein was used as the criteria for identification as a differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
The bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei (BSF), the parasite protist causing sleeping sickness, primarily proliferate in the blood of their mammalian hosts. The skin and adipose tissues were recently identified as additional major sites for parasite development. Glucose was the only carbon source known to be used by bloodstream trypanosomes to feed their central carbon metabolism, however, the metabolic behaviour of extravascular tissue-adapted parasites has not been addressed yet. Since the production of glycerol is an important primary function of adipocytes, we have adapted BSF trypanosomes to a glucose-depleted but glycerol-rich culture medium (CMM_Glyc/GlcNAc) and compared their metabolism and proteome to those of parasites grown in standard glucose-rich conditions (CMM_Glc). BSF were shown to consume 2-folds more oxygen per consumed carbon unit in CMM_Glyc/GlcNAc and were 11.5-times more sensitive to SHAM, a specific inhibitor of the plant-like alternative oxidase (TAO), which is the only mitochondrial terminal oxidase expressed in BSF. This is consistent with (i) the absolute requirement of the mitochondrial respiratory activity to convert glycerol into dihydroxyacetone phosphate, as deduced from the updated metabolic scheme and (ii) with the 1.8-fold increase of the TAO expression level compared to the presence of glucose. Proton NMR analysis of excreted end products from glycerol and glucose metabolism showed that these two carbon sources are metabolised through the same pathways, although the contributions of the acetate and succinate branches are more important in the presence of glycerol than glucose (10.2% versus 3.4% of the excreted end products, respectively). In addition, metabolomic analyses by mass spectrometry showed that, in the absence of glucose, 13C-labelled glycerol was incorporated into hexose phosphates through gluconeogenesis. As expected, RNAi-mediated down-regulation of glycerol kinase expression abolished glycerol metabolism and was lethal for BSF grown in CMM_Glyc/GlcNAc. Interestingly, BSF have adapted their metabolism to grow in CMM_Glyc/GlcNAc by concomitantly increasing their rate of glycerol consumption and decreasing that of glucose. However, the glycerol kinase activity was 7.8-fold lower in CMM_Glyc/GlcNAc, as confirmed by both western blotting and proteomic analyses. This suggests that the huge excess in glycerol kinase that is not absolutely required for glycerol metabolism, might be used for another yet undetermined non-essential function in glucose rich-conditions. Altogether, these data demonstrate that BSF trypanosomes are well-adapted to glycerol-rich conditions that could be encountered by the parasite in extravascular niches, such as the skin and adipose tissues.

### Keywords
Bloodstream forms, Glycerol-rich medium, Label-free quantitative proteome analysis, Trypanosoma brucei, Glucose-depleted conditions

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité (MFP), Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR-5234, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Bringaud Frédéric
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité (MFP), Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR-5234, Bordeaux, France


