### Accession
PXD002231

### Title
PTSD mouse brain proteome -  Fluoxetine Treatment Rescues Energy Metabolism Pathway Alterations in a Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Mouse Model

### Description
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent psychiatric disorder. Several studies have attempted to characterize molecular alterations associated with PTSD, but most findings were limited to the investigation of specific cellular markers in the periphery or defined brain regions. In the current study, we aimed to unravel affected molecular pathways/mechanisms in the fear circuitry associated with PTSD. We interrogated a foot shock induced-PTSD mouse model by integrating proteomics and metabolomics profiling data. Alterations at the proteome level were analyzed  using in vivo 15N metabolic labeling combined with mass spectrometry in prelimbic cortex (PrL), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), basolateral amygdala (BLA), central nucleus of amygdala (CeA) and CA1 of hippocampus between shocked and non-shocked (control) mice, with and without fluoxetine treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Brain punch sampling Mice were euthanized by an overdose of isoflurane (Forene, Abbott, Wiesbaden, Germany) and sacrificed. Brains were harvested after decapitation and immediately fixed with ice-cold 2-methylbutane (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. For brain punch, brains were dissected with a cryostat (Microm, Walldorf, Germany) up to the appearance of target sub-regions. Punch specimens were isolated using cylindrical punchers (Fine Science Tools, Heidelberg, Germany) essentially as described (18). The location and length of the punches were selected based on a stereotaxic atlas (Paxinos G, 2001) described as follows (in mm: starting point posterior to bregma, punch diameter, punch length): for prelimbic cortex (PrL) (2.3 mm posterior to bregma, 1.0 mm in diameter, 0.9 mm in length), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) (0.86, 0.5, 1.0), nucleus accumbens (NAc) (1.7, 0.5, 1.0), basolateral amygdala (BLA) (-0.8, 0.35, 1.0), central nucleus of amygdala (CeA) (-0.9, 0.5, 0.8), cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) region (-1.5, 0.5, 0.8). Punches were stored at -80°C for RNA extraction. The dissection site was verified by histological staining with a stereomicroscope.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based quantitative proteomics analysis Tissue pools (3-5) of each punched brain region (PrL, ACC, NAc, BLA, CeA, CA1) were subjected to extraction of cytosolic and membrane-associated proteins (Wiśniewski et al, 2010). To all samples, equal protein amounts of 15N-labeled internal reference standard were added (Filiou et al, 2011). 14N/15N protein mixtures representing 50-60 μg were separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, fixed and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). The gel was destained and each gel lane was cut into 2.5 mm slices (20-22 slices per sample) for tryptic in-gel digestion and peptide extraction as described previously (Filiou et al, 2011).  Tryptic peptide extracts were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid and subjected to a nanoflow HPLC-2D system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Prior to peptide separation, samples were on-line desalted for 10 min with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 3 μl/min (Zorbax-C18 (5μm) guard column, 300 μm  5 mm, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). RP-C18 (3μm). Desalted peptides were then separated by chromatography (in-house packed Pico-frit column, 75 μm  15 cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). A gradient of 95% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid from 10% to 45% at a flow rate of 200 nl/min was applied for peptide elution. Column effluents were directly injected into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode applying a data-dependent scan switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition and MS parameters were set as described previously (Filiou et al, 2011; Webhofer et al, 2013).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation Peptides were identified by 14N and 15N database searches using Sequest (implemented in Bioworks v3.3, Thermo Fisher) against a decoy Uniprot mouse protein database containing 110,128 entries. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Mass accuracy settings were 10 ppm and 1 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and cysteine carboxyamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. 15N peptide identification was assessed by a variable modification of -0.99970 Da for lysine and arginine for the frequent shift from 15N monoisotopic to the most intense 15N isotopomer as described previously (Zhang et al, 2009). False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.1% was set as filtering criteria for peptide hits using PeptideProphet, 14N and 15N database searches were combined via iProphet and protein groups were identified by ProteinProphet (Keller and Shteynberg, 2011). Relative protein quantification was performed with the ProRata software (v1.0) with default parameter settings (Pan et al, 2006). Identification of differentially expressed (DE) proteins After indirect comparison between two experimental groups for individual proteins, a p-value was calculated from the confidence interval for each protein ratio. Based on the confidence interval for each ratio, the p-value was generated to identify whether the estimated log2 ratio is significantly different from 0. All p-values are adjusted using the "Benjamini-Hochberg" method.  In silico pathway analysis To identify altered pathways between different mouse groups in distinct brain regions, DE proteins (p < 0.05) were uploaded to DAVID Bioinformatics Resources (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp) with all quantified proteins as background. Functional enrichments of KEGG pathway and Gene ontology were acquired and pathways were considered enriched with p-value < 0.05 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent psychiatric disorder. Several studies have attempted to characterize molecular alterations associated with PTSD, but most findings were limited to the investigation of specific cellular markers in the periphery or defined brain regions. In the current study, we aimed to unravel affected molecular pathways/mechanisms in the fear circuitry associated with PTSD. We interrogated a foot shock-induced PTSD mouse model by integrating proteomics and metabolomics profiling data. Alterations at the proteome level were analyzed using in vivo (15)N metabolic labeling combined with mass spectrometry in the prelimbic cortex (PrL), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), basolateral amygdala, central nucleus of the amygdala and CA1 of the hippocampus between shocked and nonshocked (control) mice, with and without fluoxetine treatment. In silico pathway analyses revealed an upregulation of the citric acid cycle pathway in PrL, and downregulation in ACC and nucleus accumbens (NAc). Chronic fluoxetine treatment prevented decreased citric acid cycle activity in NAc and ACC and ameliorated conditioned fear response in shocked mice. Our results shed light on the role of energy metabolism in PTSD pathogenesis and suggest potential therapy through mitochondrial targeting.

### Keywords
Brain, Ptsd, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Biomarkers, Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry

### Submitter
Chi-Ya Kao

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph W. Turck
Proteomics and Biomarkers, Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich


