### Accession
PXD023145

### Title
Deconstructing a type III secretion system effector network unravels the inherent robustness and plasticity in pathogenesis and immunity

### Description
Infections with many Gram-negative pathogens rely on type III secretion system effectors. We hypothesized that while hijacking processes within mammalian cells, the effectors operate as a robust network which can tolerate significant contractions; this was tested in vivo using the mouse pathogen Citrobacter rodentium (encoding 31 effectors). Progressive gene deletions showed that effector essentiality for infection is context dependent and that the network can tolerate 60% contraction while maintaining pathogenicity. Despite inducing drastically different colonic cytokine profiles (e.g. IL-22, IL-17, IFN-γ or GM-CSF), different networks induced protective immunity. Using data from >100 distinct mutant combinations, we built and trained an in silico model able to predict colonization outcomes, which were confirmed experimentally. Furthermore, reproducing the human-restricted enteropathogenic E. coli effector repertoire in C. rodentium was not sufficient for efficient colonization, implicating effector networks in host adaptation. These results unveil the extreme robustness of both T3SS effector networks and host responses.

### Sample Protocol
For the final analysis, we included mice in which satisfactory colonization level following the infection was reached (>1x107 CFU/g stool by 8 DPI). IEC pellets isolated from 5 mice per condition per biological replicate were solubilized using probe sonication in lysis buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific), boiled for 5 min at 90 °C, and sonicated once more. Protein concentration was measured with Coomassie Plus assay (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s protocol. 100 µg of protein, with an equal contribution from each individual mouse within the group were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min, then digested by adding trypsin (Pierce) at final concentration 75 ng/µl to each sample and incubating the samples for 18 h at room temperature. Peptides were labelled with tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplex reagent (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s protocol. SDC was precipitated with formic acid (FA) at final concentration of 2% (v/v) and centrifugation for 5 min at 10,0000 rpm. Supernatant containing TMT-labelled peptides was dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  High-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation and LC-MS analysis  Prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, TMT-labelled peptides underwent high-pH reversed-phase (RP) fractionation using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. 0.1% ammonium hydroxide was used as Mobile phase A, while mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The peptides were separated with a gradient elution at 200 µl/min including the following steps: isocratic for 5 min at 5% phase B, gradient for 40 min to 35% phase B, gradient to 80% phase B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min, and re-equilibrated to 5% phase B. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate every 42 s to a total of 65 fractions, then concatenated into 28 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 50 μl 0.1% formic acid. The samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion and Orbitrap Fusion  Lumos Trybrid mass spectrometers. A Dionex Ultimate 3000 system and and mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) were used for data acquisition. From each fraction 10 μl was injected onto a C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) at a 10 μl/min flow rate. The samples were subjected to a low-pH gradient elution on a nanocapillary reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at 45°C. Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid respectively. The separation was performed at 300 nl/min flow rate and 90 min gradient from 5% to 38% phase B followed by 10 min up to 95% phase B, isocratic for 5 min at 95% B, re-equilibrated to 5% phase B in 5 min, and isocratic for 10 min at 5% phase B. MS1 scans were collected with mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control of 4 × 105, and injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions (Top Speed mode, 3 s) were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th (Thomson unit). Collision energy was set at 35%, with AGC at 1 × 104 and IT at 50 ms. Quantification was obtained at the MS3 level with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 7 most abundant CID fragments isolated with synchronous precursor selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65%, and the AGC setting was at 1 × 105 with IT at 105 ms. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the range 100-500 m/z with a resolution of 50,000. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further fragmentation for 45 s with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt annotated reference proteomes of Mus musculus and Citrobacter rodentium in Proteome Discoverer v2.3 and v2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the SEQUEST-HT engine using following parameters: 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, the static modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation of Cys residues and TMT modification of peptide N-term and Lys residues, while dynamic modifications were specified as oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asp and Glu residues. The search was restricted to fully tryptic peptides with maximum of 2 missed-cleavages.  Based on the q value and decoy database search confidence of peptide discovery was estimated at 1% FDR with percolator node. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT-10-plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at MS3 level. Protein groups with only unique peptides were used for quantification. Proteomics data normalization, analysis and visualization  In order to compare the results between sample batches, the datasets were normalized in various steps. For proteins with at least 60% of the TMT channels present, the remaining missing values were replaced with the minimum value in the TMT batch. For mouse proteins, normalization factor for each condition was calculated by the sum of all raw abundances in each TMT channel and dividing it by the maximum sum within given TMT-plex. To correct for the bacterial load variation in the different strains of Citrobacter rodentium, the median abundances of the Citrobacter proteins were computed per TMT channel and regressed out from each Citrobacter protein across samples.  For %CV calculations and PCA, each biological group was centered to its mean within their respective TMT-batch. For further analysis, the normalized data were used to compute log2 ratios versus the uninfected samples. For further analysis, the technical replicates of the same biological repeat included in both TMT batches were averaged. GO terms slim name, InterPro name, KEGG name, Keywords name, Pfam name, Reactome name and SMART name enrichment analysis was performed with 1D-annotation enrichment method (86) in the Perseus software (87).The data was visualized using the online Phantasus tool (88) (Table S13 Key Resources Table). Terms with significant positive enrichment were addressed as upregulated and those with negative enrichment as downregulated. . All terms were filtered for a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of <0.05. Infection signature and differential expression P values were calculated using 1-sample t-test and 2-sample t test, respectively, in the Perseus proteomic tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Tmt, Ms3, Pathogen

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


