### Accession
PXD003163

### Title
Glycopeptide glycoforms analysis of mouse transferrin

### Description
Collagen type II-induced arthritis (CIA) is a disease, which includes inflammatory and autoimmune reactions. Spleen protein extracts were subjected to 2D-DiGE and MS-MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis to identify proteins that were different in concentration ally expressed in CD38-KO and B6 WT mice with arthritis or with inflammation. Using multivariate analyses, in Col-II-immunized mice 20 differentially expressed spleen protein species were able to discriminate between WT and CD38-KO mice. Among them, multiple serotransferrin (Tf) species were identified. In contrast, in CFA/IFA-treated mice, the distinct protein profile, which discriminates between CD38-KO and WT mice, was unrelated with Tf. Unexpectedly, non-immunized CD38-KO mice showed a distinct proteome profile as compared with that in non-immunized WT mice, and again multiple protein species were identified as Tf.  By using a LC-TOF-MS method to separate and detect Tf glycopeptide glycoforms in serum samples, differences in the Tf glycosylation pattern between CD38-KO and WT mice sera were found in both non-immunized and CIA+ mice. Data on Tf spots separated by 2-DE indicate differences in glycosylation related with NeuGc content. In summary, Tf changed significantly in its glycosylation pattern in mice with arthritis

### Sample Protocol
Purification of serotransferrin from mouse serum samples by immunoaffinity chromatography (IAC)   In order to isolate Tf from the rest of serum proteins, an immunoaffinity purification was carried out using a cyanogen-bromide Sepharose column where a polyclonal antibody against human transferrin was bond as explained in a previous work. The immunoaffinity procedure consisted in: first, a conditioning step with two washes of 10 mM Tris-HCl. Second, the serum sample was diluted 1/16 in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) in order to improve antigen-antibody interaction, and passed through the column ten times. After washing with 10 mM Tris-HCl and 0.5 M NaCl (pH 7.6) to remove the non-specifically retained fraction (washing fraction), retained Tf was eluted with 100 mM glycine-HCl (pH 2.5). Eluted Tf was immediately neutralized with 0.5 M Tris. Afterwards, glycine-HCl buffer was exchanged for 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH 7.9) by ultracentrifugation using Microcon YM-10 (MW cut-off 10 kDa, Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Finally, Tf was digested as explained in the section below.  Serotransferrin in-solution digestion  Tf previously purified by immunoaffinity chromatography as described above, or a commercially available mouse apoTf (Sigma, reference: T0523), which was used as standard, was reduced, alkylated and immediately subjected to enzymatic digestion in the presence of RapiGest® as explained in a previous work. 0.5 M DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer was added to an aliquot of isolated Tf with 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest®. The mixture was incubated in a TS-100 Thermo-Shaker digester (Bio-San, Riga, Latvia) at 56ºC for 30 min and then alkylated with 50 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess of reagents were removed by ultracentrifugation with Microcon YM-10 washing 3 times with NH4HCO3 buffer. The final residue was recovered from the upper reservoir by being centrifuged upside down in a new vial, and reconstituted to the initial volume with NH4HCO3 buffer with 0.1% RapiGest®. Trypsin was added and the mixture was carefully vortexed and incubated overnight at 37ºC. After the overnight incubation the surfactant was hydrolyzed to avoid MS incompatibilities. Formic acid (HFor) was added to the digest to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) and the mixture was incubated in the digester at 37ºC for 30 min. Then, the solution was centrifuged for 10 min at 12000 rpm to separate the RapiGest® residues. A residual fraction of RapiGest® still remained in the solution but it was completely compatible with LC-MS analysis as indicated by the manufacturer. Finally, the supernatant was carefully collected and stored at -20ºC until its analysis.  Serotransferrin in-gel digestion  Each gel spot was subjected to the following in-gel digestion procedure: the spots were washed with 50% ACN, 100% ACN and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Afterwards, the spots were dried with 100% ACN and the solvent was then evaporated in a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVacTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The reduction of Tf was performed adding 10mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 0.1% RapiGest® to the spots and incubating in the digester at 56ºC for 45 min. Then, the alkylation of Tf was carried out adding 55 mM of IAA in 50mM NH4HCO3 with 0.1% RapiGest® to the spots and leaving in the dark for 30 min. The spots were again washed with 50% ACN, 100% ACN and 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dried with 100% ACN. Then, the solvent was again evaporated. 0.1% of RapiGest® was added to the spots and the mixture was incubated at 37ºC for 10 min. The solvent was once more evaporated in the vacuum concentrator and trypsin was finally added to the spots until reswollen. The mixture was incubated in ice for 45 min. Then, 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to completely cover the spots and the mixture was incubated at 37ºC overnight. After the incubation, the supernatant was collected. This supernatant contains RapiGest® which had to be hydrolyzed to avoid MS interferences. To ensure the complete removal of RapiGest® the spots were washed twice with water and the supernatants were collected and mixed with the first supernatant. The mixture was then hydrolyzed as explained in section 2.8. Afterwards, the spots were washed twice with 100% ACN and both supernatants were collected and mixed with the solution resulting from the surfactant hydrolyzation. Then, the solvent was evaporated and, finally, the sample was reconstituted in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and stored at -20ºC until its analysis.

### Data Protocol
Prior to data analysis, a database with the exact monoisotopic mass of the different glycopeptide glycoforms of mouse Tf was created using Excel. To calculate the monoisotopic mass of each glycopeptide glycoform, it was necessary to calculate the elemental composition of all the glycopeptides taking into account the peptide and glycan contribution. First, the peptide sequence of mouse Tf was obtained from UniProt Knowledgebase (Q921l1), which also includes information about which cysteines and asparagines are involved in disulfide bonds and in N-glycosylation points, respectively. Afterwards, the theoretical sequence of each peptide and glycopeptide that would be obtained after tryptic digestion is obtained using the proteomic tool PeptideMass from the Expasy bioinformatics resource program. Subsequently, using the ProtParam tool from Expasy the elemental composition of the peptide sequence of the glycopeptide is obtained. Furthermore, the elemental composition of each glycan is calculated as the sum of the elemental composition of each monosaccharide that forms the glycan. Ionsource webpage was used to obtain the elemental composition of each monosaccharide. Finally, the elemental composition of the peptide is added to obtain the molecular formula of each possible glycopeptide glycoform and thus, the monoisotopic mass with four decimals. Afterwards, the mass-to-charge values (m/z) for each glycopeptide glycoform are calculated up to a z value of 5 considering proton adducts (i.e. [M+H]+, [M+2H]2+, [M+3H]3+, [M+4H]4+ and [M+5H]5+)  Finally, the data analysis is carried out using the software MassHunter Qualitative (Agilent Technologies). All the previously calculated m/z values for each glycopeptide glycoform are extracted together to obtain an extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) of that glycopeptide specie, as can be observed in figure 1, which shows the EIC for some glycopeptide glycoforms in three different samples. If more than one of the extracted masses are detected in one chromatographic peak of the EIC, the presence of the corresponding glycopeptide glycoform can be confirmed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spleen, Transferrin, Mouse, Serum, Μlc-ms

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Department, University of Barcelona
University of Barcelona

### Submitter
Albert Barroso

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Sanz Nebot
Analytical Chemistry Department, University of Barcelona


