### Accession
PXD006722

### Title
Specter -  Specter: linear deconvolution for targeted analysis of data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry proteomics

### Description
These data cover all of the analyses described in the paper "Specter: linear deconvolution as a new paradigm for targeted analysis of data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry proteomics". Specifically, the data consist of - 20 DIA and DDA files from the HEK293T/synthetic phosphopeptides spike-in experiments - 10 DDA files, one for each of ten fractions of an E. coli lysate digest - 14 DIA files for the experiments involving mixtures of synthetic peptides - 11 DDA files for the isolated runs of these synthetic peptides - 84 DIA files for measurements of the phosphoproteome of perturbed PC3 cells - 10 DDA files for spectral library construction for the phosphoproteomics data - 3 DIA and 3 DDA files for analysis of an unfractionated E. coli lysate digest. See the spreadsheet "Specter Datasets Catalog.xlsx" for further descriptions and file metadata.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T/synthetic spike-in experiment: HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Gibco, 11995) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS (Sigma, F4135). Once cells reached ~95% confluence they were harvested by scraping. Cells were pelleted at 1,000 × g for 2 min. The supernatant was then removed, and the cell pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen. HEK298T cells were lysed by exposing them for 5 minutes on ice to a lysis buffer (8 M urea; 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 2 μg/mL aprotinin (Sigma, A6103), 10 μg/mL leupeptin (Roche, #11017101001), 1 mM PMSF (Sigma, 78830)). The sample was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 20000g. The protein concentration of HEK293T proteins was determined by BCA to be 4.3 ug/ul. 10 mg of protein was reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 45 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min). A Tris HCl solution (50 mM, pH8) was used to dilute the samples by a factor 4 to reach a concentration of 2M urea. A two-step digestion protocol was used to digest the lysate: Lys-C was used in a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio (Wako Chemicals, 129-02541) for 2 hours at 30C, then the lysate was digested overnight at room temperature with trypsin in a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio (Promega, V511X) on a shaker. Formic acid (0.5% final concentration) was added to stop the digestion. The sample was split in four and loaded onto four 100mg capacity C18 SepPak (Waters) for desalting. The four aliquots were eluted using 50% ACN/0.1% formic acid, pooled together and vacuum concentrated to dryness. The HEK293T digest was resuspended using 0.1%TFA and a mixture containing ninety-six synthetic peptides at known individual concentrations (Supplementary Table XXX) was spiked into it to generate a five-point calibration curve. Each point was designed to contain 1ug of HEK293T digest and 6.75, 13.5, 27, 54 or 108 ng of total peptide amount on column. All samples were analyzed with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoflow Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass-spectrometer was used in positive mode and was equipped with a nanoflow ionization source (James A. Hill Instrument Services, Arlington, MA), the spray voltage was set at 2.00 kV. The LC system, column, and the electrospray voltage source (platinum wire) were connected via a stainless-steel cross (360μm, IDEX Health & Science, UH-906x). The column was heated to 50C. A volume of 3ul was injected onto an in-house packed 20cm x 75um diameter C18 silica picofrit capillary column (1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, r119.aq; Picofrit 10um tip opening, New Objective, PF360-75-10-N-5). Mobile phase flow rate was 250 nL/min, comprised of 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and 90% acetonitrile /0.1% formic acid (Solvent B). The column was conditioned prior to each sample injection. Peptides were separated using the following LC gradient: 0 to 3 %B in 3 min, 5 to 40 %B in 50 minute, 40 to 90%B in 1minute, stay at 90%B for 5.5 min and 90% to 50% in 30s. DDA and DIA data were acquired on the same instrument. For the MS1 scans the resolution was set at 60,000 at 200 m/z and the AGC target was 3e6 with a maximum inject fill time of 20 ms. For DDA, MS2 scans on the top 12 peaks doubly charged and above were acquired at a resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 5e4 with maximum inject fill time of 50 ms. Isolation widths were set to 1.5 m/z with a 0.3 m/z offset. NCE was set to 27 and dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s. For data-independent acquisition (DIA), an overlap DIA method was used with 56 x 22m/z isolation windows covering the 400-1000 m/z range. In this method the isolation windows in two consecutive cycles have an offset of 11m/z. The default charge state was 4, the resolution was 30,000 at 200 m/z, the AGC target was 1e6, the maximum inject fill time was 50 ms, the loop count 27 and the NCE was set to 27.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry data files (in either Thermo RAW or AB Sciex WIFF format) were converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard MSConvert version 3.0.6141 with peak picking (centroiding). Spectral libraries are accepted in Skyline’s blib format, which can be constructed from any of the common MS search results file formats.  HEK293T/synthetic spike-in experiment: A spectral library was generated by first searching the DDA runs with Spectrum Mill v. B.06.01.201 using a FASTA containing the ninety six synthetic peptide sequences as well as the UniProt human protein sequences (version dated 10/17/2014). Results were auto-validated to a FDR of 1%. This yielded a PepXML search results file, which was loaded into Skyline v. 3.6.0.10162 in order to generate a spectral library of 29,248 HEK293T and eighty five synthetic precursors (eleven of the ninety-six were not identified) in blib format.   Synthetic peptide experiments:  The raw files for the DDA runs of the individual synthetic peptides were searched using Spectrum Mill v. B.06.01.201 with a FASTA containing only the sequences of the synthetic peptides and common contaminants. The best-scoring spectrum for each precursor was then chosen to serve as the precursor’s library spectrum. To generate a library of E. coli precursors, raw files from DDA runs of the fractionated E. coli digest were searched by SpectrumMill v. B.06.01.201 using the NCBI E. coli K12 DH10B FASTA sequence database (a FASTA for DH5α was unavailable) and auto-validated to a false discovery rate of 1%. The results were exported as a PepXML summary file, which was imported into Skyline v. 3.6.0.10162 to generate a spectral library consisting of 48,131 precursors. This spectral library was exported in blib format23,25 for later use by Specter.  Drug-perturbed phosphoproteomics experiments: Raw files from DDA runs of ten randomly chosen samples were searched using Spectrum Mill as above with a FASTA containing the 2014 UniProt Human proteome and 150 common contaminants. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The resulting pepXML files were imported into Skyline to construct a redundant blib containing multiple PSMs for each precursor. Search results were further filtered by variable modification location score so that only spectra for which phosphosites could be unambiguously localized were retained, and the highest scoring spectra for each precursor were extracted from the redundant blib to obtain a nonredundant spectral library consisting of only confidently localized phosphopeptides. Specter was applied to the 84 DIA runs using this spectral library and a 10 p.p.m. mas accuracy.  E. coli DDA vs DIA analysis: RAW files obtained from triplicate DDA runs of the unfractionated E. coli digest described above were imported into MaxQuant v. 1.5.5.1. These were searched using the same FASTA as used by Spectrum Mill above with all default settings for Orbitrap instruments (Match between runs was disabled in order to assess replicate reproducibility). Results were analyzed using the evidence.txt output table. Only precursors with posterior error probability < 0.01 were retained, and the top scoring MS2 spectrum for each of these precursors within each replicate was used to determine precursor quantifications within each run. Protein identifications (based on all three replicates) were determined from the proteinGroups.txt output table.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry with data-independent acquisition (DIA) is a promising method to improve the comprehensiveness and reproducibility of targeted and discovery proteomics, in theory by systematically measuring all peptide precursors in a biological sample. However, the analytical challenges involved in discriminating between peptides with similar sequences in convoluted spectra have limited its applicability in important cases, such as the detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and alternative site localizations in phosphoproteomics data. We report Specter (https://github.com/rpeckner-broad/Specter), an open-source software tool that uses linear algebra to deconvolute DIA mixture spectra directly through comparison to a spectral library, thus circumventing the problems associated with typical fragment-correlation-based approaches. We validate the sensitivity of Specter and its performance relative to that of other methods, and show that Specter is able to successfully analyze cases involving highly similar peptides that are typically challenging for DIA analysis methods.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Broad Institute
Proteomics Platform, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

### Submitter
Ryan Peckner

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Carr
Proteomics Platform, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard


