### Accession
PXD032016

### Title
An Amphipathic Helix in Brl1 is Required for Nuclear Pore Complex Biogenesis in S. cerevisiae – targeted analysis of cell lysate (PRM)

### Description
The project was aimed at assessing the metabolic labeling of NUPs in the full lysate upon SILAC labeling of growing yeast cultures, 90 min post labeling. This experiment was performed to exclude that the systematic labeling differences that we observed in KARMA assays with Brl1 bait were present already in the source lysate.

### Sample Protocol
Part of the cell lysate that was used for the Brl1 KARMA APs was assessed by parallel reaction monitoring MS. The source lysates of Brl1 APs 90 min post labeling were adjusted to 50 µL with a protein concentration of 4 µg/µL with lysis buffer as determined by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad). Samples were diluted with 200 µL guanidine chloride (7 M in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) to reach a final guanidine chloride concentration of 5.6 M. Disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT (6.5 mM f.c.) at 37° C for 45 min and alkylated with iodoacetamide supplemented to 54 mM f.c. at 30° C in the dark for 30 min. The samples were then diluted to a final guanidine chloride concentration of 1 M with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, 1:100 trypsin:protein) for 22 h at 37° C. Digestion was quenched by addition of 3% (v/v) of 100% formic acid (pH ∼2.0 ) and peptides were desalted in a BioPureSPN MACRO spin columns (The Nest Group, Inc.) as described above (Tryptic in-gel digestion). Tryptic peptides were diluted to 1 µg/µL with Buffer A based on OD280 readouts and the samples were spiked with 1:50 (v:v) iRT peptides (Escher et al. 2012) for the mass spectrometry acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The metabolic labeling of proteins in the source cell lysates was analyzed by parallel reaction monitoring MS (PRM) 90 min after the pulse labeling onset. Probed proteins included NUPs that exhibited outstandingly high or low labeling kinetics in the Brl1 AP, two NTRs (Kap123 and Mex67) and two randomly picked co-purified proteins (Rrp5 and Acc1). Precursors for the targeted analysis were selected based on good labeling consistency with other peptides of the same protein, high intensity and low number of missing values in the Brl1 APs. Peptides with missed cleavage sites or with cysteine and methionine residues were excluded when possible. All proteins were represented by 2-5 peptides. Targeted data analysis was performed as described in “PRM MS assays” and resulting intensities were analyzed with Skyline daily (64 bit, 20.1.1.213 version). Precursor ions identified by at least 3-4 coeluting light and heavy transitions were quantified by manual peak integration. For precursor ions that were well detected in both heavy and light channels the respective intensities were calculated as the sum of the top3 most intense transitions in each channel. Fractional protein labeling was quantified as H / (H + L), where H and L are the summed intensities of the above protein-born precursors in heavy and light channels, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell lysate, Prm

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry (IBC, ETHZ)
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry (IBC, ETHZ)


