### Accession
PXD010596

### Title
Maize AF F24 PICS -  A fungal substrate mimicking molecule suppresses plant immunity via an inter-kingdom conserved motif

### Description
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus causing corn smut disease in maize. To downregulate immune responses and promote host colonization, U. maydis secretes a set of effector proteins into the plant apoplast. An effector essential for U. maydis virulence is Pit2, an inhibitor of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs). Pit2 virulence function relies on a 14 amino acids motif (PID14). While sequence of the Pit2 effector is highly diverse amongst related pathogen species, the PID14 motif is highly conserved. Interestingly, synthetic PID14 peptides act more efficiently as PLCP inhibitors than the full-length Pit2 effector. In line with this finding, mass spectrometry showed processing of Pit2 by maize PLCPs, which releases an inhibitory core motif of the PID14. Mutational analysis demonstrated that two residues of the released inhibitor peptide are essential for Pit2 function and, consequently, for U. maydis virulence. Based on these findings, we propose a model, in which the Pit2 effector functions as a decoy: Pit2 represents a favorable substrate for apoplastic PLCPs, which are central hubs of the maize immune system. Processing of Pit2 releases the inhibitor peptide, which in turn efficiently blocks PLCPs to modulate host immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by tryptic digest of E.coli K12 lysates as described. The peptide library was split in two aliquots that were treated with/without F24 fraction, pre-incubated for 10 minutes with a selected set of inhibitors (1mM EDTA, 50µM Pepstatin A, 50µM DCI), o/N at RT and the reaction was stopped by adding 3M Guanidiniumhydrochloride (final). Peptides were duplex stable isotope labelled by reductive dimethylation [26]. Isotopically light formaldehyde (CH2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was used to label control-treated library peptides and heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) were used to label samples after F24 incubation. Dimethylation was performed for 2h at RT and quenched by addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 1h. Subsequently samples were mixed, desalted and purified by C18 StageTips. 1 µg peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC system coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker). Peptides were eluted with a binary gradient from 5-35% B for 90 minutes with a total runtime of 2 h per sample. Line-mode MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 200-1750 m/z at an acquisition rate of 4 Hz. For each MS spectrum, the Top17 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from the acquired MS spectra using the MaxQuant software package, v1.6.0.16 and a UniProt E.coli K12 proteome library (downloaded Nov 2015, 4313 entries). Trypsin was set as digestion enzyme for semi-specific searches (e.g. only one side of the peptide was required to match the trypsin specificity). Label multiplicity was set to two, considering light dimethylation (+28.0313 Da) and heavy dimethylation (+34.0631 Da) as peptide N-terminal and lysine labels. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 Da) was considered as variable modifications. PSM false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Identified peptides that showed at least a fourfold increase in intensity after protease treatment compared to the control treatment or were exclusively present in the protease-treated condition were considered as putative cleavage products. An in-house developed Perl script was used to remove putative library peptides (trypsin specificity on both sides of the identified peptide) and to reconstruct the full cleavage windows from the identified cleavage products as described. Aligned validated cleavage windows were visualized as iceLogos, displaying site-specific differential amino acid abundance calculated as per cent difference compared to the E.coli K12 proteome as reference set (p-value 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus causing corn smut disease in maize. The secreted effector protein Pit2 is an inhibitor of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) essential for virulence. Pit2 inhibitory function relies on a conserved 14 amino acids motif (PID14). Here we show that synthetic PID14 peptides act more efficiently as PLCP inhibitors than the full-length Pit2 effector. Mass spectrometry shows processing of Pit2 by maize PLCPs, which releases an inhibitory core motif from the PID14 sequence. Mutational analysis demonstrates that two conserved residues are essential for Pit2 function. We propose that the Pit2 effector functions as a substrate mimicking molecule: Pit2 is a suitable substrate for apoplastic PLCPs and its processing releases the embedded inhibitor peptide, which in turn blocks PLCPs to modulate host immunity. Remarkably, the PID14 core motif is present in several plant associated fungi and bacteria, indicating the existence of a conserved microbial inhibitor of proteases (cMIP).

### Keywords
Maize af pics plcps apoplastic fluid

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


