### Accession
PXD042021

### Title
Developmentally regulated sex differences in K48 polyubiquitination in the amygdala

### Description
This project examined if sex differences in K48 polyubiquitination in the amygdala were developmentally regulated. This used basolateral amygdala (BLA) samples collected from 4 and 9 week old male and female Sprague-Dawley rats.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (BLA tissue) dissected from male and female Sprague-Dawley rats at 4 and 9 weeks of age. All animals were behaviorally naïve. Samples were homogenized in denaturing lysis buffer (0.05% SDS) with 70mM NEM, briefly centrifuged and supernatant collected. Normalized samples were mixed with a K48 polyubiquitin-specific Tandem Ubiquitin Binding Entity (TUBE; Life Sensors) bound to magnetic streptavidin beads and incubated at 4C. Samples were then washed and protein eluted in 1x sample buffer at 95C, 800 rpm for 5 minutes. Samples were processed utilizing S-Trap micro columns (Protofi) and trypsin. Recovered peptides were analyzed via LC-ESI-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid instrument (Thermo) running each sample in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed and processed utilizing Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5 (Thermo) merging the results from a Sequest HT search and a Mascot server v. 2.7 (Matrix Science) search of the rat reference proteome downloaded from UniProt and a common contaminants database provided with Proteome Discoverer. Simultaneous searching of a decoy database allowed for determination of a false discovery rate. Protein quantities were the sum of the intensities of the associated peptides. Values were normalized to streptavidin amount and averaged for duplicate runs prior to statistical analyisis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ptsd, Amygdala, Sex differences, K48

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech
Associate Professor, School of Animal Sciences Core Faculty, School of Neuroscience Faculty of Health Sciences Co-Director, Molecular and Cellular Biology (MCB) Graduate Program Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy J. Jarome
Associate Professor, School of Animal Sciences Core Faculty, School of Neuroscience Faculty of Health Sciences Co-Director, Molecular and Cellular Biology (MCB) Graduate Program Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA


