### Accession
PXD003969

### Title
Chronic low-dose ionising radiation rates affect the hippocampal phospho-proteome of synaptogenesis in an ApoE-/--Alzheimer mouse model over 300 days of exposure

### Description
Cognitive impairments are an important side effect after radiation exposure. Yet, it comes more and more into scientific focus that ionising radiation can resemble pathologies of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer´s. Here, we used a multidisciplinary approach to elucidate the effect of chronic low-dose irradiation exposure (1 mGy/day and 20 mGy/day) over 300 days (cumulative dose of 0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy) on the murine ApoE-/- hippocampus as an Alzheimer´s model.  By using mass spectrometry to quantify global expression levels of unmodified proteins, phospho-proteins and N-linked sialylated glycoproteins, we found nearly exclusive changes on the phospho-proteome at both doses. These proteins regulate signalling of synaptic plasticity and calcium-dependent signalling. We used synaptic plasticity-targeted transcriptomics, immunoblotting and ELISA to validate our findings and could identify that memory-related CREB signalling is reduced at both doses whereas Rac1-Cofilin signalling is only altered at 1 mGy/day. Interestingly, we noted a reduction in the number of activated microglia in the molecular layer of the hippocampus only at 1 mGy/day paralleled with reduced levels of TNFα mRNA and lipid peroxidation at this dose. Adult neurogenesis (Ki67, GFAP and NeuN as markers) and cell death (activated caspase-3) were not changed / initiated at both doses. Our analysis showed that several molecular targets induced by chronic low-dose radiation overlap with molecular targets of Alzheimer´s pathology. We suggest that chronic low-dose ionising radiation can be a potential confounder in Alzheimer´s disease.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the mouse hippocampus and labelled with TMT-9plex approach. Trypsin was used for enzymatic digestion. Peptides (unmodified, phosphorylated and N-linked sialylated) were enriched by in-house TiSH (Titanium-SIMAC-HILIC) protocol.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Discoverer v1.4.1.14 was used. Raw-files were searched against Swissprot and Uniprot mouse data base. Variable modifications: phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr and deamindation of Asn. Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT9-plex labeling of Lys and N-terminal.

### Publication Abstract
Accruing data indicate that radiation-induced consequences resemble pathologies of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer&#xb4;s. The aim of this study was to elucidate the effect on hippocampus of chronic low-dose-rate radiation exposure (1 mGy/day or 20 mGy/day) given over 300 days with cumulative doses of 0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy, respectively. ApoE deficient mutant C57Bl/6 mouse was used as an Alzheimer&#xb4;s model. Using mass spectrometry, a marked alteration in the phosphoproteome was found at both dose rates. The radiation-induced changes in the phosphoproteome were associated with the control of synaptic plasticity, calcium-dependent signalling and brain metabolism. An inhibition of CREB signalling was found at both dose rates whereas Rac1-Cofilin signalling was found activated only at the lower dose rate. Similarly, the reduction in the number of activated microglia in the molecular layer of hippocampus that paralleled with reduced levels of TNF&#x3b1; expression and lipid peroxidation was significant only at the lower dose rate. Adult neurogenesis, investigated by Ki67, GFAP and NeuN staining, and cell death (activated caspase-3) were not influenced at any dose or dose rate. This study shows that several molecular targets induced by chronic low-dose-rate radiation overlap with those of Alzheimer&#xb4;s pathology. It may suggest that ionising radiation functions as a contributing risk factor to this neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Phospho-proteomics, Synapse, Proteomics, Synaptic plasticity, Dendritic spine, Creb, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Stefan J. Kempf

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


