### Accession
PXD037676

### Title
Plasma proteomics in mouse sepsis

### Description
Analysis of plasma proteomes from 8 week old C57BL/6J WT or TCRα-/- (Tcratm1Phi) either naïve or infected by intravenous injection of 5x105 yeast (clinical isolate SC5314), and collected 72 hrs post-infection

### Sample Protocol
24 (heparin-treated) plasma samples of WT naive, WT infected, TCRα -/- naive, TCRα -/- infected mice in equal replicates of six were used for proteomics analysis. The samples were randomised and plated in a 96-well plate (Eppendorf). The protocol used for protein/peptide extraction and proteomics analysis has been described in detail in Messner et al., 2020 66. Briefly, 5μL of plasma was denatured in 50μl 8M Urea (Honeywell Research Chemicals), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Honeywell Research Chemicals) and reduced with 5μL of 50mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at 30oC for 1 hour. Alkylation with 5μL of 100mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) followed, at 23oC for 30 minutes in the dark. Then the samples were diluted with 340μL of 100mM ABC and 220μL were added to trypsin solution (Promega) for protein digestion at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/40 and incubated at 37°C overnight (17h). Quenching of digestion was done by the addition of 25μL of 10% v/v formic acid (FA, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Rounds of solid phase extraction clean-up steps were performed with the use of C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group) as described previously in Messner et al. 2020 66. Methanol (Fisher Chemicals), 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemicals) or 0.1% v/v FA was used at each centrifugation step as required. After final elution, the collected peptide material was dried by a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus) and redissolved in 50μl 0.1% v/v FA, to be processed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.  1μg of protein digest (peptides) was injected and analysed on a nanoAcquity Liquid Chromatograph (Waters) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 Mass Spectrometer (Sciex) at a flow-rate of 5µl/min. Separation was achieved using a Waters HSS T3 column (150mm x 300µm, 1.8µm particles) in 20-minute non-linear gradients starting with 3% B up to 40% B (Buffer A: 0.1% v/v FA; Buffer B: ACN / 0.1% v/v FA). A data independent acquisition (DIA/SWATH) method was used, with MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 and 50ms accumulation time followed by 40 MS2 scans of 35ms accumulation time with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250. Ion source gas 1 (nebulizer gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas) and curtain gas were set to 30, 15 and 25 respectively. The source temperature was set to 450°C and the ion spray voltage to 5500V. Injections of samples took place in a random order.

### Data Protocol
The library was generated with “gas-phase fractionation” methodology out of pooled peptide digest of all mouse plasma samples with the use of a LC-MS/MS method as mentioned before. 3μg of protein digest was separated with a 60-minute linear gradient (3% B to 40% B). Injections were performed at the mass ranges of: 400 – 500 m/z, 495 – 600 m/z, 595 – 700 m/z, 695 – 800 m/z, 795 – 900 m/z, 895 – 1000 m/z, 995 – 1100 m/z, 1095 – 1250 m/z. The precursor selection windows were 2 m/z (1 m/z overlap). DIA-NN 1.7.10 proteomics analysis software was used for the library preparation with Mus musculus (mouse) UniProt (UniProt Consortium, 2019) isoform sequence database (UP000000589) to annotate the library67, 68. For protein quantification, raw data acquired were processed with DIA-NN 1.7.10 with the “robust LC (high precision)” mode with MS2, MS1 and scan window size set to 20ppm, 12ppm and 8 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The factors that influence survival during severe infection are unclear. Extracellular chromatin drives pathology, but the mechanisms enabling its accumulation remain elusive. Here, we show that in murine sepsis models, splenocyte death interferes with chromatin clearance through the release of the DNase I inhibitor actin. Actin-mediated inhibition was compensated by upregulation of DNase I or the actin scavenger gelsolin. Splenocyte death and neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) clearance deficiencies were prevalent in individuals with severe COVID-19 pneumonia or microbial sepsis. Activity tracing by plasma proteomic profiling uncovered an association between low NET clearance and increased COVID-19 pathology and mortality. Low NET clearance activity with comparable proteome associations was prevalent in healthy donors with low-grade inflammation, implicating defective chromatin clearance in the development of cardiovascular disease and linking COVID-19 susceptibility to pre-existing conditions. Hence, the combination of aberrant chromatin release with defects in protective clearance mechanisms lead to poor survival outcomes.

### Keywords
Mice; plasma; proteomics; sepsis

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Markus Ralser, Prof. Dr.  Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk

### Submitter
Spyros Vernardis

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Markus Ralser, Prof. Dr.  Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk


