### Accession
PXD023181

### Title
A systematic survey of the light-dependent protein quality control in a model cyanobacterium

### Description
We conducted a large-scale identification of protein degradation under light or dark condition in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC 6803 (Hereafter referred as Synechocystis) using the isobaric labeling based quantitative proteomics technique. This is the first discovery about redox-regulated protein degradation in cyanobacteria. Our results provide the first comprehensive catalog of the light-dependent protein degradation events, and would act as an important resource in future study toward understanding light-regulated processes and protein quality control mechanism in cyanobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
The WT cells of Synechocystis at OD730 nm~0.8. Lincomycin (Lincomycin hydrochloride, Sigma Aldirch) 100 μg/mL, 24 h. Three replicates in light, three in dark.  Harvested cells were lysed and the lysates were extracted after removing the insoluble debris. Then the lysates were precipitated with ice-cold 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone. The dried proteins were re-solubilized with 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. The SDS was cleared by filter-aided proteome preparation (FASP) method and the proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI).  One set of TMT 6-plex labelling reagents was used to label three replicates of control or lincomycin-treated cells (in light,TMT_Light) and another set was to label three replicates of control or Lincomycin-treated cells (in dark,TMT_Dark). The resultant tryptic peptides from each sample were then labeled with one tag of the TMT 6-plex labelling reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Labeled peptides with the same set of TMT 6-plex reagents were then mixed together.The TMT-labeled peptides mixture was separated through reversed phase (RP)-high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on a Waters e2695 separations HPLC system. The separation was performed on a Gemini-NX 5u C18 column (250mm x 3.0 mm, 110 Å) (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). The separated samples were combined into 15 fractions and frozen at -20°C after lyophilization. After removing the salts, the peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% acetic acid and dried with a Speed-Vac concentrator. When loading on the Mass Spectrometry, the dried peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). An LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL Waltham, MA) coupled with an on-line nano flow UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Easy-nLC 1000) was used for the LC-MS/MS analysis, which was ran by data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files of different fractions were searched against the Synechocystis proteome sequence database together using the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). The database was acquired from the CyanoBase, which contains 3,672 entries in both forward and reversed directions and 248 common contaminations. The type of LC-MS run was set as reporter ion MS2 and TMT 6-plex was chosen as the isobaric labels. Trypsin/P was set as the protease for protein digestion mode. And 2 missed cleavages was maximally allowed. The minimum PIF was set to 0.75. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation was chosen as the variable modifications and Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as the fixed modification. For precursor ions, the mass tolerance was specified at 20 PPM for the first search and 4.5 PPM for the main search, respectively. For fragments ions the mass tolerance was set to 20 PPM. The 1% FDR which determined by target-decoy approach was set at both peptide and protein level. The minimum scores for unmodified peptides and modified peptides were set to 15 and 40, respectively. The match between runs was selected here. All other parameters were set according to the default provided in MaxQuant. After searching, proteins with shared identified peptides were combined and outputted as a protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Light is essential for photosynthetic organisms and is involved in the regulation of protein synthesis and degradation. The significance of light-regulated protein degradation is exemplified by the well-established light-induced degradation and repair of the photosystem II reaction center D1 protein in higher plants and cyanobacteria. However, systematic studies of light-regulated protein degradation events in photosynthetic organisms are lacking. Thus, we conducted a large-scale survey of protein degradation under light or dark conditions in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (hereafter referred to as Synechocystis) using the isobaric labeling-based quantitative proteomics technique. The results revealed that 79 proteins showed light-regulated degradation, including proteins involved in photosystem II structure or function, quinone binding, and NADH dehydrogenase. Among these, 25 proteins were strongly dependent on light for degradation. Moreover, the light-dependent degradation of several proteins was sensitive to photosynthetic electron transport inhibitors (DCMU and DBMIB), suggesting that they are influenced by the redox state of the plastoquinone (PQ) pool. Together, our study comprehensively cataloged light-regulated protein degradation events, and the results serve as an important resource for future studies aimed at understanding light-regulated processes and protein quality control mechanisms in cyanobacteria.

### Keywords
Light-dependent, Protein degradation, Pq pool, Proteomics, Light-independent, Redox, Synechocystis

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics an Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology   Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Weiyang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics an Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


