### Accession
PXD004935

### Title
The EML4-ALK Interactome in Lung Cancer

### Description
We experimentally generated an ALK interactome combining quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics and protein complex annotation using affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry and further investigated downstream ALK signaling using quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem-affinity purification:  To dissect the EML4-ALK protein-protein interaction network, we isolated and identified components of protein complexes of EML4-ALK V1, SHC1, GRB2, and PIK3R2 coupling tandem affinity purification with MS analysis using GFP as a control. H3122 cells were infected with virus supernatant to introduce the TAP construct and isolated by cell sorting for GFP positivity. GFP and HA expression were assessed by flow cytometry and immunoblot, respectively, before expanding the cells. When approximately 90% confluent, the EML4-ALK V1, SHC1, GRB2, and PIK3R2-tagged cells were processed for TAP of the interactome complexes using StrepTactin sepharose followed by biotin elution and secondary capture with anti-HA agarose beads. Retained proteins were eluted from the column using 100 mM HCOOH and immediately neutralized with 125 μL of 1 M TEAB. Two hundred microliters were removed for immunoblot analysis. The remaining samples were desalted by SDS-PAGE; the bands were excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin and subsequence LC-MS/MS analysis. Tyrosine phosphoproteomics:  H3122 cells were used to systemically characterize EML4-ALK signaling. Tyrosine-phosphorylated (pY) peptides were purified using the PhosphoScan kit (P-Tyr-100 antibody, Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS):  After peptide recovery for TAP and pY experiments, samples were concentrated to 20 µL of A solvent using vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (U3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with electrospray hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. Samples were first loaded onto a precolumn (5 × 300-mm internal diameter packed with C18 reversed- phase resin, 5 mm, 100 Å) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (C18, 75 μm internal diameter × 15 cm; Pepmap 100, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The 60-minute gradient delivered at 300 nl/min was programmed as 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes; solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) was ramped from 5% to 50% over 35 minutes and then from 50% to 90% in 1 minute and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by ramping down from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibratation for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nL/min. After each survey scan, 5 tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner. The MS scans were performed in Orbitrap to obtain accurate peptide mass measurement, and the MS/MS scans were performed in linear ion trap using 60-second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
Sequest, and Mascot searches were performed against human entries in the UniProt database. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, and the precursor mass tolerance was set to 1.08 Da (to accommodate incorrect selection of the monoisotopic peak). MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.8 Da. Dynamic modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn, Gln) and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr). To accurately identify phosphorylation sites, we integrated database search results from both Sequest and Mascot into Scaffold (www.proteomesoftware.com ) and took multiple parameters (SCAFFOLD peptide probability, XCorr, DeltaCN, Mascot ion score, E-value) into consideration. The following limits were used to establish data quality: 80% peptide probability, 10 ppm fragment error, 40 Mascot score, and XCorr for 2+ >2.5, XCorr for 3+ >3, and DeltaCN >0.1. Peptides could be identified by either database search alone as long as the quality metrics were met. Finally, phosphorylation site assignment was manually validated from the raw data.  To quantify the perturbation of pTyr proteome change response to ALK TKI treatment, the integrated peak areas for each pTyr peptide were calculated from extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) using QuanBrowser from Xcalibur 2.0. These values were restricted by m/z (+/-0.02) and retention time (60 s). Other parameters were Genesis peak integration using 9 point smotting, S/N threshold 0.5, and genesis peak detection minimum peak height (S/N) 3.0. The masses and isotopic peak patterns of the target peptides were manually inspected to ensure proper sequence assignment and to verify peak quality. Peak area values of all precursors from all samples were merged to one spreadsheet using PeakAreaSummary software, which was developed in-house (available at http://proteome.moffitt.org/proteomics/). PeakAreaSummary is an Excel add-in using VBA. It first calculates the sum of peak areas for all the precursors in the same sample with the same m/z and retention time (using the same delta values as mentioned above) and then merges the peak area values from all the samples to get one value for any precursor.

### Publication Abstract
Patients with lung cancers harboring anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene fusions benefit from treatment with ALK inhibitors, but acquired resistance inevitably arises. A better understanding of proximal ALK signaling mechanisms may identify sensitizers to ALK inhibitors that disrupt the balance between prosurvival and proapoptotic effector signals. Using affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry in an ALK fusion lung cancer cell line (H3122), we generated an ALK signaling network and investigated signaling activity using tyrosine phosphoproteomics. We identified a network of 464 proteins composed of subnetworks with differential response to ALK inhibitors. A small hairpin RNA screen targeting 407 proteins in this network revealed 64 and 9 proteins that when knocked down sensitized cells to crizotinib and alectinib, respectively. Among these, knocking down fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2 (FRS2) or coiled-coil and C2 domain-containing protein 1A (CC2D1A), both scaffolding proteins, sensitized multiple ALK fusion cell lines to the ALK inhibitors crizotinib and alectinib. Collectively, our data set provides a resource that enhances our understanding of signaling and drug resistance networks consequent to ALK fusions and identifies potential targets to improve the efficacy of ALK inhibitors in patients.

### Keywords
Human, Eml4-alk, Interactome, Lung cancer

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Thoracic Oncology Chemical Biology and Molecular Medicine Program Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric B. Haura, MD
Thoracic Oncology Chemical Biology and Molecular Medicine Program Moffitt Cancer Center


