### Accession
PXD001661

### Title
Comparative Analyses of Five Grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) Cultivars Under Seasonal Water Deficit

### Description
Berry skin total protein from Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Pinot Noir, Chardonnay and Semillon. Treatments were control (well-watered) versus restricted irrigation (water-deficit). Samples were taken from harvest-ripe whole berry clusters following a seasonal water deficit in treatment vines. A comparative analysis between the cultivars and treatments was performed. Associated dataset identifiers: GSE72421, PRJNA268857.

### Sample Protocol
Berry skin total protein from Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Pinot Noir, Chardonnay and Semillon. Treatments were control (well-watered) versus restricted irrigation (water-deficit). Samples were taken from harvest-ripe whole berry clusters following a seasonal water deficit in treatment vines. A comparative analysis between the cultivars and treatments was performed.

### Data Protocol
A protein database was compiled from three sources 07 May 2012: 1) all reviewed V. vinifera protein entries in UniProt, "Taxonomy:29760  AND reviewed:yes" (164 sequences); 2) V. vinifera proteins predicted by the Interanational Grape Genome Program, "Taxonomy:29760 AND author:vitulo AND reviewed:no" (29803 sequences); 3) mitochondrial proteins associated in UniProt (81 non-redundant sequences). Spectrum-peptide matching was performed with X!Tandem and the GPM Cyclone (www.thegpm.org) in automated mode using MudPit merging. The GPM Cyclone XE and X!Tandem Cyclone version 2011.12.01.1 were used. Default ion trap parameters were used with the exceptions of MS error (+3, -1 Da), the inclusion of point mutations, the inclusion of reversed sequences, and a protein expect value of -1. Approximately 50,000 spectra per sample were assigned to peptides. Proteins were quantified with a normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF). Protein identifications were filtered and protein and peptide FDRs. Protein identifications were excluded if they did not match at least one spectrum in all three biological replicates and at least a total of six spectra among the replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Water deficit, Berry skin, Vitis vinifera

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; University of Nevada, Reno; USA
University of Nevada, Reno

### Submitter
Ryan Ghan

### Lab Head
Dr Grant R Cramer
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; University of Nevada, Reno; USA


