### Accession
PXD022395

### Title
NAD+/NADH Redox Alterations Reconfigure Metabolism and Rejuvenate Senescent Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells In Vitro

### Description
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) promote endogenous tissue regeneration and have become a promising candidate for cell therapy. However, in vitro culture expansion of hMSCs induces a rapid decline of stem cell properties through replicative senescence.  Here we characterize metabolic profiles of hMSCs during expansion. We show that alterations of cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+ /NADH) redox balance and activity of the Sirtuin (Sirt) family enzymes regulate cellular senescence of hMSCs. Treatment with NAD+ precursor nicotinamide increases the intracellular NAD+ level and re-balances the NAD+ /NADH ratio, with enhanced Sirt-1 activity in hMSCs at high passage, partially restores mitochondrial fitness and rejuvenates senescent hMSCs. By contrast, human fibroblasts exhibit limited senescence as their cellular NAD+ /NADH balance is comparatively stable during expansion. These results indicate a potential metabolic and redox connection to replicative senescence in adult stem cells and identify NAD+ as a metabolic regulator that distinguishes stem cells from mature cells. This study also suggests potential strategies to maintain cellular homeostasis of hMSCs in clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested when reached 80% confluency and hMSC pellets were resuspended in protein extracting buffer containing protease inhibitor.  The samples were ultra-sonicated for 2 min on ice and the extracted protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).  The proteins were then digested by modified Filter Aided Sample Prep (FASP) method 2.  Briefly, 100 µg protein was vacuum-dried and resuspended in 8 M urea solution to a final volume of 200 µL, then 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added for reduction and alkylation respectively.  Samples were transferred to a 10 kDa filter and centrifuged with 14000 g for 30 min.  After washing with 200 µL of 8 M urea and 200 µL of ammonium bicarbonate, the extracts were centrifuged at 14000 g for 30 min.  Then 2 µg trypsin was added for digestion at 37°C overnight.  After that, peptides were collected and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
An externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer, MS, Thermo Scientific) was used in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System.  The solution of 1 µg peptides in 0.1% formic acid was injected into a 50 μL loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo µ-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 µm i.d. × 10 cm).  The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 μM× 15 cm nanoviper).  Mobile phase A was composed of 99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent) with 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of 99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  A 120 min-stepped gradient from 3% to 45% of phase B was performed.  The LC eluent was directly nano-sprayed into Q Exactive HF MS.  During the chromatographic separation, the Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Scientific).  The MS data were acquired at 20 data-dependent collisional-induced-dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans per full scan (350 to 1700 m/z).  The spray voltage for Thermo Scientific™ LTQ was 2.0 kV and the capillary temperature was set at 200°C.  A survey full scan (m/z = 350–1700) and the five most intense ions were selected for a zoom scan to determine the charge state, after which MS/MS was triggered in Pulsed-Q Dissociation mode (PQD) with minimum signal required (1000), isolation width 2.0, normalized collision energy 27.0.  All measurements were performed at room temperature.  Raw files were analyzed by Maxquant 1.6 followed protein identification and relative comparison in Scaffold 4.4.  Gene ontology (GO) annotation was carried out by WebGestalt while canonical pathway, diseases and functions analysis was performed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen).

### Publication Abstract
Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) promote endogenous tissue regeneration and have become a promising candidate for cell therapy. However, in vitro culture expansion of hMSCs induces a rapid decline of stem cell properties through replicative senescence. Here, we characterize metabolic profiles of hMSCs during expansion. We show that alterations of cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD&#x2009;+&#x2009;/NADH) redox balance and activity of the Sirtuin (Sirt) family enzymes regulate cellular senescence of hMSCs. Treatment with NAD&#x2009;+&#x2009;precursor nicotinamide increases the intracellular NAD&#x2009;+&#x2009;level and re-balances the NAD&#x2009;+&#x2009;/NADH ratio, with enhanced Sirt-1 activity in hMSCs at high passage, partially restores mitochondrial fitness and rejuvenates senescent hMSCs. By contrast, human fibroblasts exhibit limited senescence as their cellular NAD&#x2009;+&#x2009;/NADH balance is comparatively stable during expansion. These results indicate a potential metabolic and redox connection to replicative senescence in adult stem cells and identify NAD&#x2009;+&#x2009;as a metabolic regulator that distinguishes stem cells from mature cells. This study also suggests potential strategies to maintain cellular homeostasis of hMSCs in clinical applications.

### Keywords
Msc

### Affiliations
Florida State University
Florida State University 

### Submitter
Xuegang Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Li
Florida State University


