### Accession
PXD026655

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomics Analysis of IBRS-2 Cells Infected with Senecavirus A

### Description
Phosphorylation is a widespread post-translational modification that regulates numerous biological processes. Viruses can alter the physiological activities of host cells to promote virus particle replication, and manipulating phosphorylation is one of the mechanisms. Senecavirus A (SVA) the causative agent of porcine idiopathic vesicular disease. Although numerous studies on SVA have been performed, comprehensive phosphoproteomics analysis of SVA infection is lacking. In the present study, we performed a quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics survey of SVA infection in instituto biologico-rim suino-2 (IBRS-2) cells. Three parallel experiments were performed and 4520 phosphosites were identified on 2084 proteins. Gene Ontology functional enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes  pathway enrichment analyses showed that many of the phosphorylated proteins were involved in apoptosis and spliceosome pathways, and subcellular structure localisation analysis revealed that more than half were located in the nucleus. Motif analysis of proteins with differentially regulated phosphosites showed that proline, aspartic acid and glutamic acid were the most abundant residues in the serine motif, while proline and arginine were the most abundant in the threonine motif. Forty phosphosites on 27 proteins were validated by parallel reaction monitoring phosphoproteomics, and 30 phosphosites in 21 proteins were verified. Nine proteins with significantly altered phosphosites were further explored, and eight (SRRM2, CDK13, DDX20, DDX21, BAD, ELAVL1, PBK, and STAT3) may play a role in SVA infection. Finally, identified eight predicted kinases, and the kinase activity of inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit β and CDK9 was reversed following SVA infection. This is the first phosphoproteomics analysis of SVA infection of IBRS-2 cells, and the results greatly expand our knowledge of SVA infection. The findings provide a basis for studying the interactions of other picornaviruses and their mammalian host cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor, 1% phosphatase inhibitor, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM) and sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonicator, and precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   Trypsin digestion The same amount of cell protein from NC and treatment groups was digested with trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, USA). An appropriate amount of standard protein was added based on the volume of the two samples, trichloroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 20%, and samples were mixed by vortexing and allowed to settle for 2 h. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min and washed with cold acetone two or three times. Triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, Darmstadt, Germany) was added to a final concentration of 200 mM, samples were sonicated, and treated with trypsin (1:50 w/w) overnight. Next, 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) was added to reduce the protein solution for 30 min at 56 °C, and samples were incubated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 15 min.  Affinity enrichment Peptides were dissolved in enrichment buffer comprising 50% acetonitrile and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), mixed with immobilised metal affinity chromatography resin (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China), and incubated overnight at 4 °C with gentle shaking. After incubation, the resin was washed three times with 50% acetonitrile containing 6% TFA, then with 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA. Finally, = peptides were eluted with 10% ammonia and cleaned with C18 ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s instructions [30].    Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry The enriched phosphorylated peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), then loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm internal diameter) attached to a Nano Elute Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (Bruker, Beijing, China) at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min. The gradient employed for elution was 2% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 50 min, increased to 35% solvent B over 2 min, then to 90% over 3 min, and holding at 90% for 5 min. Peptides were subjected to capillary ionisation source followed by trapped ion mobility time of flight spectroscopy. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6 kV, the m/z scan range was 100 to 1700 for full scans, and the parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) data acquisition mode was employed. Ten primary and secondary mass spectra were collected sequentially (precursor ions ranged from 0 to 5) in PASEF mode. In order to avoid repeated scanning of precursor ions, the dynamic exclusion time of MS/MS scans was set to 24 s.  Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) of phosphorylated proteins The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and isolated with an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). The gradient applied for elution was an increase from 1% to 18% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 38 min, followed by 18% to 32% over 4 min, which was then increased to 80% over 4 min, and held at 80% for 4 min. The flow rate was maintained at 450 nL/min.  Phosphorylated peptides were isolated using a UPLC system, then loaded onto an NSI source and analysed by MS/MS using a Q ExactiveTM HF-X instrument (Thermo Scientific). The electrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the m/z range was 510 to 1120. Intact peptides were detected using an Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 for primary mass spectra and 30,000 for MS/MS spectra. Data-independent scanning was employed as the data acquisition mode. The automatic gain control was 3E6 of for full MS scans and 1E5 for MS/MS scans. The maximum ion implantation time was set at 140 ms, and the isolation window was set at 1.4 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Secondary MS data were processed with MaxQuant (v.1.6.6.0, http://www.maxquant.org/). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Sus_scrofa_9823_PR_20191031 database (40,701 sequences) [31] concatenated with the reverse-decoy database. The common pollution bank was added to eliminate the impact of contaminating proteins. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, up to two missed cleavages were allowed, the maximum number of modifications per peptide was five, and the minimum length of peptides was seven amino acids. The mass tolerance for fragment ions in the first search and the main search was set to 20 ppm, while the mass tolerance for secondary fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate, peptide-spectrum matches identification, and protein identification were all adjusted to < 1%. Cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification, and variable modifications included methionine oxidation, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. For the PRM database search, peptide settings were as follows: the enzyme was Trypsin [KR/P], the maximum number of missed cleavages was two, the peptide length was 735 amino acids, cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification, and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation was set as a variable modification. Regarding the transition settings, precursor charges were set as 2, 3 and 4, ion charges were set as b and y (corresponding to phosphorylation neutral loss generated when the library is introduced), fragment ions were set from ion 3 to the last ion, and the ion match tolerance was set as 0.02 Da.  Bioinformatics analysis Subcellular location predication of phosphorylated proteins was performed using Wolfpsort (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html), Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm, V5.0.2 http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo) was used to analyse the models of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modified 13-mers for phosphorylation (six amino acids upstream and downstream of the site). The background database parameter was IBRS-2 cell protein sequences from the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/), and all other parameters were set to default values. Gene Ontology annotation was performed against the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) Firstly, identified proteins IDs were switched to UniProt IDs and mapped to GO IDs. InterProScan（http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/）was employed to predict protein function based on the protein sequence alignment method when proteins were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database. Proteins were classified according to their cellular components, molecular functions, and physiological processes. Protein domain annotation was performed by InterProScan software and the InterProScan domain database (v.5.14-53.0). Similarly, KEGG pathway annotation was performed against the online KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (V2.0, http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main), and the annotation results were mapped to the KEGG pathway database using KEGG mapper (V2.5, http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to assess the enrichment of proteins with differentially regulated phosphosites (GO, KEGG pathway and protein domain; p <0.05 was considered as significant). Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was performed using the Neighboring Gene (STRING) database (http://string-db.org/). All differentially regulated proteins were searched against this database, those with an interaction confidence score  0.7 were retained, and all other parameters were set as default values. The PPI network was visualised using Cytoscape software (v3.7.2, https://cytoscape.org/). Kinase-substrate interactions were identified by PPI analysis. Kinases can regulate multiple substrates, and one phosphosite may be regulated by more than one kinase. The differentially regulated ratio threshold was set as 1.5, the significant change threshold was 0.05, and the predicted kinases and significantly altered phosphosites were chosen to construct a kinase-substrate regulatory network.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is a widespread posttranslational modification that regulates numerous biological processes. Viruses can alter the physiological activities of host cells to promote virus particle replication, and manipulating phosphorylation is one of the mechanisms. Senecavirus A (SVA) is the causative agent of porcine idiopathic vesicular disease. Although numerous studies on SVA have been performed, comprehensive phosphoproteomics analysis of SVA infection is lacking. The present study performed a quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics survey of SVA infection in Instituto Biologico-Rim Suino-2 (IBRS-2) cells. Three parallel experiments were performed, and 4,520 phosphosites were quantified on 2,084 proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses showed that many phosphorylated proteins were involved in apoptosis and spliceosome pathways, and subcellular structure localization analysis revealed that more than half were located in the nucleus. Motif analysis of proteins with differentially regulated phosphosites showed that proline, aspartic acid, and glutamic acid were the most abundant residues in the serine motif, while proline and arginine were the most abundant in the threonine motif. Forty phosphosites on 27 proteins were validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) phosphoproteomics, and 30 phosphosites in 21 proteins were verified. Nine proteins with significantly altered phosphosites were further discussed, and eight [SRRM2, CDK13, DDX20, DDX21, BAD, ELAVL1, PDZ-binding kinase (PBK), and STAT3] may play a role in SVA infection. Finally, kinase activity prediction showed 10 kinases' activity was reversed following SVA infection. It is the first phosphoproteomics analysis of SVA infection of IBRS-2 cells, and the results greatly expand our knowledge of SVA infection. The findings provide a basis for studying the interactions of other picornaviruses and their mammalian host cells.

### Keywords
Pathway analysis; protein kinases; senecavirus aprotein modification; phosphoproteome; bioinformatics, Pathway analysis; protein kinases; senecavirus a, Protein modification; phosphoproteome; bioinformatics

### Affiliations
1
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute

### Submitter
Jieyi Li

### Lab Head
Dr Li Jieyi
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute


