### Accession
PXD025675

### Title
Genomic locus proteomic screening identifies the NF-kB signaling pathway components NFkB1 and IKBKG as transcriptional regulators of Ripk3 in endothelial cells

### Description
The receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) is a multi-functional protein best known for facilitating cellular necroptosis and inflammation. Recent evidence from our lab indicates that RIPK3 expression must be tightly regulated in endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis and maintain vascular integrity during embryogenesis and to provide protection from postnatal atherosclerosis. RIPK3 activity and stability are regulated by post-translational modifications and caspase-dependent cleavage. However, less is known about the transcriptional regulation of Ripk3. Here we utilized an unbiased CRISPR-based technology called genomic locus proteomics (GLoPro) to screen transcription factors and coregulatory proteins associated with the Ripk3 locus in a murine endothelial cell line. We found that 41 nuclear proteins are specifically enriched at the Ripk3 locus, including the Nuclear Factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) signaling pathway components NFkB1 and IKBKG. We further verified that NFkB1 and IKBKG directly bind the Ripk3 promoter and prevent TNFa-induced Ripk3 transcription in cultured human primary endothelial cells. Moreover, NFkB1 prevents RIPK3-mediated death of primary endothelial cells. These data provide new insights into NF-kB signaling and Ripk3 transcriptional regulation in endothelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated cell lysates were incubated with Streptavidin magnetic bead for 2 hours at 4°C, washed three times with cold lysis buffer. Bead-bound proteins were digested and followed by subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.  Each protein sample was analyzed using three replicate LC-MS/MS analyses on a Fusion model quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system and a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by using the MaxQuant v1.6.2.10 to search the MS data against the Uniprot Mouse database. Protein hits were analyzed in Perseus 1.6.12.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glopro

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, US
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Siqi Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Courtney Griffin
Cardiovascular Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, US


