### Accession
PXD024139

### Title
Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) of proteins in MDA-MB231

### Description
To determine the absolute copy number of proteins in MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells, we employed IBAQ mediated absolute quantification of proteins based on (Schwanhäusser et al., Nature, 2011), with some modifications. Maqquant calculated iBAQ values were calibrated using spike-in standards, and used to calculate copy numbers for each identified protein within the dataset. Copy numbers for a total of 3,584 proteins were calculated in MDA-MB231 cells.

### Sample Protocol
400,000 MDA-MB231 cells were lysed in 4%SDS, Tris-HCl pH 7.5, sonicated, and the protein concentration was quantified via BCA assay (Thermo). 17.5 µg of total lysate, corresponding to 40,000 cells, was then spiked in with 5.3 µg of Universal Proteomics Standard Set (UPS2, Sigma-Aldrich), which consists of 48 human proteins formulated into a dynamic range of known amounts spanning six orders of magnitude. An equivalent amount of lysate without the spiked in standard set was taken and analysed as control. Both samples were then reduced by the addition of 100 mM DTT and heating for 5 mins at 95˚C, followed by Trypsin digestion and desalting, as described before (Dermit et al., Developmental Cell, 2020). MS analysis was also performed as described before (Dermit et al., Developmental Cell, 2020), using a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher). Each sample was run twice to obtain two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) (Tyanova et al., Nat Protocols, 2016), with the iBAQ option enabled, and enzyme specificity set to “Trypsin”. Default MaxQuant parameters were applied to all other settings. All downstream MS data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) (Tyanova et al., Nature Methods, 2016). Briefly, “iBAQ” intensities were log-transformed, median normalized, and the missing values were replaced by imputation using a downshift of 2 and a width of 0.3 standard deviations. The iBAQ values were then averaged between technical replicates and the inverse Log was calculated. The resulting values in the spiked-in averaged runs were then subtracted from the control averaged runs to calculate the corrected iBAQ values for the spiked-in standard proteins. Linear regression was then used to fit the Log of the corrected iBAQ intensities to Log of absolute spiked-in standard protein amounts. The slope and intercept from the linear regression analysis was then used to convert iBAQ intensities to molar amounts for all other identified proteins in each run. Uncertainty of the fit was calculated by bootstrapping to provide upper and lower ranges. Cellular copy numbers were then calculated by multiplying the estimated molar values by the Avogadro constant, followed by dividing by the number of cells used in the experiment (40,000).

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant alternative splicing is a hallmark of cancer, yet the underlying regulatory programs that control this process remain largely unknown. Here, we report a systematic effort to decipher the RNA structural code that shapes pathological splicing during breast cancer metastasis. We discovered a previously unknown structural splicing enhancer that is enriched near cassette exons with increased inclusion in highly metastatic cells. We show that the spliceosomal protein small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide A' (SNRPA1) interacts with these enhancers to promote cassette exon inclusion. This interaction enhances metastatic lung colonization and cancer cell invasion, in part through SNRPA1-mediated regulation of <i>PLEC</i> alternative splicing, which can be counteracted by splicing modulating morpholinos. Our findings establish a noncanonical regulatory role for SNRPA1 as a prometastatic splicing enhancer in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Ibaq; absolute protein quantification; breast cancer; mda-mb231;

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ UK.

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz K. Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ UK.


