### Accession
PXD014688

### Title
A Temporal Study of the Perturbation of Crustacean Neuropeptides Due to Severe Hypoxia Using 4-Plex Reductive Dimethylation

### Description
Hypoxia (i.e., low oxygen (O2) levels) is a common environmental challenge for several aquatic species, including fish and invertebrates. To survive or escape these conditions, these animals have developed novel biological mechanisms, some regulated by neuropeptides. By utilizing mass spectrometry, this study aims to provide a global perspective of neuropeptides in the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, and their changes over time (0, 1, 4, and 8 hours) due to severe hypoxia (~10% O2 water saturation) stress using a 4-plex dimethyl labeling strategy to increase throughput. Using both electrospray ionization and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization provided complementary coverage– 88 neuropeptides were identified with only five overlapping between the two ionization techniques. Interesting trends include (1) an overall decrease in expression due to hypoxia exposure, (2) a return to basal levels after 4 or 8 hours of exposure following an initial response, (3) changes only after 4+ hours exposure, and (4) an oscillating pattern. Overall, this study boosts the power of multiplexed quantitation to understand the large-scale changes due to severe hypoxia stress over time.

### Sample Protocol
To mimic severe hypoxia (1 ppm, ~10% O2), a tank was sparged with N2 gas for 30-40 minutes to reduce the DO to 1 ppm as measured by a Pinpoint II Oxygen Monitor prior to adding a crab. A plastic tarp was placed on top of the water’s surface to minimize water-air oxygen exchange during sparging. A crab was then placed in the tank for the desired amount of time (i.e., 1 hour, 4 hours, or 8 hours), anesthetized on ice for 20 minutes, and sacrificed for its organs of interest as previously described.22 All dissections were performed in chilled (~ 10 oC) physiological saline (composition:  440 mM NaCl; 11 mM KCl; 13 mM CaCl2; 26 mM MgCl2; 10 mM Trizma acid; pH 7.4 (adjusted with NaOH)). For each bioreplicate, one set of each tissue of interest (i.e., sinus gland (SG), brain, pericardial organ (PO), commissarial ganglion (CoG), and thoracic ganglion (TG))  was extracted with a Fisherbrand Model 120 probe sonicator/sonic dismembrator with chilled acidified MeOH (90:9:1 MeOH:H2O:GAA; volume (v):v:v). Each sample was sonicated three times for 8 seconds at 50% amplitude with a 15 second break in between each sonication. After centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected and dried down in a Savant SCV100 Speedvac. All crude extracts were purified using C18 ZipTips following the manufacturer’s protocol. All samples were centrifuged at high speed (>10,000 rpm) briefly prior to purification. Control and hypoxia-exposed samples were differentially labeled using reductive dimethylation using a previously published protocol with slight modifications.18-20 The samples were all differentially labeled as follows: (a) control (i.e, 0 hours) with formaldehyde (CH2O, +28.03130 Da), (b) 1 hr exposure with 13C-formaldehyde (13CH2O, +30.04391 Da), (c) 4 hr exposure with 2H2-formaldehyde (C2H2O, +32.05641 Da), and (d) 8 hr exposure with 13C, d2-formaldehyde (13C2H2O, +34.06902 Da). Borane pyridine was the reducing agent. All samples were mixed 1:1:1:1 after being quenched with ammonium bicarbonate. The multiplexed samples were then processed two different ways: (a) spotted with 150 mg/mL DHB (in 50:50 MeOH:H2O with 0.1% FA) on a stainless-steel plate to be analyzed by a Thermo MALDI-LTQ-Orbitrap XL or (b) purified again with C18 ZipTips and analyzed by a Thermo Q Exactive (QE) coupled to a Waters nanoAquity system.

### Data Protocol
Data collected by MALDI-MS was analyzed by exporting all the m/z values from Xcalibur and processed using a custom program written in Java by accurate mass matching (±5 ppm) with an intensity threshold of 100. Neuropeptides were identified by matching their masses to an in-house database, accounting for the addition of +28.03130, +30.03801, +32.05641, and +34.06312 Da on the N-terminus from isotopic reductive dimethylation. ESI-MS raw data were imported into PEAKS 8.5 software for de novo sequencing and database matching. Database search results initially were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate. Peak areas were then extracted for corresponding tandem MS-identified neuropeptide peak sets if they were detected in at least 1 technical replicate (n=3), 3 biological replicates (n=8 for brain, CoG, PO, and TG; n=7 for SG), unique to that neuropeptide, and eluted within ± 2 minutes from each other. All fragments of a neuropeptides were equally weighted for the calculation ratios. No isotopic correction was considered for our datasets. For both MALDI and ESI analyses, all channels were normalized by taking individual intensity or peak areas divided by the total intensity or peak area. Ratios were then calculated by dividing the normalized intensity of either the +30.03801, +32.05641, or +34.06312 channel by the +28.03130 channel’s normalized intensity. Statistical significance between experimental and control samples was determined by a Dunnett’s test, which is utilized for comparing multiple experimental conditions to a single control.23, 24 If only the control and one other time point were detected, a t-test was used to determine significance.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia (i.e., low oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) levels) is a common environmental challenge for several aquatic species, including fish and invertebrates. To survive or escape these conditions, these animals have developed novel biological mechanisms, some regulated by neuropeptides. By utilizing mass spectrometry (MS), this study aims to provide a global perspective of neuropeptides in the blue crab, <i>Callinectes sapidus</i>, and their changes over time (0, 1, 4, and 8 h) due to acute, severe hypoxia (&#x223c;10% O<sub>2</sub> water saturation) stress using a 4-plex reductive dimethylation strategy to increase throughput. Using both electrospray ionization and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) MS, this study provides complementary coverage, allowing 88 neuropeptides to be identified. Interesting trends include (1) an overall decrease in neuropeptide expression due to hypoxia exposure, (2) a return to basal levels after 4 or 8 h of exposure following an initial response, (3) changes only after 4+ h exposure, and (4) an oscillating pattern. Overall, this study boosts the power of multiplexed quantitation to understand the large-scale changes due to severe hypoxia stress over time.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Maldi, Neuropeptides, Hypoxia, Isotopic labeling

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry, University of WI-Madison, Madison, WI, United States

### Submitter
Chris Sauer

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry, University of WI-Madison, Madison, WI, United States


