### Accession
PXD040456

### Title
mRNA 3’UTR lengthening by alternative polyadenylation attenuates inflammatory responses and correlates with virulence of Influenza A virus

### Description
Alternative polyadenylation (APA) leading to changes of mRNA 3’UTRs has been associated to numerous pathologies but its molecular origin and functional consequences often remain enigmatic. We show that all Influenza A virus (IAV) strains cause APA of host transcripts and mapped the effect to a drug-targetable glycine residue (G184) in the viral non-structural protein 1 (NS1) that is required for its interaction with CPSF4. Unexpectedly, this interaction is also conserved in IAVs not causing virus-induced transcriptional shutoff and introduction of G184R in NS1 alleviates APA. Functionally, a recombinant PR8 (NS1-G184R) virus elicited increased secretion of inflammatory cytokines as compared to the parental wild-type in vitro and in vivo, and had a strongly attenuated phenotype in vivo. Finally, we show that many pathogens induce APA, which is potentially used towards similar immunomodulatory effects.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocol including descriptions of sample harvest, preparation and MS measurements is available in the Materials and Methods of the parent manuscript. This submission contains 3 datasets, described in the parent manuscript: proteomics of A549 cells, infected with various Influenza A mutants (IAV_FPMS); proteomics of THP-1 cells infected with Semliki Forest Virus (SFV); Interactomics of various mutants of viral protein NS1 (IAV_APMS).

### Data Protocol
Detailed protocol including descriptions of sample harvest, preparation and MS measurements is available in the Materials and Methods of the parent manuscript. This submission contains 3 datasets, described in the parent manuscript: proteomics of A549 cells, infected with various Influenza A mutants (IAV_FPMS); proteomics of THP-1 cells infected with Semliki Forest Virus (SFV); Interactomics of various mutants of viral protein NS1 (IAV_APMS).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Semliki forest virus, Sfv, Pr8, Influenza a, Ns1, Iav

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Valter Bergant

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich


