### Accession
PXD017704

### Title
Protein Kinase A interacting proteins

### Description
Find interactors of Protein kinase A (PKA) holoenzyme in human SCLC (H446) cells using LAP-tagged PRKACA, PRKACB and PRKAR1A proteins as baits. Tandem affinity purified complexes were analyzed using Bruker timsTOF Pro LC-MS mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
LAP-tagged PRKACA, PRKACB, PRKAR1A were transduced into NCI-H446 human SCLC cells using standard techniques. Tandem affinity purification and analysis were performed as previously described (Kanie et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from Bruker timsTOF output were processed using Byonic software (Protein Metrics, Inc).

### Publication Abstract
Using unbiased kinase profiling, we identified protein kinase A (PKA) as an active kinase in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Inhibition of PKA activity genetically, or pharmacologically by activation of the PP2A phosphatase, suppresses SCLC expansion in culture and in&#xa0;vivo. Conversely, GNAS (G-protein &#x3b1; subunit), a PKA activator that is genetically activated in a small subset of human SCLC, promotes SCLC development. Phosphoproteomic analyses identified many PKA substrates and mechanisms of action. In particular, PKA activity is required for the propagation of SCLC stem cells in transplantation studies. Broad proteomic analysis of recalcitrant cancers has the potential to uncover targetable signaling networks, such as the GNAS/PKA/PP2A axis in SCLC.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics co-Director of the Cancer Biology PhD program Harriet and Mary Zelencik Scientist in Children's Cancer and Blood Diseases 265 Campus Drive, SIM1 Bldg - Rm G2078a - Stanford, CA 94305-5457, USA

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Sage
Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics co-Director of the Cancer Biology PhD program Harriet and Mary Zelencik Scientist in Children's Cancer and Blood Diseases 265 Campus Drive, SIM1 Bldg - Rm G2078a - Stanford, CA 94305-5457, USA


