### Accession
PXD011970

### Title
Post-column solvent addition enhances sensitivity of microflow-based bottom-up proteomics

### Description
We demonstrate that post-column addition of organic solvents leads to a strong enhancement of electrospray stability in microflow LC-MS experiments improving the sensitivity across the entire gradient, for early eluting peptides by up to tenfold. Post-column solvent addition did not negatively affect chromatographic performance and resulted in an overall 28%-36% increase in identifications at both protein- and peptide-level. Post-column solvent addition can be easily adopted on any microflow LC-MS/MS system.

### Sample Protocol
Raw data processing and database search were performed in PLGS ver. 3.02 (Waters Corporation). A custom compiled database containing the UniProt human reference proteome (UniProtKB release 2018_05, 20,341 entries) and a list of common contaminants was used to for database search applying the following parameters: i) trypsin as enzyme for digestion, ii) two missed cleavages per peptide, iii) carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed, and iv) methionine oxidation as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was assessed using the target-decoy strategy by searching a reverse database. FDR was set to 0.01 for database search in PLGS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and database search were performed in PLGS ver. 3.02 (Waters Corporation). A custom compiled database containing the UniProt human reference proteome (UniProtKB release 2018_05, 20,341 entries) and a list of common contaminants was used to for database search applying the following parameters: i) trypsin as enzyme for digestion, ii) two missed cleavages per peptide, iii) carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed, and iv) methionine oxidation as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was assessed using the target-decoy strategy by searching a reverse database. FDR was set to 0.01 for database search in PLGS.

### Publication Abstract
The introduction of more sensitive mass spectrometers allows researchers to adapt front-end liquid chromatography (LC) to individual needs for the analysis of complex proteomes. Where absolute sensitivity is not paramount, it is advantageous to switch from a highly sensitive nanoflow-LC setup, the de facto standard platform in mass-spectrometry (MS)-based discovery proteomics, to a more robust, high-throughput-compatible microflow or conventional-flow setup. To enhance the microflow-LC-MS electrospray process of complex proteomic samples, we tested the effects of different solvents, including 2-propanol, methanol, and acetonitrile, pure or as mixture with dimethyl sulfoxide, which were added postcolumn to the eluting sample. Postcolumn addition of organic solvents strongly enhanced the electrospray efficiency in microflow-LC-MS experiments and improved the sensitivity across the entire gradient and for early eluting peptides by up to 10-fold. Postcolumn solvent addition did not negatively affect chromatographic performance and resulted in an overall 28-36% increase in identifications at both the protein and peptide levels. The presented microflow-LC-MS workflow, including postcolumn solvent addition, can be easily adopted on any LC-MS/MS platform.

### Keywords
Post-column solvent addition, Hela digest, Microflow lc-ms, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
University Medical Center

### Submitter
Mateusz Lacki

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz


