### Accession
PXD002107

### Title
Glycoproteomic Analyses of Prostate Cancer Cells

### Description
Integrated Proteomic and Glycoproteomic Analyses of Prostate Cancer Cells Reveals Glycoprotein Alteration in Protein Abundance and Glycosylation

### Sample Protocol
Human prostate cancer cell lines were described in our previous publication (16). The cells were used for proteomic analysis at 80-90% confluence. The cells were washed six times with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline prior to cell lysis for protein extraction. Protein and peptide extraction from cells for proteomic analysis  The cell pellet from two 10cm dishes was first denatured in 1mL of 8M urea and 0.4M NH4HCO3 and sonicated thoroughly.  The protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo). The proteins were then reduced by incubating in 120mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 min and alkylated by addition of 160mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark.  Sample was diluted with buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) containing 0.5ug/ul trypsin and incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were purified with C18 desalting columns and dried using a SpeedVac Concentrator.  iTRAQ labeling of global tryptic peptides from cell lines Each iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) 4-plex reagent was dissolved in 70μl of methanol. 1mg of each tryptic peptide sample was added into 250µl of iTRAQ dissolution buffer, then mixed with iTRAQ 4-plex reagent and incubated for one hour at room temperature. iTRAQ channels 114 and 115 were used to label two replicate LNCaP samples in order to determine the analytical reproducibility, iTRAQ channel 116 was used to label peptides from PC3 cells and iTRAQ channel 117 was used for labeling peptides from another cell line unrelated to this study. After iTRAQ labeling, the 4 sets of tagged peptides were combined and purified by SCX column. Then, 10% of the labeled peptides were dried and resuspended into 0.4% acetic acid solution prior to fractionation for mass spectrometry analysis. The remaining peptides were desalted for glycopeptide capture.

### Data Protocol
Data generated was searched using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) against the Human RefSeq database downloaded on 13 August 2014 containing 55926 proteins . Peptides were searched with two tryptic ends, allowing two missed cleavages. Search parameters used were 10ppm precursor tolerance for precursor mass and 0.06Da fragment ion tolerance, static modification of 4plex iTRAQ at N-terminus and lysine, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, and variable modifications of oxidation at methionine. Deamidation at asparagine was applied as a variable modification to identify N-linked glycosylation sites of formerly glycosylated peptides. Filters used for global data analysis included peptide rank 1, two peptides per protein, and 2% FDR threshold. Filters used for glycopeptide analysis was peptide rank 1, 1% FDR in Proteome Discoverer. Data was normalized by protein median.  For intact glycopeptide identification, data was searched in Byonics(18) and in house developed glycopeptide analysis software GPQuest(19)  with the same parameters as mentioned above for proteomic data in the human RefSeq database (Figure 1). Additional parameters for database search were the mammalian N-glycans database and offset was set for one and more. Results were filtered using an in-house software a) for presence of two oxonium ions, b) intensity of the highest oxonium ion being greater than the maximum reporter ion intensity, c) Results were lastly filtered on the basis of reverse database match, all the peptides were filtered below the score of the highest reverse database match.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer is the most common cancer among men in the U.S. and worldwide, and androgen-deprivation therapy remains the principal treatment for patients. Although a majority of patients initially respond to androgen-deprivation therapy, most will eventually develop castration resistance. An increased understanding of the mechanisms that underline the pathogenesis of castration resistance is therefore needed to develop novel therapeutics. LNCaP and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines are models for androgen-dependence and androgen-independence, respectively. Herein, we report the comparative analysis of these two prostate cancer cell lines using integrated global proteomics and glycoproteomics. Global proteome profiling of the cell lines using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling and two- dimensional (2D) liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) led to the quantification of 8063 proteins. To analyze the glycoproteins, glycosite-containing peptides were isolated from the same iTRAQ-labeled peptides from the cell lines using solid phase extraction followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Among the 1810 unique N-linked glycosite-containing peptides from 653 identified N-glycoproteins, 176 glycoproteins were observed to be different between the two cell lines. A majority of the altered glycoproteins were also observed with changes in their global protein expression levels. However, alterations in 21 differentially expressed glycoproteins showed no change at the protein abundance level, indicating that the glycosylation site occupancy was different between the two cell lines. To determine the glycosylation heterogeneity at specific glycosylation sites, we further identified and quantified 1145 N-linked glycopeptides with attached glycans in the same iTRAQ-labeled samples. These intact glycopeptides contained 67 glycan compositions and showed increased fucosylation in PC3 cells in several of the examined glycosylation sites. The increase in fucosylation could be caused by the detected changes in enzymes belonging to the glycan biosynthesis pathways of protein fucosylation observed in our proteomic analysis. The altered protein fucosylation forms have great potential in aiding our understanding of castration resistance and may lead to the development of novel therapeutic approaches and specific detection strategies for prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Pc3, Lncap, Glycoproteins, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Associate Prosfessor, Johns Hopkins University, Department of Pathology Baltimore USA

### Submitter
Paul Aiyetan

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Associate Prosfessor, Johns Hopkins University, Department of Pathology Baltimore USA


