### Accession
PXD016248

### Title
Metaproteomics on the digestive tract from Gammarus fossarum, an environmentally relevant sentinel.

### Description
Presentation of a new data treatment methodology for investigating the full range of biomasses and metabolic activities of the holobiont components from the digestive tract of Gammarus fossarum. Two tissues, intestine and hepatopancreatic caecum from individual animals were compared. Three animals have been analyzed in technical duplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, fractionated and excised from the gel as three polyacrylamide bands per sample, digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed with MASCOT. The results were assigned to taxa using in house scripts and NCBI references. Spectral counts for taxon and protein abundance proxy have been extracted.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics of gut microbiomes from animal hosts lacking a reference genome is challenging. Here we describe a strategy combining high-resolution metaproteomics and host RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) with generalist database searching to survey the digestive tract of Gammarus fossarum, a small crustacean used as a sentinel species in ecotoxicology. This approach provides a deep insight into the full range of biomasses and metabolic activities of the holobiont components, and differentiates between the intestine and hepatopancreatic caecum.

### Keywords
Fungi, Metaproteomics, Proteogenomics, Gut, Non-model host, Bacteria, Amphipod, Bioinformatics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


