### Accession
PXD010032

### Title
Rapid Aldosterone Effects in Mouse Kidney Distal Convoluted Tubules Cells

### Description
Kidney distal convoluted tubules (DCT) are important for regulation of urinary salt excretion. Aldosterone is known to exert long-term effects in this segment, and regulate sodium reabsorption via increasing abundance of the Na+-Cl- cotransporter (NCC) and the epithelial Na channel ENaC. Whether acute effects of aldosterone occur in the DCT and the potential signaling networks remain unknown. Here in this study, we aim to identify the acute aldosterone-mediated signaling (rapid effects) in the DCT.

### Sample Protocol
mpkDCT cells were grown in SILAC advanced DMEM/F12-Flex media (Invitrogen) in light (12C6 lysine, 12C6 14N4 arginine) or heavy (13C6 lysine, 13C6 15N4 arginine) conditions for at least 21 days (3-5 passages). Mass spectrometry (MS) confirmed labeling efficiency >98%. Cells were grown on filter plates until a fully confluent polarized monolayer was formed. Cells were incubated in phenol red and serum-free media for overnight before aldosterone (1 nM) was added to both apical and basolateral compartments of experimental group, controls received an equivalent volume of DMSO. After 30 min cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and scraped in cell lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal quantities of differentially labelled control or hormone-treated samples were pooled. 1 mg lysates from each biological replicate (light and heavy combined) were reduced, alkylated, pre-digested by lys-c, and followed by trypsin digestion overnight. Peptides were then desalted using Oasis PRiME HLB columns (Waters) and fractionated under high pH by reverse phase columns. The phosphopeptides from each fraction were enriched using home-made TiO2 columns. Samples were analyzed by Thermo EASY nLC 1000 coupled with QExactive, through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were 1st trapped by a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75um*2cm, nanoviper fitting, C18, 3um, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) and then further separated by an analytical column (EASY-Spray column PepMap, 75um*25cm, nanoviper fitting, C18, 3um, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Buffer A was 0.1% FA and Buffer B was 100% ACN/0.1% FA. A gradient of 0-35% B was used for peptide separation. The MS was set up as full scan (m/z 300-1700) at the resolution of 70,000; 10 data dependent MS/MS scans at the resolution of 17,500; HCD collision energy, 29%; dynamic exclusion time 30s; charge state exclusion for less than +1 and above +8. Both the phospho-enriched fractions and the flow through fractions were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) database searching using SEQUEST and MASCOT on a uniprot mouse protein database (mouse.protein.v20180126.fasta). The parameters for Proteome Discoverer were: precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; maximum miss cleavage, 2; static modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modification: N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, 10+ for heavy arginine, 6+ for heavy lysine, phosphorylation of STY. Percolator was used to calculate false discovery rate (FDR); phosphoRS 3.0 algorithm was used to evaluate phosphorylation site probability score. Only rank 1 and high confidence (with a target false discovery rate (FDR) q-value below 0.01) peptides were included in the final results. The quantification of each unique peptide was obtained from the sum of raw values from different peptide charge states, different fractions and different technical replicates. The heavy-to-light ratio of each unique peptide was calculated from the summed raw intensities of heavy or light peptide from different charge states and different fractions. Quantification ratios were normalized based on median log2 ratios of each biological replicate. Normalization was done using all peptides, including phosphopeptides and non-phosphopeptides. Phosphopeptides identified and quantified in at least three replicates were subjected to Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) FDR analysis, and those that passed the 10% BH-FDR threshold were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Quantification, Aldosterone, Distal convoluted tubules (dct)

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, Aarhus University
Institute of biomedicine, AU

### Submitter
Lei Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Cheng
Institute of Biomedicine, Aarhus University


