### Accession
PXD002075

### Title
ESCRTIII-associated protein AtALIX mediates high affinity phosphate transporter trafficking to maintain phosphate homeostasis in Arabidopsis

### Description
Prior to the release of their cargoes into the vacuolar lumen, sorting endosomes mature into multivesicular bodies (MVB) through the action of ENDOSOMAL COMPLEX REQUIRED FOR TRANSPORT (ESCRT) protein complexes. MVB-mediated sorting of high affinity phosphate transporters (PHT1) to the vacuole limits their plasma membrane levels under phosphate sufficient conditions, a process that allows plants to maintain phosphate homeostasis. We describe here AtALIX, a cytosolic protein that associates to MVB by interacting with ESCRT-III subunit SNF7 and enables PHT1;1 trafficking to the vacuole. Thus, we show that the partial loss of function mutant Atalix-1 displays reduced vacuolar degradation of PHT1;1. AtALIX versions containing the Atalix-1 mutation showed reduced interaction with SNF7, providing a simple molecular explanation for impaired cargo trafficking in Atalix-1 mutants. Indeed, Atalix-1 mutation also hampered vacuolar sorting of brassinosteroid receptor BRI1. In line with a presumed broad target spectrum, Atalix-1 mutation is pleiotropic, provoking reduced plant growth, late flowering and altered vacuole morphogenesis, whereas null mutants are lethal, indicating that AtALIX controls diverse processes in plants being essential for their life.

### Sample Protocol
Bands of interest from coomasie-stained gels were excised manually, deposited in 96-well plates and processed automatically in a Proteineer DP (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The digestion protocol used was exactly the same in the three cases and was based on Schevchenko et al. [Anal. Chem. 68: 850-858, 1996] with minor variations: gel plugs were washed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN prior to reduction with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and alkylation was carried out with 55 mM IAA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Gel pieces were then rinsed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN, and then were dried under a stream of nitrogen. Proteomics Grade Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 16 ng/μl in 25% ACN/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added and the digestion took place at 37 ºC for 4 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 50%ACN/0.5%TFA for peptide extraction. The tryptic eluted peptides were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and were resuspended in 4 ul of MALDI solution (30% ACN/15% isopropanol/0.5% TFA). A 0.8 l aliquot of each peptide mixture was deposited onto a 384-well OptiTOFTM Plate (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and allowed to dry at room temperature. A 0.8 µl aliquot of matrix solution (3 mg/mL α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in MALDI solution) was then deposited onto dried digest and allowed to dry at room temperature.   For MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis, samples were automatically acquired in an ABi 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) in positive ion reflector mode (the ion acceleration voltage was 25 kV to MS acquisition and 2 kV to MSMS) and the obtained spectra were stored into the ABi 4000 Series Explorer Spot Set Manager

### Data Protocol
PMF and MSMS fragment ion spectra were smoothed and corrected to zero baseline using routines embedded in ABi 4000 Series Explorer Software v3.6. Each PMF spectrum was internally calibrated with the mass signals of trypsin autolysis ions to reach a typical mass measurement accuracy of <25 ppm. Known trypsin and keratin mass signals, as well as potential sodium and potassium adducts (+21 Da and +39 Da) were removed from the peak list. To submit the combined PMF and MS/MS data to MASCOT software v.2.5.10 (Matrix Science, London, UK), GPS Explorer v4.9 was used, searching in the Viridiplantae protein database from Uniprot-SwissProt repository (UKBsp_20140703; 2069501 sequences; 705582891 residues). The following search parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; carbamidomethyl cystein as fixed modification by the treatment with iodoacetamide; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; mass tolerance for precursors was set to ± 50 ppm and for MS/MS fragment ions to ± 0.3 Da. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p < 0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the identity threshold were considered correctly identified.

### Publication Abstract
Prior to the release of their cargoes into the vacuolar lumen, sorting endosomes mature into multivesicular bodies (MVBs) through the action of ENDOSOMAL COMPLEX REQUIRED FOR TRANSPORT (ESCRT) protein complexes. MVB-mediated sorting of high-affinity phosphate transporters (PHT1) to the vacuole limits their plasma membrane levels under phosphate-sufficient conditions, a process that allows plants to maintain phosphate homeostasis. Here, we describe ALIX, a cytosolic protein that associates with MVB by interacting with ESCRT-III subunit SNF7 and mediates PHT1;1 trafficking to the vacuole in Arabidopsis thaliana. We show that the partial loss-of-function mutant alix-1 displays reduced vacuolar degradation of PHT1;1. ALIX derivatives containing the alix-1 mutation showed reduced interaction with SNF7, providing a simple molecular explanation for impaired cargo trafficking in alix-1 mutants. In fact, the alix-1 mutation also hampered vacuolar sorting of the brassinosteroid receptor BRI1. We also show that alix-1 displays altered vacuole morphogenesis, implying a new role for ALIX proteins in vacuolar biogenesis, likely acting as part of ESCRT-III complexes. In line with a presumed broad target spectrum, the alix-1 mutation is pleiotropic, leading to reduced plant growth and late flowering, with stronger alix mutations being lethal, indicating that ALIX participates in diverse processes in plants essential for their life.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics - Bioinformatics
Department Y centro: Plant Molecular Genetics, Spanish National Center of Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC).

### Submitter
J. Alberto Medina-Aunon

### Lab Head
Dr Vicente Rubio Muñoz
Department Y centro: Plant Molecular Genetics, Spanish National Center of Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC).


