### Accession
PXD030478

### Title
Heterotopic ossification vs. fracture healing

### Description
Extracellular vesicle cargo proteins shed new light on bone formation  healing: Extracellular vesicle cargo proteins shed new light on bone formation

### Sample Protocol
Vesicle membranes were lysed by sonication, proteins precipitated by acetone and resuspended in urea. For LC/MS analysis protein pools processed (alkylation with iodoacetamide in urea/digestion by trypsine) in 10-kDa centrifugal filter units. Obtained peptides purified using Stage tips. Peptides separated on a 15 cm C18 nano-column by HPLC (Ultimate 3000) and injected to an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is an extremely rare disease in which bone tissue forms in extraskeletal sites, which is known as heterotopic ossification (HO). Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small phospholipid-enclosed particles released by various cells which have an emerging, but not completely understood role in various (patho)physiological processes. In order to further study the pathophysiology of FOP we conducted a small observational study comparing the proteomic profiles of EV cargo, derived from pooled plasma of four patient groups: FOP patient (<i>N</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;1) during active disease phase (flare-up), FOP patients during remission (<i>N</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;2), patients after long bone fracture (<i>N</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;20) and healthy controls (<i>N</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;10). After isolation of EVs - their protein cargo was determined using liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry, after which a functional gene enrichment analysis was performed. Our results show a sizeable difference of the proteomics profiles in which EVs from the bone fracture group show significant activity of integrin interactions, Wnt, VEGF, IGF-1 and PDGF pathways; conversely, FOP patients' EVs indicate that HO occurs via processes of innate immunity and the Ephrin B signaling pathway. We hypothesize that the Ephrin B signaling (expressed in EVs) contributes to HO by aiding in mesenchymal stem cell recruitment and osteogenic differentiation, as well as by contributing to the inflammatory response, including macrophage chemotaxis and activation. This is, to our knowledge, the first published analysis of EV protein cargo in FOP.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicle, Ossification

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Ruđer Novak

### Lab Head
Dr Lovorka Grgurevic
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb


