### Accession
PXD025106

### Title
Silver binding proteins in S. aureus

### Description
The rapid emergence of drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), in particular, methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) poses a serious threat to public health globally. Reuse of metal-based antimicrobials stands for one of the most promising strategies to resensitize drug resistant bacteria to conventional antibiotics. Silver (Ag) has been used as an antimicrobial agent since antiquity, yet its molecular mechanism of action is elusive largely owing to technical challenges to identify the direct silver-binding protein targets accountable for its action. Herein, using an in-house developed hyphenated technique LC-GE-ICP-MS, we successfully separated and identified 38 authentic Ag+-binding proteins (Ag+-proteome) in S. aureus at the whole-cell scale for the first time. By integration with bioinformatic analysis and systematic biochemical characterizations, we captured the first snapshot on the dynamic action of Ag+ against S. aureus at the molecular level, i.e., Ag+ primarily targets glycolysis via inhibiting multiple enzymes and induces the elevation of ROS through functional disruption of redox homeostasis system at the late stage, leading to an upregulation of oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (oxPPP) to alleviate Ag+ stress. However, the activation of oxPPP is ultimately futile due to key oxPPP enzymes being inhibited by Ag+. We further validated that Ag+ could inhibit 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, a key target from oxPPP through binding to His185 at the active site and morphing the shape of catalytic pocket by X-ray crystallography. Significantly, the multi-target mode of action of silver is accountable for its suppression of antibiotic selection effects towards S. aureus as well as its sustainable antimicrobial activity. Such a unique mode of action of Ag+ (and silver nanoparticles) led to enhanced efficacy of a broad range of antibiotics and resensitization of MRSA to antibiotics. Our study resolves the long-standing question of the molecular targets of silver in S. aureus and offers a novel insight into the sustainable bacterial susceptibility of silver, providing a potential approach for combating antimicrobial resistance.

### Sample Protocol
The destained gel pieces were first were rinsed with MilliQ water, 50% acetonitrile (ACN), then by 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with 100% ACN. The gel plugs were rehydrated with 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) with volume that was sufficient to cover the gel pieces (e.g., ~ 50 μL) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After incubation for 16 hrs at 37°C, the peptides were extracted twice using 5% formic acid (FA)/50% ACN and then extracted once with 100% ACN. After drying in a SpeedVac concentrator (Eppendorf), the peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA, and purified using μC-18 Ziptips (Millipore). The desalted peptides were then mixed in a 1:1 ratio with 10 mg/mL α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (Fluka) dissolved in 0.1% FA/50% ACN.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and characterization was performed using the 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (ABSciex) which was equipped with a Nd:YAG laser that operates at 355 nm to ionize the samples. All mass spectra were acquired in positive ion Reflector mode using the 4000 Series Explorer version 3.5.28193 software (ABSciex). Before each job run, the MS and the MS/MS were calibrated using the peptide calibration standard, 4700 Cal-Mix (ABSciex), which was spotted across 13 locations on the MALDI target plate. Characteristic spectra were attained by averaging 500 acquisitions in Reflector mode and in MSMS mode with the smallest amount possible laser energy to keep the best resolution. Precursor ions with a charge state of 1+ were fragmented through Post-source Decay (PSD). First, each sample was analyzed with MALDI-TOF MS to create the PMF data (Scanning range: 900-4000 m/z). Next the five most abundant peptides (precursors) that were not on exclusion list were chosen for advance fragmentation (MALDI-TOF/TOF) analysis to make the full scan mass spectrum. For PMF, the peak detection criteria used were a minimum S/N of 5, a local noise window width mass/charge (m/z) of 250 and a minimum full-width half maximum (bins) of 2.9. The following monoisotopic precursor selection criteria were used for MSMS: minimum S/N filter of 20, excluding the most observed peptide peaks for trypsin and keratin, and excluding the precursors within 200 resolution. The peak detection criteria for MSMS used were an S/N of 5 and a local noise window width of 250 (m/z) and a minimum full-width half maximum (bins) of 2.9. The combined PMF and MS/MS search was then performed using GPS Explorer algorithm version 3.6 (ABSciex) against the non-redundant NCBInr database using the in-house MASCOT search engine version 2.2. MASCOT search analysis settings were as follow: Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: oxidation (M) MSMS fragment tolerance: 0.2 Da; precursor tolerance: 75 ppm, Peptide charge: +1; Monoisotopic. In a [PMF+MS/MS] analysis, Protein Score was a combination of PMF-type protein score and total ion score. The criteria for protein identification were based on the probability score of each search result. Significant matches had scores greater than the minimum threshold set by MASCOT (with P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The rapid emergence of drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) poses a serious threat to public health globally. Silver (Ag)-based antimicrobials are promising to combat antibiotic resistant S. aureus, yet their molecular targets are largely elusive. Herein, we separate and identify 38 authentic Ag<sup>+</sup>-binding proteins in S. aureus at the whole-cell scale. We then capture the molecular snapshot on the dynamic action of Ag<sup>+</sup> against S. aureus and further validate that Ag<sup>+</sup> could inhibit a key target 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase through binding to catalytic His185 by X-ray crystallography. Significantly, the multi-target mode of action of Ag<sup>+</sup> (and nanosilver) endows its sustainable antimicrobial efficacy, leading to enhanced efficacy of conventional antibiotics and resensitization of MRSA to antibiotics. Our study resolves the long-standing question of the molecular targets of silver in S. aureus and offers insights into the sustainable bacterial susceptibility of silver, providing a potential approach for combating antimicrobial resistance.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Silver-binding protein

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Haibo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hongzhe Sun
Department of Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong


