### Accession
PXD000857

### Title
29RNP phosphorylation site -  Identification and characterization of chloroplast casein kinase II from Oryza sativa (rice)

### Description
Identfication 29RNP phosphorylation site by rice chloroplast CK2 alpha.

### Sample Protocol
For identification the RNP phosphorylation site, the phosphorylation reaction was performed in vitro as mentioned before. Then the RNP protein were loaded to SDS PAGE and stained. The band of RNP were cut and in-gel digested by trypsin. The phosphorylation peptides were enriched by Magnetic TiO2 beads (Thermo Scientific. USA).  Dried peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN and 0.3% formic acid and analyzed on a LTQ-Oribtrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a nanoelectropspray ion source. Peptides were separated with an Eksigent nano LC system (Eksigent Technologies), equipped with an 12-cm fused silica emitter (75μm i.d.) packed with a reversed phase C18 resin (3-μm particles, 120-Å pore size, SunChrom, Friedrichsdorf, Germany). The flow rate was 600 nl/min. The peptide mixture was separated and eluted by a gradient from 5 to 65 % ACN over 1 h followed by an increase up to 80% during an additional 7 min. Nano-ESI was accomplished with a spray voltage of 2.5 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 230 °C. A cycle of one full-scan mass spectrum (400–2000 m/z) followed by five data-dependent MS/MS spectra was repeated continuously. All MS/MS spectra were acquired using the following parameters: normalized collision energy, 35%; ion selection threshold, 1e5 counts. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. The application of mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by an XCalibur data system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were search against the Rice database containing common contaminants such as keratin using MASCOT 2.4 (Matrix Science). The fixed modification was set to carbamylation of Cys residues and the variable modifications were set to oxidation of Met and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr. With MASCOT, database searches were restricted to tryptic peptides missing maximal one cleavage site and protein C- and N-terminal peptides, allowing for 2+ and 3+ charged peptides a parent mass error tolerance of 5 ppm and a daughter ion error tolerance of 0.6 D.  Identifications were accepted with a MASCOT ion score of 40 or greater and a MASCOT expect value of less than 0.01. The identified phosphor-peptides was also analyzed by PhosCalc based on software manual(MacLean et al., 2008).

### Publication Abstract
Plastid casein kinase II is an important regulator of transcription, posttranscriptional processes, and, most likely, different metabolic functions in dicotyledonous species. Here we report the identification and characterization of pCKII from the monocotyledonous species Oryza sativa. OspCKII activity was enriched from isolated rice chloroplasts using heparin-Sepharose chromatography, in which it co-elutes with the transcriptionally active chromosome (TAC) and several ribosomal proteins. Inclusion mass scanning of the kinase-active fraction identified the gene model for OspCKII. Transient expression of GFP fused to the 184 N-terminal amino acids of the OspCKII sequence in rice confirmed the chloroplastic localization of the kinase. OspCKII activity shows the characteristic features of casein kinase II, such as the utilization of GTP as phosphate donor, inhibition by low concentrations of heparin and poly-lysine, and utilization of the canonical pCKII motif E-S-E-G-E in the model substrate RNP29. Phosphoproteome analysis of a protein extract from rice leaves combined with a meta-analysis with published phosphoproteomics data revealed differences in the target protein spectrum between rice and Arabidopsis. Consistently, several pCKII phosphorylation sites in dicotyledonous plants are not conserved in monocots and algae, suggesting that details of pCKII regulation in plastids have changed during evolution.

### Keywords
29rnp, Phosphorylation site

### Affiliations
Ph.D

### Submitter
Qingtao Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lu Qingtao
Ph.D


