### Accession
PXD007755

### Title
Proteomic profiling of rhabdomyosarcoma-derived exosomes yield functional role for extracellular vesicles

### Description
In this study, we interrogated the protein composition of exosomes purified from cell culture supernatants of 5 different RMS cell lines, by LC-MS/MS technology and analysis using bio-informatics tools. We attempted to characterize the differences and similarities between exosomes derived from ERMS and ARMS cells, and common as well as unique characteristics of RMS exosome protein content when compared to that of other cancer and non-cancer cells.  Our results identify potential protein exosome biomarkers for RMS to be further investigated in future clinical studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were incubated in 150 mm plates in exosome-free medium for 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2. The conditioned media were collected and exosomes isolated by differential centrifugation as previously described. Briefly, the collected conditioned medium was centrifuged at 4°C at 300 × g for 10 min, 2,000 × g for 20 min and 10,000 × g for 30 min. The resulting supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 4°C at 100,000 × g for 70 min. After each step, the pellet was discarded and the supernatant was used for the following step. The resulting pellet was washed in PBS and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 × g for 70 min at 4°C. Finally, PBS or lysis buffer was added to the pellet for protein extraction.  To prepare exosome-free medium, complete medium supplemented with 20% FBS was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g overnight at 4°C to effectively deplete exosomes. The resulting supernatant was filtered with 0.22 μm filter (Millipore), and diluted 1:1 in FBS-free medium to reach 10% FBS concentration. Cells and exosomes were lysed using CHAPS lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 1% CHAPS) mixed with 25X protease inhibitor (Roche), and sonicated. Extracted proteins were first cleaned up and digested using FASP method. Aliquots were diluted 10 folds by adding 8M urea solution, loaded into nominal molecular weight cutoff of 3,000 filtration devices and centrifuged at 14, 000 g for 15 min. The concentrated samples were diluted with 300 µl of 8M urea solution and centrifuged again. This step was then repeated twice. After centrifugation, 8M urea solution was added to the concentrates to make the final volume 200 µl. Then, disulfide bridges were reduced by addition of 5 µl of 200mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and the mixture were incubated at 60 ˚C for 45 min. Reduced sulfide was further alkylated by adding 20 µl of 200mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and 45-min incubation at 37.5 ˚C. Following a centrifugation, the concentrates were diluted with 300 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and concentrate again. This step was repeated for additional 2 times and followed by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to make volume 200 µl. A portion of the reduced and alkylated proteins were separated from each sample for BCA protein assay. The rest of proteins were digested by Trypsin. Typsin/Lys C Mix (Promega) was added at a ratio of 1:25 (enzyme to protein, w/w) and the mixture was incubated at 37.5 ˚C for 18 h. Finally, peptides were collected by centrifugation followed by 2 additional 300 µl washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Collected follow-through was dried and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Analysis was performed on a Dionex 300 Ultimate nano-LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced to a ESI equipped LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Aliquots of 1 µg tryptic digests was injected and first purified on-line using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 guard column (3 µm, 100 Å, Dionex) at a flow rate of 3 µl/min. The separation of purified peptides was achieved using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 capillary column (75 µm id × 150 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex) at 0.35 µl/min in 120 min. The LC gradient was as follow: Solvent B was kept at 5% for 0-10 min, increased from 5% to 20% for 10-65 min, 20%-30% for 65-90 min, 30-50% for 90-110 min, 50%-80% for 110-111 min, 80% for 111-115 min, decreased from 80% to 5% for 115-116 min and maintained at 5% over 4 min. Solvent B contained 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, while solvent A was 2% ACN and 0.1% FA in water.  The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was set to perform two scan events in data dependent acquisition mode. The first scan was a full MS scan of m/z 400-2000 at a mass resolution of 15,000. The second scan event was a CID MS/MS repeated on top 10 intense ions selected from the first scan event with an isolation window of m/z 3.0. The normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation Q value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms. The dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 seconds and exclusion duration of 90 seconds. Results acquired from untargeted quantitative analysis was confirmed by multiple reactions monitoring (MRM) experiment. The transition list was generated using Pinpoint (Thermo Scientific) as previously described. In total, 45 common proteins in RD, Rh36 and JR1, with 88 peptides and 264 transitions were finally selected for the MRM experiment. Aliquots of 1.5 µg of peptides were injected. The MRM experiment was run with chromatogram filter peak width as 10.0 s and collision gas pressure as 1.5 mTorr. In the SRM setting, Q1 peak width (full width at half maximum) was set as 0.70 Da and cycle time was set as 6.0 s. The collision energy (CE) for each targeted peptide is predicted by Pinpoint using following equations:  CE(+2)=0.034×m/z+3.314(eV),CE(+3)=0.044×m/z+3.314(eV).

### Data Protocol
The raw files aquired from LC-MS/MS analysis were converted to mascot generic format (*.mgf) files using Proteome Discover version 1.2 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The *.mgf files were subjected to MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA) and searched against UniProt database (Homo sapiens, 20214 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Peptides were matched with tolerence of 6 ppm and 0.8 Da for  precusor ions and fragments, respectively. Enzyme was specified as trypsin and a maxinum of 2 miscleavage was allowed. MASCOT searching results were then uploaded to Scaffold (version 3.6.3, Proteome Software, Portland, OR) for verification and quantification. identifications considered for quantification were selected using following parameters: Peptide threshold = 95%, protein thresholds = 99% and the minimum number of identified peptides for a protein was 2.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are important intercellular communication vehicles, secreted into body fluids by multiple cell types, including tumor cells. They have been demonstrated to contribute to the metastatic progression of tumor cells through paracrine signaling. Tumor exosomes contain intact and functional proteins, mRNA and miRNA that may alter the cellular environment to favor tumor growth. We evaluated the protein cargo of exosomes derived from the childhood tumor rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) and the molecular pathways they are implicated in to decipher their role in the progression of this aggressive disease. We conducted a mass spectrometry analysis of exosome content isolated from five RMS cell lines: three of embryonal RMS (ERMS) and two of alveolar RMS (ARMS) histology and verified results by multiple reaction monitoring and western blot analyses. Results revealed 161 common proteins in ERMS-derived exosomes and 122 common proteins in ARMS-derived exosomes, of which 81 proteins were common to both subtypes. Using both PANTHER gene classification and Pathway Studio software, we assessed the perturbed biological processes and altered pathways in which the exosomal proteins are involved. The 81 commonly expressed proteins included those involved in "cell-signaling," "cell-movement," and "cancer." Pathways engaging the identified proteins revealed 37 common pathways including "integrin signaling pathway," "inflammation mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathway," and "angiogenesis." Finally, a comparison of exosomal proteins of RMS cells with publicly available datasets from other cancer cells revealed that 36 proteins are specific and endogenous to the RMS-exosomes. Taken together, our results reveal that RMS-derived exosomes carry a protein cargo that contributes to conserved cellular signaling networks across multiple cell lines, and we also identify RMS exosome-specific proteins that should be further evaluated as possible novel biomarkers for this tumor.

### Keywords
Pathways, Proteomics, Rhabdomyosarcoma, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Jingfu Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia S Mechref
Texas Tech University


