### Accession
PXD005736

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Human Cardiac Organoids

### Description
The mammalian heart undergoes major transitions during postnatal life to acquire the physiological properties of an adult organ. Postnatal life imposes numerous adaptations including electrophysiological, structural and metabolic maturation of cardiomyocytes1, which occur coincident with loss of proliferative capacity and regenerative potential2,3. The discovery of key upstream drivers of cardiomyocyte maturation and cell cycle arrest remains one of the most important unanswered questions in cardiac biology. Discovery of these drivers would facilitate current attempts to promote cardiomyocyte maturation in vitro for drug discovery and to de-differentiate adult cardiomyocytes in vivo for regenerative medicine.   A recent study has suggested that the shift from a low oxygen environment in utero towards a high oxygen environment after birth acts as a key trigger for cardiomyocyte cell cycle exit4. Moreover, it was recently demonstrated that proliferative adult cardiomyocytes reside in a hypoxic niche5 and that exposure of adult mice to gradual hypoxemia is sufficient to drive cell cycle re-entry and regeneration following infarction6. However, it is currently unclear whether postnatal changes in oxygen tension or the associated shifts in cardiomyocyte metabolism are sufficient to promote maturation and cell cycle arrest as human pluripotent stem cell (hPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes fail to mature when cultured at 21% oxygen7,8.   There are considerable changes in metabolic substrate provision during early postnatal life. The mammalian heart relies on high concentrations of carbohydrates and the presence of insulin in utero but later switches to fatty acid dominated substrates present in milk and low insulin levels post-birth9. In order to adapt to these changes in substrates, cardiomyocytes upregulate the genes required for fatty acid oxidation after birth10. The importance of these metabolic adaptations for cardiomyocyte maturation has been difficult to study because genetic disruption of fatty acid oxidation components in vivo can have a broad range of negative health impacts11. Therefore, there is a need to develop alternative approaches for studying the impact of cardiomyocyte metabolism on the maturation process.   hPSCs are now widely used for the generation of defined human somatic cell types, including cardiomyocytes. These cardiomyocytes have now been used extensively for developmental studies, drug screening, disease modeling, and heart repair. However, lack of maturity and inappropriate responses to pharmacological agents have been identified as limitations in 2D or embryoid body based differentiation strategies12. To improve maturity of hPSC-derived cardiomyocytes, long-term culture can be used13, although long-term cultures may not be amenable to high-throughput screening applications and adult-like maturity is still not achieved14. In an effort to better simulate heart muscle structure and function, cardiac tissue engineering to form 3D engineered heart tissue has been used15-19. However, despite these recent advances in human cardiac tissue engineering, cardiac tissues derived from hPSC still lack many features of fully mature adult heart tissue20. Moreover, engineered heart tissue fabrication, culture, mechanical loading and pacing protocols, and analysis methods using organ baths are costly, labor intensive, and the multiple handling steps induce variability.  In order to facilitate higher-throughput experiments, platforms for engineered heart tissue production have been miniaturized, however, screening experiments using semi-automated force of contraction analyses have only been published in 24-well plate formats21. Therefore, we developed a novel 96-well device, the heart dynamometer (Heart-Dyno), for high-throughput functional screening of human cardiac organoids (hCOs) to facilitate screening on a larger scale. The Heart-Dyno is designed to facilitate automated formation of dense muscle bundles from minimal cells and reagents while also facilitating culture and automated force of contraction analysis without any tissue handling.    Using the Heart-Dyno, we define serum-free 3D culture conditions that promote structural, electrophysiological, metabolic and proliferative maturation of hPSC-derived cardiac organoids. Furthermore, we uncover a metabolic mechanism governing cardiomyocyte cell cycle arrest through repression of a β-catenin and YAP1 dependent signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Nine hCO from either CTRL medium or MM conditions were pooled per replicate and washed 2X in PBS. The human adult heart sample was obtained from a healthy 49 year old female and snap frozen under ethical approval from The University of Sydney (2012/2814).Tissues were lysed in by tip-probe sonication in 6 M guandinium chloride, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95°C for 5 min. The samples were cooled to 4°C and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water followed by protein precipitation with 4 volumes of acetone. Protein pellets were washed with 80% acetone and resuspended in 10% trifluoroethanol, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0. Protein was quantified by BCA and 50 µg digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako Chemicals) for 2 h at 37°C followed by 1 µg trypsin (Sigma) for 16 h at 37°C. Digests were diluted with 4 volumes of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 microcolumns packed with POROS Oligo R2/R3 reversed-phase particles (20 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were quantified by Qubit fluorescence and 1 µg aliquots were removed for direct analysis by LC-MS/MS. A second aliquot of peptides were removed from each of the hCO samples (totaling 30 µg) and pooled for fractionation. Peptides from pooled hCO and myocardial tissue were fractionated on an 320 µm x 30 cm in-house packed C18 µHPLC column (3 µm BEH, Waters) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC. The gradient was 0-40% Buffer B over 60 min with 2 min fractions collected followed by concatenation into 12 fractions for analysis by LC-MS/MS (Buffer A = 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.9, Buffer B = 90% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3500RS coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus with Tune v2.4.1824 in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch) with a gradient of 2 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 300 – 1500 m/z (70,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the 20 most intense ions with HCD (17,500 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 60 ms injection time, 27 NCE, 1.2 m/z isolation width). Raw data was searched with Andromeda51 in MaxQuant v1.5.3.3052 against the human UniProt database (January 2016) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. Label-free quantification 53 was enabled including the “match between runs” option where single-shot replicates of the hCO were matched into the pooled fractionated sample. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus54 and included a two-sample t-test corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR. Only proteins quantified in all biological replicates were included in the final analysis and significance was calculated based on q<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian heart undergoes maturation during postnatal life to meet the increased functional requirements of an adult. However, the key drivers of this process remain poorly defined. We are currently unable to recapitulate postnatal maturation in human pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hPSC-CMs), limiting their potential as a model system to discover regenerative therapeutics. Here, we provide a summary of our studies, where we developed a 96-well device for functional screening in human pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiac organoids (hCOs). Through interrogation of &gt;10,000 organoids, we systematically optimize parameters, including extracellular matrix (ECM), metabolic substrate, and growth factor conditions, that enhance cardiac tissue viability, function, and maturation. Under optimized maturation conditions, functional and molecular characterization revealed that a switch to fatty acid metabolism was a central driver of cardiac maturation. Under these conditions, hPSC-CMs were refractory to mitogenic stimuli, and we found that key proliferation pathways including &#x3b2;-catenin and Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) were repressed. This proliferative barrier imposed by fatty acid metabolism in hCOs could be rescued by simultaneous activation of both &#x3b2;-catenin and YAP1 using genetic approaches or a small molecule activating both pathways. These studies highlight that human organoids coupled with higher-throughput screening platforms have the potential to rapidly expand our knowledge of human biology and potentially unlock therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Yap1, Β-catenin, Tissue engineering, Cell cycle, Cardiomyocyte maturation, Insulin signalling, Metabolism, Cardiac organoid

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia 4072, Queensland, Australia.

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr James Hudson
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia 4072, Queensland, Australia.


