### Accession
PXD021682

### Title
N-glycomic signature of stage II colorectal cancer and its association with the tumor microenvironment

### Description
The choice for adjuvant chemotherapy in stage II colorectal cancer (CRC) is controversial as many patients are cured by surgery alone and it is difficult to identify patients with high-risk of recurrence of the disease. There is a need for better stratification of this group of patients. Mass spectrometry imaging could identify patients at risk. We report here the N-glycosylation signatures of the different cell populations in a group of stage II CRC tissue samples.

### Sample Protocol
For identification by MS/MS analysis, FFPE tissue blocks were sectioned with a microtome Leica (Leica Biosystems RM2245 Microtome, Amsterdam, Netherlands) at 6 µm thickness. Tissues sections were mounted in pairs onto poly-L-lysine-coated indium tin oxide (ITO) slides (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Prior to tissue mounting, ITO slides were cleaned in 70% ethanol for 10 min and coated with a 0.05% poly-L-lysine solution in mQ. All sections were dried overnight at 37°C, stored at 4°C and then prepared following the procedure by Holst et al. [24]. In brief, paraffin was removed by heating the slides 1 h at 65°C followed by two consecutive washes in xylene (10 min and 5 min respectively). Tissues were rehydrated in ethanol baths (100% ethanol, twice for 2 min), followed by water baths (twice for 5 min) and dried for 10 min in a vacuum desiccator. Release N-glycans were then extracted and derivatized according to previously described methods [olst, S., Heijs, B., de Haan, N., van Zeijl, R.J.M., Briaire-de Bruijn, I.H., van Pelt, G.W., Mehta, A.S., Angel, P.M., Mesker, W.E., Tollenaar, R.A., Drake, R.R., Bovée, J.V.M.G., McDonnell, L.A., and Wuhrer, M. (2016) Linkage-Specific in Situ Sialic Acid Derivatization for N-Glycan Mass Spectrometry Imaging of Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded Tissues. Anal. Chem. 88(11): p. 5904-5913. ]. Dried samples were co-crystallized with sDHB matrix (5 mg/mL in 50% ACN,  1mM NaOH). Spectra were recorded using the rapifleXTM mass spectrometer and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed for glycan identification

### Data Protocol
The total ion current-normalized (TIC) overall average spectrum of the full dataset was exported to .csv-format from SCiLS Lab, and loaded in the open-source software mMass (http://www.mmass.org). The average spectrum was processed in mMass using the following parameters: Baseline subtraction with 15 precision and 25 relative offset; smoothing with Savitsky-Golay smoothing, window size: 0.05 m/z and 4 cycles; internally recalibration Peak picking was performed with a signal-to-noise (S/N) threshold of 3 (S/N ≥ 3) followed by deisotoping (maximum charge: 1, isotope mass tolerance: 0.15 m/z, isotope intensity tolerance: 50%). N-glycan compositions were assigned using the Glyco-Peakfinder tool in GlycoWorkbench (version 2.1 stable build 146, http://www.eurocarbdb.org/) as well as MS/MS data. The assigned N-glycan compositions were used in the “composition list” for MassyTools, a data processing tool for targeted high-throughput N-glycan MALDI-MS data extraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycomic, Mass spectrometry imaging, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Center of Proteomics & Metabolomics, Imaging group
PhD 

### Submitter
Fanny Boyaval

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Heijs
Leiden University Medical Center, Center of Proteomics & Metabolomics, Imaging group


