### Accession
PXD035880

### Title
Transcriptomic and proteomic landscape of mitochondrial dysfunction reveals secondary coenzyme Q deficiency in mammals

### Description
Abstract Dysfunction of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system is a major cause of human disease and the cellular consequences are highly complex. Here, we present comparative analyses of mitochondrial proteomes, cellular transcriptomes and targeted metabolomics of five knockout mouse strains deficient in essential factors required for mitochondrial DNA gene expression, leading to OXPHOS dysfunction. Moreover, we describe sequential protein changes during post-natal development and progressive OXPHOS dysfunction in time course analyses in control mice and a middle lifespan knockout, respectively. Very unexpectedly, we identify a new response pathway to OXPHOS dysfunction in which the intra-mitochondrial synthesis of coenzyme Q (ubiquinone, Q) and Q levels are profoundly decreased, pointing towards novel possibilities for therapy. Our extensive omics analyses provide a high-quality resource of altered gene expression patterns under severe OXPHOS deficiency comparing several mouse models, that will deepen our understanding, open avenues for research and provide an important reference for diagnosis and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Ultrapure mitochondria isolation, peptide digestion and clean up for label-free mass spectrometry Mitochondria were isolated from mouse hearts using differential centrifugation as previously reported (Ku¨hl et al., 2016). Crude mitochondrial pellets were washed in 1xM buffer (220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 5 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 mM EGTA pH 7.4; pH was adjusted with potassium hydroxide; supplemented with EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP Tablets (Roche, Germany)) and purified on a Percoll density gradient (12%:19%:40% prepared with buffer 2xM) via centrifugation in a SW41 rotor at 15500 rpm at 4°C for 1 hr in a Beckman Coulter Optima L-100 XP ultracentrifuge using 14 mm 89 mm Ultra-Clear Centrifuge Tubes (Beckman Instruments Inc., Germany). Mitochondria were harvested at the interphase between 19% and 40%, washed three times with buffer 1xM and mitochondrial pellets were frozen at 80°C. Purified frozen mitochondria pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM Tris(2-carbox-yethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl) (Kulak et al.,2014). After complete lysis, samples were diluted 1:10 in 20 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 and 80 mg of protein were mixed with 3 mg of Trypsin gold (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C to achieve complete digestion. Peptides were cleaned with home-made STAGEtips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) (Empore Octadecyl C18; 3M, Germany) and eluted in 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid buffer. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac apparatus (Eppendorf concentrator plus 5305) at 45°C and the peptides were suspended with 0.1% formic acid. Approximately 1.5 mg of peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. All the samples of either the proteomic comparison of end-stage knockouts or of the temporal proteomic analysis of Lrpprc knockouts were prepared at the same time by the same person. LC-MS/MS analysis For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 mm internal diameter Pico-Frit analytical column (New Objective, Part No. PF7508250) packed with 1.9 mm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch, Mat. No. r119.aq) using an EASY-nLC 1000 or EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. For the analysis using the EASY-nLC 1200 system, buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 2% to 5% buffer B for 10 min, from 5% to 20% buffer B for 100 min, from 20% to 25% buffer B for 10 min, and from 25% to 45% buffer B for 10 min at 200 nl / min (EASY-nLC 1000). Using the EASY-nLC 1200 system, peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 3% to 6% buffer B for 10 min, from 6% to 25% buffer B for 100 min, from 25% to 31% buffer B for 10 min, and from 31% to 60% buffer B for 10 min, at 200 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor mass to charge ratio (m/z) measurements (MS1) were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD frag mentation using 25% collision energy. The m/z of the peptide fragments (MS2) were measured at 30000 resolution using an AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation precursors were put on an exclusion list for 45 s. Peptides from the five knockout strains were analyzed in two runs and Polrmt knockout was used to control for the variability within runs. The time course analysis on Lrpprc knockout was performed in a single run.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 (RRID:SCR_014485; Cox and Mann, 2008) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the mouse reference proteome (proteome ID UP000000589, August 2015 from UniProt). The database was complemented with 245 sequences of contaminating proteins by MaxQuant. For the analysis methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The digestion parameters were set to ‘specific’ and ‘Trypsin/P,’ allowing for cleavage after lysine and arginine also when followed by proline. The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The ‘second peptide’ option was on to identify co-fragmented peptides. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the ‘Match between runs’ option, using a match time window of 0.7 min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. Protein quantification analysis Analysis of the label-free quantification (LFQ) results was done using the Perseus computation platform (Tyanova et al., 2016), version 1.5.0.0 and R, version 3.3.0 (R Core Team, 2010). For the analysis, LFQ intensity values were loaded in Perseus and all identified proteins marked as ‘Reverse’, ‘Only identified by site’, and ‘Potential contaminant’ were removed. The corresponding L/L and the L/L, cre genotypes were loaded separately in Perseus, the LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and all proteins that contained less than two to five missing values in one of the groups (L/L or L/L, cre) were removed (Supplementary file 1). Missing values in the resulting subset of proteins were imputed with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Imputed LFQ intensities were loaded into R where a two-sided moderated t-test analysis was performed using limma, version 3.30.13 (Ritchie et al., 2015). Proteins with an adjusted p value (‘BH’ correction) of less than 0.05 were designated as differentially expressed. Our list of differentially expressed proteins was combined with annotations from MitoCarta2.0 (Calvo et al., 2016). The first of the semicolon separated entries in the ‘Gene names’ column was used to merge annotations through the ‘Symbol’ or ‘Synonyms’ columns of the Mouse.MitoCarta2.0.txt file. For protein entries that lacked a ‘Gene names’ entry, gene name information was retrieved using UniProt.ws, version 2.14 (Carlson, 2017). Using the principles of the ‘Total Protein approach’ (Wis´niewski et al., 2014), the LFQ intensity values were used to calculate the contribution of all mitochondrial proteins, according to MitoCarta2.0, to the total protein mass. Log2 transformed LFQ intensity and fold changes were used to generate density ad MA-plots plots. The mean LFQ value of controls was used to generate MA-plots. Mouse MitoCarta2 protein sequences (Mouse.MitoCarta2.0.fasta) were downloaded from https://www.broadinstitute.org/scientific-community/science/programs/metabolic-disease-program/publica-tions/mitocarta/mitocarta-in-0. Mitochondrial proteins were manually placed in functional categories based on literature and Uniprot (The UniProt Consortium, 2017). For the L/L comparison across different time points, MaxQuant’s proteinGroups.txt file was combined with annotations from MitoCarta2.0 (Calvo et al.,2016) as described above. The MitoCarta annotated data were imported into Perseus and filtered for at least nine valid LFQ intensity values across all samples (26 in total). Only proteins annotated as mitochondrial, according to the ‘MitoCarta2_List’ column, were kept for analysis. Missing values were imputed as described above. Limma’s F-statistic was used to detect proteins with significant differences in protein expression across the time points. Testing was performed after the data were grouped per week (nine week groups in total). The fold changes of the average LFQ intensity for all time points, relative to week three were calculated, scaled and z-score normalized in R. Hierarchical clustering of the normalized data was performed with pheatmap, version 1.0.8 (Kolde, 2015), using Euclidean distance as a metric. The rows (proteins) dendrogram was cut into to ten clusters and proteins, which partitioned into the four main clusters were used. Profiles plots of the normalized fold change values were color-coded using the distance of each profile from the cluster center (mean value). For the Lrpprc knockout time course analysis data were imported into Perseus, filtered for at least 23 valid LFQ intensity values across all samples (46 in total), and missing values were imputed as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Dysfunction of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system is a major cause of human disease and the cellular consequences are highly complex. Here, we present comparative analyses of mitochondrial proteomes, cellular transcriptomes and targeted metabolomics of five knockout mouse strains deficient in essential factors required for mitochondrial DNA gene expression, leading to OXPHOS dysfunction. Moreover, we describe sequential protein changes during post-natal development and progressive OXPHOS dysfunction in time course analyses in control mice and a middle lifespan knockout, respectively. Very unexpectedly, we identify a new response pathway to OXPHOS dysfunction in which the intra-mitochondrial synthesis of coenzyme Q (ubiquinone, Q) and Q levels are profoundly decreased, pointing towards novel possibilities for therapy. Our extensive omics analyses provide a high-quality resource of altered gene expression patterns under severe OXPHOS deficiency comparing several mouse models, that will deepen our understanding, open avenues for research and provide an important reference for diagnosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Lfq, Coenzyme q

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


