### Accession
PXD037899

### Title
Cellular determinants of targeted membrane protein degradation by lysosome targeting chimeras

### Description
Targeted protein degradation is a powerful therapeutic strategy that offers benefits over canonical target inhibition. Lysosome targeting chimeras (LYTACs) harness lysosome trafficking receptors such as the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor (CI-M6PR) to direct secreted and membrane proteins to lysosomes. Their development as therapeutics would benefit from mechanistic insights into the factors that govern their activity. We conducted a genome-wide CRISPR screen to identify modulators of LYTAC-mediated membrane protein degradation. Disrupting retromer genes improved LYTAC-induced degradation by reducing the recycling of LYTAC-CI-M6PR complexes from endosomes to the plasma membrane. We identified neddylated cullin 3 as a predictive marker for LYTAC efficacy. Quantitative proteomics revealed that a significant fraction of cell-surface CI-M6PR remains occupied by endogenous M6P-modified glycoproteins. Accordingly, disruption of M6P biosynthesis enhanced the internalization of LYTAC-target complexes. Our findings inform new design strategies for LYTACs with enhanced degradation activity and elucidate the biology of CI-M6PR with implications for enzyme replacement therapies.

### Sample Protocol
UMRC2 cells were plated (375,000 cells/well in a 6-well plate) one day before the experiment. Cells were incubated with 1500 µl l of complete growth media with PBS (control), 10 nM Gir, or 10 nM Gir-M6Pn for 48 hours, with all conditions performed in triplicate. Cells were then washed with PBS and lysed with RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 0.1% Benzonase (Millipore-Sigma), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling Technologies) on ice for 30 minutes. The cells were scraped, transferred to Eppendorf tubes, and spun down at 21,000g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Pierce), and approximately 30 μg of total protein from each sample was processed for quantitative bottom-up proteomics using an micro S-trap (Protifi) protocol as follows. The concentration of SDS was brough to 5% SDS and disulfide bonds were reduced by heating samples to 95 °C for 10 minutes following addition of 5 mM DTT. After cooling down to room temperature for 3 min, reduced cysteine residues were alkylated by incubating in 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, A3221) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were then acidified with phosphoric acid at a final concentration of 1.2% and vortexed. Bind/wash buffer (100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) in 90% methanol) was then added to each sample (7x the final volume after acidification). 150 μl of each sample were loaded onto micro S-trap columns and spun down at 4000 g for 20 s. Flow-through was discarded, and the centrifugation step was repeated until all the solution passed through the column. Following three washes with 150ul bind/wash buffer, trypsin (Promega, V5113) in 50 mM TEAB solution was added to the S-trap at a 1:25 protease:protein ratio and incubated at 47 °C for 90 min. After trypsinization, peptides were eluted from the S-trap with 40 μl 50 mM TEAB, 40 μl 0.2% formic acid, and 40 μl 50% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid by spinning down at 1,000g for 60 s for each elution step. All elution steps were collected in the same tube for a give sample and the total peptide mixtures were lyophilized. Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% formic acid, normalized to concentration using a Nanodrop Spectrophotomerter (Thermo Fisher, absorbance at 205 nm), and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Prior to analysis, one microliter of each sample was taken and combined into a pooled sampled that was used to make the chromatogram library discussed below.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were acquired using a spectrum-library free data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach that relies on gas-phase fractionation (GPF) to generate DIA-only chromatogram libraries (Pino et al., 2020a; Searle et al., 2018). Peptides were separated over a 25 cm Aurora Series Gen2 reverse-phase LC column (75 µm inner diameter packed with 1.6 μm FSC C18 particles, Ion Opticks). The mobile phases (A: water with 0.2% formic acid and B: acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system (Thermo Fisher). An integrated loading pump was used to load peptides onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 um particles, 20 mm length, Thermo Fisher) at 5 µl/minute, which was put in line with the analytical column 5.5 minutes into the gradient. The gradient was held at 0% B for the first 6 minutes of the analysis, followed by an increase from 0% to 5% B from 6 to 6.5 minutes, and increase from 5 to 22% B from 6.5 to 66.5 minutes, an increase from 22% to 90% from 66.5 to 71 minutes, isocratic flow at 90% B from 71 to 75 minutes, and re-equilibration at 0% B for 15 minutes for a total analysis time of 90 minutes per acquisition. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS system (Thermo Fisher). Precursors were ionized was ionized with a spray voltage held at +2.2 kV relative to ground, the RF lens was set to 60%, and the inlet capillary temperature was held at 275 °C.     Six chromatogram library files were collected through six repeated injections of the pooled sample only. Here, the instrument was configured to acquire 4 m/z precursor isolation window DIA spectra using a staggered isolation window pattern (Amodei et al., 2019) from narrow mass ranges using window placements optimized by Skyline. DIA MS/MS spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 400,000 charges, a maximum injection time of 54 ms, beam-type collisional dissociation (i.e., HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33, and a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap as a mass analyzer. The six gas-phase fractionation chromatogram libraries were collected with nominal mass ranges of 400-500 m/z, 500-600 m/z, 600-700 m/z, 700-800 m/z, 800-900 m/z, and 900-1000 m/z. The exact windowing scheme was downloaded from https://bitbucket.org/searleb/encyclopedia/wiki/Home (Pino et al., 2020a) and is available in Supplementary Information as part of this manuscript. Precursor MS1 spectra were interspersed every 25 scans with an AGC target of 400,000 charges, a maximum injection time of 55 ms, a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap as a mass analyzer, and a scan range of either 395-505 m/z, 495-605 m/z, 595-705 m/z, 695-805 m/z, 795-905 m/z, or 895-1005 m/z. For quantitative samples (i.e., the non-pooled samples) the instrument was configured to acquire 25 x 16 m/z precursor isolation window DIA spectra covering 385-1015 m/z using a staggered isolation window pattern with window placements optimized by Skyline (windowing scheme downloaded from the same link as above and available as Supplementary Information). DIA spectra were acquired with the same MS/MS settings described above. Precursor MS1 spectra were interspersed every 38 scans with a scan range of 385-1015 m/z, an AGC target of 400,000 charges, a maximum injection time of 55 ms, and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap as a mass analyzer. The detailed parameters were recorded in Supplementary Table X. To ensure chromatographic conditions were consistent between library generation and quantitative sample acquisition, GPF library runs were acquired in the middle of the set of quantitative samples described below, and the quantitative samples were collected in randomized order.  Data analysis. Staggered DIA spectra were demultiplexed from raw data into mzML files with 10 ppm accuracy using MSConvert (Adusumilli and Mallick, 2017) with settings described in Pino et al (Pino et al., 2020a). Encyclopedia (version 1.12.31) (Searle et al., 2018) was used to search demultiplexed mzML files using an internal PECAN fasta search engine called Walnut (Ting et al., 2017) and a reviewed human proteome database (canonical sequences only) from Uniprot (Consortium, 2021). Walnut settings were: fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, full tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, HCD (y-only) fragmentation, 10 ppm precursor and fragment mass tolerances, and 5 quantitative ions. The chromatogram library resulting from the Walnut search was then used for Encyclopedia searching, where all analogous settings to the Walnut search remained the same, and other settings included a library mass tolerance of 10 ppm, inclusion of both b- and y-type fragment ions, and a minimum number of quantitative ions set at 3. Percolator (version 3.1) was used to filter peptides to a 1% false discovery rate using the target/decoy approach and proteins to a 1% protein-level FDR assuming protein grouping parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation can provide advantages over inhibition approaches in the development of therapeutic strategies. Lysosome-targeting chimeras (LYTACs) harness receptors, such as the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-M6PR), to direct extracellular proteins to lysosomes. In this work, we used a genome-wide CRISPR knockout approach to identify modulators of LYTAC-mediated membrane protein degradation in human cells. We found that disrupting retromer genes improved target degradation by reducing LYTAC recycling to the plasma membrane. Neddylated cullin-3 facilitated LYTAC-complex lysosomal maturation and was a predictive marker for LYTAC efficacy. A substantial fraction of cell surface CI-M6PR remains occupied by endogenous M6P-modified glycoproteins. Thus, inhibition of M6P biosynthesis increased the internalization of LYTAC-target complexes. Our findings inform design strategies for next-generation LYTACs and elucidate aspects of cell surface receptor occupancy and trafficking.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Lysosome, Crispri, Dia, Lytac

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry and Sarafan ChEM-H

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry and Sarafan ChEM-H


