### Accession
PXD014825

### Title
Identification of cellular CDK9 substrates using an analog-sensitive cell line

### Description
Analog-sensitive kinase technology allows for specific inhibition of a given kinase. Here we utilize an analog-sensitive CDK9 cell line to determine the impact of CDK9 inhibition on the phospho-proteome of human cells. Specifically, we aim to identify substrates of CDK9 in a quantitative way using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) followed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of Whole Cell Phospho-Proteins for Mass Spectrometric Analysis  Inhibition of Analog-Sensitive CDK9 1x10^7 Raji B-cells were treated with 10 µM 1-NA-PP1 (Merck Millipore) or DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and washed once in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). 1-NA-PP1-treated cells and DMSO control cells were pooled resulting in 2x10^7 total cells per replicate. Four biological replicates of labeled, 1-NA-PP1-treated cells pooled with unlabeled, DMSO-treated cells were prepared. In addition, four corresponding label-swapped replicates were prepared, in which unlabeled cells were treated with 1-NA-PP1 and DMSO control cells were labeled with 13C15N-containing arginine and lysine. Cell Lysis and Phosphopeptide Enrichment Subsequent sample preparation was essentially based on the EasyPhos method (Humphrey et al., 2015, doi: 10.1038/nbt.3327) with modifications as follows. Pooled cells were washed once in PBS, solubilized in 400 µL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM tris pH 8.5, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich) and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Lysates were cooled on ice, sonicated (Branson Sonifier 250, 3x 10 pulses, output 5, duty cycle 50%) and heated again at 95°C for 5 min. Lysates were once more cooled on ice and processed on a Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diagenode, 15x [30 sec ON + 30 sec OFF] at high setting). Lysates were centrifuged for 30 min at 3,500 g at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into a clean tube and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce Microplate BCA Protein Assay Kit - Reducing Agent Compatible). Samples were normalized to a protein concentration of 5 mg/mL and protein was precipitated over night by adding 4x volume of -20°C acetone. Precipitated protein was collected by centrifugation (15 min at 2,000 g) and washed twice in -20°C acetone and by resuspension in the Bioruptor (20 sec, high). Protein pellets were resuspended in 500 µL TFE digestion buffer (10% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol [Sigma-Aldrich], 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Protein digest and phosphopeptide enrichment were performed as described in Humphrey et al, 2015. For phosphopeptide enrichment Titansphere Phos-TiO Beads 10 µm were used (GL Sciences). Eluted phosphopeptides were concentrated by speed-vac and brought to 3% TFA. Desalting and LC-MS/MS For desalting, peptides were loaded onto 2x layers styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase-sulfonated StageTips (SDB-RPS; 3M Empore) and washed 1) in 100 μL SDB-RPS wash buffer 1 (99% isopropanol, 1% trifluroacetic acid [TFA]) and 2) in 100 µL SDB-RPS wash buffer 2 (0.2% TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted with 60 μL SDB-RPS elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1.25% NH4OH [25%, HPLC grade]) into a clean protein low-binding tube by centrifugation for 5 min at 500 g. Peptides were concentrated by speed-vac for 30 min at 45°C, or until ∼2 μL remained. Samples were resuspended in 7 μL MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.3% TFA) and injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 3 to 16% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid followed by a 10-min gradient from 16 to 26% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF (Thermo) operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x10^6) and MS/MS spectra with resolution 15,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 1x10^5). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x10^5, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Normalized heavy to light ratios reported by MaxQuant were log2 transformed for statistical analyses. We then selected the best 3 out of 4 paired replicates to reduce the number of dropouts caused by missing values. Missing value imputation was not performed. Differential abundance of peptides based on inhibitor administration was estimated by t-tests (with Welch correction, two sided, unpaired) on the log ratios of forward versus reverse labelled replicates. This approach avoids systematic errors based on arginine to proline conversion (Ong & Mann 2007, doi: 10.1038/nprot.2006.427) leading to a systematic distortion of heavy/light ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptional cyclin-dependent kinases regulate all phases of transcription. Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) has been implicated in the regulation of promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II and more recently in transcription termination. Study of the substrates of CDK9 has mostly been limited to <i>in vitro</i> approaches that lack a quantitative assessment of CDK9 activity. Here we analyzed the cellular phosphoproteome upon inhibition of CDK9 by combining analog-sensitive kinase technology with quantitative phosphoproteomics in Raji B-cells. Our analysis revealed the activity of CDK9 on 1102 phosphosites quantitatively, and we identified 120 potential cellular substrates. Furthermore, a substantial number of CDK9 substrates were described as splicing factors, highlighting the role of CDK9 in transcription-coupled splicing events. Based on comparison to <i>in vitro</i> data, our findings suggest that cellular context fundamentally impacts the activity of CDK9 and specific selection of its substrates.

### Keywords
Analog-sensitive, Protein phosphorylation, Mass spectrometry, P-tefb

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Research Unit Molecular Epigenetics German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH) Helmholtz Zentrum München Marchioninistraße 25 81377 Munich Tel. +49 89 3187-1512 Fax +49 89 3187-1200

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dirk Eick
Research Unit Molecular Epigenetics German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH) Helmholtz Zentrum München Marchioninistraße 25 81377 Munich Tel. +49 89 3187-1512 Fax +49 89 3187-1200


