### Accession
PXD013591

### Title
GRP75 in chicken -  75 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP75) is a novel molecular signature for heat stress response in avian species

### Description
GRP75 is a multipotent chaperone regulating cellular processes ranging from stress response to neurodegeneration. As the only ATPase component of the pre-protein mitochondrial import machinery, GRP75 plays a key role in multiple basic mitochondrial processes, including mitochondrial protein import, folding, and degradation. We are interested to characterize and study functions of GRP75 in avian using chicken as a model.

### Sample Protocol
Chicken liver samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris base, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.5% NP-40, protease, and phosphatase inhibitors). Extracted Proteins were incubated with anti-GRP75 antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) overnight at 4°C and immune complexes were collected using Dynabeads magnetic separation technology according to manufacturer’s recommendation (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). After extensive wash, the immuno-complexes were resolved by 4–12% Novex Bis-Tris gels (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  The gel was then stained with Coomassie-brilliant blue dye. Gel portions of each sample were excised and chopped into small pieces (<1 mm2) and washed twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3. The gel pieces were digested with 25 mM NH4HCO3/50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and dried with 100% ACN. Proteins were then reduced using 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM NH4CO3 at 56o for 1 hr. Subsequently, alkylation was conducted using 55mM Iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4CO3, protected from light. The gel pieces were then washed with 25 mM NH4HCO3, dehydrated with 25 mM NH4HCO3/50% ACN, and completely dried via SpeedVac. Mass spectrometry grade Trypsin Gold (12.5 ng/μl in 25 mM NH4HCO3, Promega, Madison, WI) was added to dried gels, and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted by 50% ACN/5% formic acid. The tryptic digests were desalted using Pierce C18 spin columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) prior to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK, Version 2.2.1). MS/MS based GRP75 peptide and protein sequence identification was validated using Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc, Version 4.8.3, Portland, OR) and was accepted by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm when the probability is higher than 95%

### Publication Abstract
Glucose-regulated protein 75 (GRP75) was first characterized in mammals as a heat shock protein-70 (HSP70) family stress chaperone based on its sequence homology. Extensive studies in mammals showed that GRP75 is induced by various stressors such as glucose deprivation, oxidative stress, and hypoxia, although it remained unresponsive to the heat shock. Such investigations are scarce in avian (nonmammalian) species. We here identified chicken GRP75 by using immunoprecipitation assay integrated with LC-MS/MS, and found that its amino acid sequence is conserved with high homology (52.5%) to the HSP70 family. Bioinformatics and 3D-structure prediction indicate that, like most HSPs, chicken GRP75 has two principal domains (the NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal ATPase and COOH-terminal region). Immunofluorescence staining shows that GRP75 is localized predominantly in the avian myoblast and hepatocyte mitochondria. Heat stress exposure upregulates GRP75 expression in a species-, genotype-, and tissue-specific manner. Overexpression of GRP75 reduces avian cell viability, and blockade of GRP75 by its small molecular inhibitor MKT-077 rescues avian cell viability during heat stress. Taken together, this is the first evidence showing that chicken GRP75, unlike its mammalian ortholog, is responsive to heat shock and plays a key role in cell survival/death pathways. Since modern avian species have high metabolic rates and are sensitive to high environmental temperature, GRP75 could open new vistas in mechanistic understanding of heat stress responses and thermotolerance in avian species.

### Keywords
And heat stress, Avian, Grp75

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas

### Submitter
Ahmed Dhamad

### Lab Head
Dr Sami Dridi
University of Arkansas


