### Accession
PXD031167

### Title
Comparative proteome analysis of the tegument of male and female adult Schistosoma mansoni

### Description
We present a comparative analysis of sex-specific tegument proteins of paired or virgin Schistosoma mansoni. By apply a new and highly sensitive workflow, detection of even low abundance proteins from the worm was achieved Therefore, a streptavidin-biotin affinity purification technique in combination with single pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation was established for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. We were able to identify 1519 tegument proteins for male and female as to virgin and paired worms. Sex-specific proteins were screened, present in both virgin and paired adult schistosomes to reduce the impact of mating. Bioinformatic analysis revealed an involvement of female-specific tegument proteins in signaling pathways of cellular processes and antioxidant mechanisms. Male-specific proteins were found to be enriched in processes linked to phosphorylation and signal transduction. This suggests a task sharing between the sexes that might be necessary for survival in the host. Our datasets provide a basis for further studies to understand and ultimately decipher the strategies of the two worm sexes to evade the immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Schistosoma mansoni life cycle and isolation of adult worm Schistosoma mansoni (Belo Horizonte strain) was kept in a life cycle using Biomphalaria glabrata fresh water snails as intermediate hosts and 6 to 8 weeks old female NMRI mice as definitive hosts. To obtain either male or female cercariae for subsequent infection of mice, individual B. glabrata were exposed to a single S. mansoni miracidia. Single-sex cercariae were harvested six weeks later. The sex of the cercariae was determined by DNA amplification of sex-related chromosome segments using female-specific primers as previously described. The mice were percutaneously infected with 300 S. mansoni cercariae, either male, female, or mixed in equal proportions. Adult worms were collected from infected mice at day 49 post infection by perfusion of the portal venous system. Worms were washed three times with washing buffer (RPMI with 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin). Following microscopic evaluation, intact adult worms were incubated in culture medium [RPMI with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin and 10 % inactivated fetal bovine serum (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany)] at 37 °C in a humid atmosphere containing 5 % CO2. About 350 worms were used for each tegument group and as control groups samples of 50 worms out of pairs were prepared. Preparation of biotinylated tegument proteins and proteins of whole and stripped adult worms. Surface proteins of vital adult worms were labeled with biotin. In brief, intact adult worms were washed three times in ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) and incubated in 10 ml of ice-cold PBS containing 0.89 mM membrane-impermeable sulfosuccinimidyl-2-(biotinamido)ethyl-1,3-dithiopropionate (EZ-LinkTM Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin; Pierce, USA) for 30 min at 4 °C with gentle rotation mixing with subsequent quenching (1 ml of quenching solution; Pierce, USA). Worms were washed three times in ice-cold Tris buffered saline (TBS, pH 7.4) with protease inhibitors (protease inhibitor cocktail; Fermentas Life Sciences, USA) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. The tegument was stripped using a freeze−thaw−vortex method. Frozen worms were slowly thawed on ice and vortexed for 10 bursts of 1 s at maximum speed. Supernatants were collected and tegument material was pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The isolation of biotinylated tegument proteins was performed using a cell surface protein isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce, USA). Samples were eluted with 50 mM DTT in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) and mixed with SDS (5 %). For the preparation of the control groups, adult worms and stripped worms were homogenized in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) using FastPrep-24 (MP Biomedicals, ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany) at 2 x 6.0 m/s for 40 s. Homogenates were centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for 3 min, supernatant was mixed with SDS (5 %) and stored at −80 °C.  Sample preparation for proteomics. Samples from two independent infections were subjected to SP3 protocol, in which the whole samples with the appropriate worm numbers were processed. The disrupted Schistosoma mansoni protein samples from the tegument fraction and the whole worm samples were reduced with 1 µl DTT (25 mmol, 30 min, 37 °C) and alkylated with 2 µl IAA (100 mmol, 15 min, 37 °C). Afterwards, the samples were prepared according to Blankenburg et al. for MS analysis. In brief, 10 µl of prepared magnetic bead solution and acetonitrile were added to the samples for binding of the proteins. After washing with ethanol and acetonitrile, trypsin (100 ng) was added to the samples for overnight digestion. For elution of the peptides, 7 µl of 2 % DMSO in H2O was added to the reaction pot. At the end, the supernatant without the beads and with the digested peptides was transferred into a vial with 7 µl prepared buffer 2xA (4 % ACN and 0.2 % acetic acid in H2O) for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS measurement was carried out using an Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 pre-column (inner diameter 100 μm, particle size 5 μm, pore size 100 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific) and an analytical Accucore column (25 cm, inner diameter 75 μm, particle size 2.6 μm, pore size 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a 120 min gradient of buffer A (aqueous solution of 0,1 % acetic acid) and buffer B (0,1 % acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 0,3 μl/min. Measurement was performed in DDA mode with top ten most abundant precursors being fragmented with HCD. Survey scan resolution was set to 70,000 with an AGC target of 3e6 and MS2 resolution was set to 17,500 with an AGC target of 2e5. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and the scan range from 300 to 1650 m/z.  MS/MS data were analysed with MaxQuant (v.1.6.2.10) searching against a UniProt database limited to entries of Schistosoma mansoni and Mus musculus (v2018-05). MS/MS search tolerance was set to 20 ppm without run alignment option and for digestion trypsin was specified with up to two missed cleavages. As fixed modification carbamidomethylation and as variable modification oxidation of methionine were considered. Peptide and protein FDR was set to 0.01.   MaxQuant search results were analyzed using R (version 4.0.1) with the tidyverse (version 1.3.0) & UpSetR package (version 1.4.0). The protein groups search results were filtered by removing contaminants and reverse protein groups hits. In addition, the dataset was filtered for protein groups found with at least 2 unique peptides in each of the two biological replicates per condition. The protein group identifications were compared between conditions using an UpSet plot. Proteins were assigned to predicted function and subcellular location using CELLO2GO. Putative transmembrane domain(s) and signal peptides were predicted using the program Phobius. G:Profiler was used to classify proteins according to Gene Ontology (GO) categories, and protein family (Pfam) analysis was performed using Pfam.

### Publication Abstract
The tegument, as the surface layer of adult male and female Schistosoma spp. represents the protective barrier of the worms to the hostile environment of the host bloodstream. Here we present the first comparative analysis of sex-specific tegument proteins of paired or virgin Schistosoma mansoni. We applied a new and highly sensitive workflow, allowing detection of even low abundance proteins. Therefore, a streptavidin-biotin affinity purification technique in combination with single pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation was established for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. We were able to identify 1519 tegument proteins for male and female virgin and paired worms and categorized them by sex. Bioinformatic analysis revealed an involvement of female-specific tegument proteins in signaling pathways of cellular processes and antioxidant mechanisms. Male-specific proteins were found to be enriched in processes linked to phosphorylation and signal transduction. This suggests a task sharing between the sexes that might be necessary for survival in the host. Our datasets provide a basis for further studies to understand and ultimately decipher the strategies of the two worm sexes to evade the immune system.

### Keywords
Tegument, Proteome, Schistosoma manson

### Affiliations
Division of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Center of Internal Medicine II, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald, Interfaculty Institute of Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Christian Hentschker

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Sombetzki
Division of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Center of Internal Medicine II, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock, Germany


