### Accession
PXD027290

### Title
Microscopic and biochemical monitoring of endosomal trafficking and extracellular vesicle secretion in an endogenous in vivo model

### Description
Extracellular vesicle (EV) secretion enables cell-cell communication in multicellular organisms. During development, EV secretion and the specific loading of signaling factors in EVs contributes to organ development and tissue differentiation. Here, we present an in vivo model to study EV secretion using the fat body and the hemolymph of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. The system makes use of tissue-specific EV labelling and is amenable to genetic modification by RNAi. This allows the unique combination of microscopic visualization of EVs in different organs and quantitative biochemical purification to study how EVs are generated within the cells and which factors regulate their secretion in vivo. Characterization of the system revealed that secretion of EVs from the fat body is mainly regulated by Rab11 and Rab35, highlighting the importance of recycling Rab GTPase family members for EV secretion. We furthermore discovered a so far unknown function of Rab14 along with the kinesin Klp98A in EV trafficking and secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent biological replicates of hemolymph samples (P14, P100, SN100) were boiled 5 min in non-reducing SDS sample buffer (300mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 12% SDS, 0.05% Bromphenolblue, 60% Glycerol, 12mM EDTA) and run short-distance (1.5 cm) into a 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigel (Invitrogen). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes. Stained areas were cut out as a single fraction and diced. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For generation of an annotated MS/MS spectral library for DIA-MS, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 80 µg and separated into twelve fractions using a reversed phase spin column (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For mass spectrometric analysis, samples and reverse phase fractions were taken up in 20 µl loading buffer (01.% aqueous formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and separated by nanoflow chromatography. Injections of 1 µg protein equivalent enriched on a self-packed precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 to 90 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1. The eluents were analyzed on a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex).  For generation of an MS/MS spectral library, reverse phase fractions were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) using a Top30 data-dependent acquisition method, with a survey scan of m/z 380 1250 accumulated for 250 ms at a resolution of 35,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 200 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS at 0.7 FWHM resolution, and fragmented using nitrogen as a collision gas using manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. MS/MS scans of m/z 180 1500 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 3.4 s. Two replicate injections per reversed phase fraction were analysed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 100 variable size windows (Zhang et al., 2015) across the 400-1200 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 180 1500 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 250 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 4.3 s. Two replicate injections per biological sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using Spectronaut SW v14.2.200619.47784 (Biognosys) . For generation of a spectral library, both DDA and DIA data were searched against the UniProtKB Drosophila melanogaster reference proteome (revision 02-2017, 23,306 entries) augmented with a set of 51 known common laboratory contaminants and the sequence of the mCherry. Default setting including dynamic mass and retention time calibration, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications were used. The search resulted in a hybrid DDA/DIA spectral library of 31,104 precursors representing 23,940 peptide sequences and 2,871 protein groups at an FDR of 1%, respectively, established by combined forward-and-reverse decoy searches. Quantitative analysis of DIA data was achieved by peak extraction on the precursor/fragment level using the above spectral library and combining 6 fragments to the precursor and up to 10 peptides to the protein for obtaining protein area values, each at estimated FDR levels of 1%. Other than this, default software settings were used, including dynamic mass and retention time calibration. The resulting peak areas were summed to peptide, protein and protein group area values, which were used for further statistical analysis. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD025871.  Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus 1.5.6.0 software (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Following log 2 transformation, data were filtered for valid values in at least 60% of injections in at least one sample group (P14/P100/SN100). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8) to avoid division by zero, resulting in a data matrix containing 2.466 protein group areas. Significance of enrichment was established using FDR-based calculation with p≤0.05 and S0=0.5, resulting in an at least 2-fold enrichment as a requirement for significance.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicle (EV) secretion enables cell-cell communication in multicellular organisms. During development, EV secretion and the specific loading of signalling factors in EVs contributes to organ development and tissue differentiation. Here, we present an in vivo model to study EV secretion using the fat body and the haemolymph of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. The system makes use of tissue-specific EV labelling and is amenable to genetic modification by RNAi. This allows the unique combination of microscopic visualisation of EVs in different organs and quantitative biochemical purification to study how EVs are generated within the cells and which factors regulate their secretion in vivo. Characterisation of the system revealed that secretion of EVs from the fat body is mainly regulated by Rab11 and Rab35, highlighting the importance of recycling Rab GTPase family members for EV secretion. We furthermore discovered a so far unknown function of Rab14 along with the kinesin Klp98A in EV biogenesis and secretion.

### Keywords
Rab11, Rab35, Drosophila, Tsp96f, Hemolymph, Fat body, Exosomes, Intercellular communication

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen/Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Chridstof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen/Germany


