### Accession
PXD016199

### Title
Age-Dependent Changes in the Plasma Proteome of Healthy Adults

### Description
Human blood plasma is a complex which communicates with most parts of the body and reflects changes in the state of the organism, therefore identifying age-related biomarkers can help to predict and monitor age-related physiological decline and diseases, as well as to find new treatments for diseases. In this study, TMT-LC-MS/MS was utilized to screen for the differentially expressed plasma proteins in 118 healthy adults with different ages. Participants were divided into three groups: 21-30 (Young), 41-50 (Middle) and ≥60 (Old), the number of differentially expressed proteins when Young vs Middle, Middle vs Old and Young vs Old were 82, 22 and 99, respectively. These proteins were found to be involved in numerous physiological processes such as “negative regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation” and “blood coagulation”. Meanwhile when Young vs Middle or Old, “Complement and coagulation cascades” was confirmed the top enriched pathway by KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. Functional phenotyping of the proteome demonstrated that the plasma proteomic profiles of Young adults were strikingly dissimilar to the Middle or Old adults. The results of this study mapped the variation in expression of plasma proteins, and provided information about possible biomarkers/treatments for different kinds of age-related function disorders.

### Sample Protocol
1. Human plasma collection The plasma samples were collected from the Health Examinations Center of Xinqiao Hospital (The Second Affiliated Hospital), Army Medical University. Samples were collected from 118 adults free of major diseases such as hepatitis, heart disease, infection within six months and immune system-related disease. The participants were divided into three groups: 21-30 (Young), 41-50 (Middle) and ≥60 (Old). Blood (5 ml) was drawn from antecubital vein and collected in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tubes, promptly mixed, and centrifuged for 20 min at 1000g at room temperature. Plasma samples were kept in cryotubes at -80℃ until use.  2. Depletion of the plasma and determination of protein concentration Abundant serum proteins were removed from the samples using a Bio-Rad Proteo Miner Protein Enrichment Large-Capacity kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After that the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  3. Trypsin Digestion The protein solution was mixed with 5 mM dithiothreitol, and kept at 56 °C for 30 min. Then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. After that the protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 (trypsin:protein) mass ratio for the digestion overnight, then digested with 1:100 (trypsin:protein) mass ratio for 4 h.  4. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB, and labeled with TMT kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   5. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. The peptides were then combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  6. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid), separated by the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system on a reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient setting was as followed: 0~60 min, 6%-20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile); 60~82 min, 20%-30% solvent B; 82~86 min, 30%-80% solvent B; 86~90 min, 80% solvent B, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap fusion lumos (Thermo Fisher). The electrospray voltage applied was 2.4 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1550 for full scan, at a resolution of 60,000. Second scanning started with 100 m/z, at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched in the Uniprot human database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, up to 2 missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions in First search and Main search were set as 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as fixed modification, and oxidation on Met was set as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.  2. Bioinformatics analysis 2.1 Annotation Methods 2.1.1 Gene Ontology (GO) Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Briefly, the identified protein ID was converted to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. 2.1.2 Domain Annotation Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used. 2.1.3 KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. 2.1.4 Subcellular Localization We used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences.  2.2 Functional Enrichment 2.2.1 Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. 2.2.2 Enrichment of pathway analysis KEGG database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. 2.2.3 Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.  2.3 Proteomic phenotyping (Enrichment-based Clustering) Further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional enrichment was performed as previously reported [16, 17]. We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value < 0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aging; healthy adults; plasma; proteomics; tmt-lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital (Xinqiao Hospital), Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University), Chongqing 400037, China
Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital (Xinqiao Hospital), Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University)

### Submitter
Rui Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyi Xiong
Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital (Xinqiao Hospital), Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University), Chongqing 400037, China


