### Accession
PXD011189

### Title
Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) - A Universal, Rapid, and Detergent-free Protocol for Proteomics based on Acid Extraction

### Description
We report a universal detergent-free method, named Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED), which consists of three mandatory steps, acidification, neutralization and digestion. SPEED is a universal method for peptide generation from various sources and is easily applicable even for lysis-resistant sample types. The protocol is highly reproducible, virtually loss-less and enables very rapid sample processing. SPEED is superior to detergent/chaotropic agent-based methods for quantitative proteomics and enhances proteome coverage for challenging samples.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using either SPEED, fa-SPEED, FASP, SP3, ISD-Urea, iST or STrap as described in the  manuscript. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 coupled online to a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ column (75 μm i.d., 100 Å C18, 2 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a linear 120 (E. coli, B. cereus, high-pH fractions), 180 (HeLa, mouse lung tissue) or 240 (microbiome standard) min gradient of 3 to 28 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid at 200 nL/min flow rate. Column temperature was kept at 40°C. Samples for evaluating online desalting, fa-SPEED and phosphopeptide analysis were loaded on a Acclaim™ PepMap™ trap column (20 mm x 75 μm i.d., 100 Å, C18, 3 μm) at a flow rate of 3 µL/min and were subsequently separated on 200 cm μPAC™ column using a 160 min (online desalting) or 210 min gradient (fa- SPEED, phosphoproteomics) of 3 to 28 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid at 300 nL/min flow rate. Column temperature was kept at 50°C. The Q Exactive™ Plus was operated in a data-dependent manner in the m/z range of 300 – 1,650. Full scan spectra were recorded with a resolution of 70,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Up to the 10 most intense 2+ - 5+ charged ions were selected for higher-energy c-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 %. Fragment spectra were recorded at an isolation width of 2 Th and a resolution of 17,500@200m/z using an AGC target value of 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The minimum MS² target value was set to 1 × 104. Once fragmented, peaks were dynamically excluded from precursor selection for 30 s within a 10 ppm window. For the analysis of phosphorylated peptides the maximum injection times were increased to 200 ms (full scan) and 100 ms (MS²) as well as the minimum MS² target value to 2 × 104. Furthermore the isolation width was decreased to 1.6 Th and precursor ion charges were restricted to 2-4. All other MS parameters were unaltered.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.1.8 and 1.6.1.0). MS² spectra were searched using the Andromeda algorithm against sequences from the complete proteomes of either homo sapiens (UP000005640, 92578 sequences, 15/7/16), E. coli K-12 (UP000000625, 4315 sequences, downloaded 26/10/16), B. cereus strain ATCC 10987 (UP000002527, 5821 sequences, downloaded 8/3/17), S. aureus strain NCTC 8325 (UP000008816, 2889 sequences, downloaded 4/10/18) or Mus musculus (UP000000589, 58430 sequences, downloaded 10/1/17), which were downloaded from UniProt. Proteome entries of bacterial species from the microbiome standard were downloaded from UniProt according to their corresponding ATCC® numbers (62989 sequences, downloaded 31/7/18). If no entry was available, the reference proteome of the respective species was used. Spectra were searched with a tolerance of 4.5 ppm in MS1 and 20 ppm in HCD MS² mode, strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) and allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal acetylation of proteins as variable modifications. For phosphopeptide analysis phosphorylation (S,T,Y) was added as an additional variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for peptide and protein identifications. Dependent peptides with previously unconsidered modifications were identified using 1 % FDR as well. Identifications were transferred between samples using the 'match between run’ option within a match window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. Protein intensities for label-free quantification (LFQ) were calculated separately for each sample preparation method.  Open search analysis of the mouse lung data using wide precursor mass windows (500 Da) was done using MSFragger GUI (v6.0) with a precursor mass tolerance of 500 Da and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) and allowing up to one missed cleavage site. Peptide length was set to 7 – 50 amino acids within the mass range of 500 – 5,000 Da. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
The main challenge of bottom-up proteomic sample preparation is to extract proteomes in a manner that enables efficient protein digestion for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. Today's sample preparation strategies are commonly conceptualized around the removal of detergents, which are essential for extraction but strongly interfere with digestion and LC-MS. These multi-step preparations contribute to a lack of reproducibility as they are prone to losses, biases and contaminations, while being time-consuming and labor-intensive. We report a detergent-free method, named Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED), which consists of three mandatory steps, acidification, neutralization and digestion. SPEED is a universal method for peptide generation from various sources and is easily applicable even for lysis-resistant sample types as pure trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) is used for highly efficient protein extraction by complete sample dissolution. The protocol is highly reproducible, virtually loss-less, enables very rapid sample processing and is superior to the detergent/chaotropic agent-based methods FASP, ISD-Urea and SP3 for quantitative proteomics. SPEED holds the potential to dramatically simplify and standardize sample preparation while improving the depth of proteome coverage especially for challenging samples.

### Keywords
Speed, Sample preparation, Quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute
Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lasch
Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Berlin, Germany


