### Accession
PXD009989

### Title
Humic Substances iTRAQ LC-MS/MS

### Description
iTRAQ analysis of Arabidopsis Thaliana roots treated with different Humic Susbstances.

### Sample Protocol
Roots were ground in liquid nitrogen and proteins precipitated with Acetone/TCA. Protein pellets were washed with cold acetone and suspended in 6M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, 2% CHAPS and 1% PVPP. Proteins were quantified. Equal amounts of proteins from each sample were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE 4-12% and the electophoretic run was stopped after all protein extracts entered the running gel. Three biological replicates were prepared.  Gel bands were cut and proteins were reduced (DTT) alkylated (iodoacetamide) and digested in-gel with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel and subjected to iTRAQ labelling with a tag-swapping strategy. Samples were pooled and SCX fractionation was performed using a step-wise elution with KCl. Samples were desalted with C18 cartrdiges and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex- Thermo) interfaced to a LTQ-OrbitrapXL MS (Thermo). The instrument worked with a Top 3 DDA method: 1 full MS scan at 30000 resolution followed by MS/MS spectra on the top 3 ions both with CID and HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo) interfaced to a Mascot server (2.2.4). Spectra were searched against the ARATH section of the Uniprot Database with a MudPIT protocol. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment tolerace was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. carbamidomethylation of cysteines and 4-plex iTRAQ modification at peptide N-term and K residues were set as fixed modifications. Met oxidation was set as variable modification. Percolator was used to assess FDR and data were filtered to keep only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides with q-value < 0.05. Proteins were merged inot protein families according to the principle of maximum parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background and Aim:</b> Humic substances (HSs) influence the chemical and physical properties of the soil, and are also known to affect plant physiology and nutrient uptake. This study aimed to elucidate plant metabolic pathways and physiological processes influenced by HS activity. <b>Methods:</b> Arabidopsis roots were treated with HS for 8 h. Quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis of root proteins was performed using the iTRAQ (Isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantification) technique. Out of 902 protein families identified and quantified for HS treated vs. untreated roots, 92 proteins had different relative content. Bioinformatic tools such as STRING, KEGG, IIS and Cytoscape were used to interpret the biological function, pathway analysis and visualization of network amongst the identified proteins. <b>Results:</b> From this analysis it was possible to evaluate that all of the identified proteins were functionally classified into several categories, mainly redox homeostasis, response to inorganic substances, energy metabolism, protein synthesis, cell trafficking, and division. <b>Conclusion:</b> In the present study an overview of the metabolic pathways most modified by HS biological activity is provided. Activation of enzymes of the glycolytic pathway and up regulation of ribosomal protein indicated a stimulation in energy metabolism and protein synthesis. Regulation of the enzymes involved in redox homeostasis suggest a pivotal role of reactive oxygen species in the signaling and modulation of HS-induced responses.

### Keywords
Humic substances itraq lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Padova Dept. of Biomedical Sciences Proteomics Center
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
University of Padova Dept. of Biomedical Sciences Proteomics Center


