### Accession
PXD001425

### Title
Sepsis related glycopeptides -  Plasma Glycoproteomics Reveals Sepsis Outcomes Linked to Distinct Proteins in Common Pathways

### Description
The plasma of the sepsis patient survivors and non-survivors (n=10/group) were analyzed using glycoproteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction and identification of N-glycopeptides was achieved by SPEG, as described previously [1, 2].   [1] Zhang, H., Li, X.J., Martin, D.B., and Aebersold, R. (2003). Identification and quantification of N-linked glycoproteins using hydrazide chemistry, stable isotope labeling and mass spectrometry. Nat Biotechnol 21, 660-666. [2] Tian, Y., Zhou, Y., Elliott, S., Aebersold, R., and Zhang, H. (2007). Solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides. Nature protocols 2, 334-339.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (11/20/2013). For this database search, the precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set at 15 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as the protease. The fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation (C), and other modifications were set as flexible modification as follows: deamidation (N) and oxidation (M).  Full-tryptic end and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. A decoy version of the IPI mouse database was used to estimate peptide and protein false discovery rate. The False Discovery Rate was set at 0.01 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Coagulation, Proteomics, Extracellular glycoproteins

### Affiliations
FDA
Department of Physiology and Biophysics  University of Mississippi Medical Cente

### Submitter
Yuan Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Merry L. Lindsey
Department of Physiology and Biophysics  University of Mississippi Medical Cente


