### Accession
PXD012006

### Title
Proteome Dataset for Adult-derived Mouse Microglia

### Description
We report methods development for quantitative proteomic analysis of samples with limited number of cells. The improvements include suspension trapping (S-Trap) for sample processing, longer analytical column length (75cm), and a segmented data dependent acquisition approach. The modified approach was applied to the proteomic analysis of adult-derived mouse microglia and optimized to the cell count expected from mouse brain (~300K microglial cells). With the improved approach, over 4500 quantifiable proteins can be obtained (in biological triplicate) with an average CV of 10%.

### Sample Protocol
Microglial cells (300K cell count) were lysed in 5% SDS and processed by suspension trapping approach (S-Trap, ProtiFi). Samples were processed according to manufacturer's instructions. After elution from the S-Trap, samples were centrifuged under vacuum until dryness and respupendend in 0.1% formic acid in water. Samples were separated on a 75cm x 75 um ID column that was in line with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo) using two modes of data dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the Mus musculus protein sequence database obtained from Uniprot using MaxQuant. Reverse sequences, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site were removed and the ProteinGroups file processed further with Perseus. Proteins were filtered out if intensity values were not present in 2/3 biological replicates. Missing values were replaced by imputation function in Perseus. Bioinformatic analysis was accomplshed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to determine over-represented biological functions and pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia, as the resident brain immune cells, can exhibit a broad range of activation phenotypes, which have been implicated in a multitude of central nervous system disorders. Current widely studied microglial cell lines are mainly derived from neonatal rodent brain that can limit their relevance to homeostatic function and disease-related neuroimmune responses in the adult brain. Recently, an adult mouse brain-derived microglial cell line has been established; however, a comprehensive proteome dataset remains lacking. Here, an optimization method for sensitive and rapid quantitative proteomic analysis of microglia is described that involves suspension trapping (S-Trap) for efficient and reproducible protein extraction from a limited number of microglial cells expected from an adult mouse brain (&#x2248;300&#xa0;000). Using a 2-h gradient on a 75-cm UPLC column with a modified data dependent acquisition method on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, 4855 total proteins have been identified where 4698 of which are quantifiable by label-free quantitation with a median and average coefficient of variation (CV) of 6.7% and 10.6%, respectively. This dataset highlights the high depth of proteome coverage and related quantitation precision of the adult-derived microglial proteome including proteins associated with several key pathways related to immune response. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012006.

### Keywords
Img cells, Proteomics, Neuroinflammation, Glia, Mass spectrometry, Dataset brief, Microglia

### Affiliations
Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Colchester, VT 05446

### Submitter
Stanley Stevens

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley M. Stevens, Jr.
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Colchester, VT 05446


