### Accession
PXD040188

### Title
Proteomics analysis of human breast milk by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoressi (2D-PAGE) coupled with mass spectrometry to assess breast cancer risk

### Description
Breast Cancer (BC) is one of the most common cancers and one of the most common causes for cancer- related mortality. Discovery of protein biomarkers associated with cancer, is considered as important for early diagnosis and prediction of the cancer risk. Protein biomarkers could be investigated by large-scale protein investigation or proteomics, using mass spectrometry (MS)- based techniques. Our group applies MS-based proteomics to study the protein pattern in human breast milk from women with BC and controls and investigates the alterations and dysregula-tions of breast milk proteins in comparison pairs of BC versus control. These dysregulated pro-teins might be considered as potential future biomarkers of BC. Identification of potential bi-omarkers in breast milk may benefit young women without BC, but who could collect the milk for future assessment of BC risk. Previously we identified several dysregulated proteins in dif-ferent sets of human breast milk samples from BC patients and controls using gel-based protein separation coupled with MS. Here, we performed two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electro-phoresis (2D-PAGE) coupled with nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) in a small-scale study on a set of 6 human breast milk samples (3 BC samples vs. 3 controls) and we identified several dysregulated proteins which have potential roles in cancer progression and might be considered as potential BC biomarkers in the future.

### Sample Protocol
One Coomassie blue-stained gel for each breast milk sample (6 gels in total) and two replicates of silver-stained gels for each sample (12 gels in total) were run. The amount of proteins per gel was 750 µg for Coomassie blue-stained gels and 200 µg for silver-stained gels. The 2D-SDS-PAGE gels were run by Kendrick Labs, Inc. (Madison, WI) using Carrier ampholine method of isoelectric focusing [15, 16]. A 3.3 mm (inner diameter) glass tube was used for isoelectric focusing, and Isodalt Servalytes (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) provided pH range of 3 to 10. Isoelectric focusing was carried out for 20,000 volt-hrs. Af-terwards, the equilibration of tube was done for 10 minutes in equilibration buffer (10% glycerol, 50mM dithiothreitol, 2.3% SDS and 0.0625 M tris, pH 6.8). Tropomyosin was added to each sample as an internal standard.  Afterwards, the tube gel was equilibrated in the equilibration buffer (10% glycerol, 50mM dithiothreitol, 2.3% SDS and 0.0625 M tris, pH 6.8) for 10 minutes, followed by sealing the tube gel on top of the stacking gel, overlay-ing the slab gel(10% acrylamide). The running time was 5 hours and the current of 25 mA/gel was carried out. Cellophane paper sheets were used to cover the gels. Twelve silver-stained gels (2 replicates for each sample) were scanned with a PDSI laser densitometer (Molecular Dynamics Inc, Sunnyvale, CA). Prior to scanning, a cali-brated neutral density filter set (Melles Griot, Irvine, CA) was used to check the linearity of the scanner. The gel images were analyzed by Progenesis Same Spots software (version 4.5, 2011, TotalLab, UK) and Progenesis PG240 software (version 2006, TotalLab, UK). And spot percentages (integrated density of the spot above background) were measured for each of the dysregulated spots. Spot percentages were calculated by taking the spot density above the background noise over the total density above background noise for all spots being measured. The spot percentages were used to calculate the fold change (fold increase or fold decrease) for each comparison group of BC vs. control and the average of all groups for BC vs. control. The extracted, zip-tipped peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoliquid chromatog-raphy tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) as described previously [17], using a nanoACQUITY® UPLC coupled with a QTOF Xevo G2 mass spectrometer (Waters, Mil-ford, MA). A 5ul sample was injected followed by a linear gradient with a flow rate of 0.4ul/min as follows: 1-50% organic solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) from 1-20 minutes, 50-85% B from 20-23 minutes, 85% B from 23-27 minutes, 85 back to 1% B from 27-32 minutes and 1% B from 32-60 minutes. Each sample was followed by a wash-ing gradient. MS data was acquired in positive ion sensitivity mode. This involved survey scans from 350-2,000 Da. Automatic data dependent analysis (DDA) of the top 5 ions with the highest intensity and possessing charges from 2+ to 6+. MS/MS analysis is triggered when the MS signal rises above 350 counts/second with a scan range of 50-2,000 Da. The maximum of 5 ions from the survey scan were further fragmented until the total MS/MS ion count (TIC) reaches 5,000 counts/second or until 3.3 seconds have elapsed. This method utilizes charge state recognition for the collision energy where the collision gas is argon. Washes were acquired using MSe conditions scanning from 50-2,000 Da over 20 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The resulted MS raw data were converted to pkl (peak list) files as described previously by ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS version 2.4, Waters) using following parameters: polynomial of order 5 for background with 35% subtraction threshold, smoothing type of Savitzky-Golay with smoothing window of 3 channels and 2 iterations. Top 80% of peaks was considered for centroid calculations with 4 channels as minimum peak width. The resulted pkl files from PLGS were run in Mascot using in-house Mascot server (www.matrixscience.com, Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.5.1) using following pa-rameters: database of NCBInr 20150706 (69,146,588 sequences; 24,782,014,966 residues) (NCBI: National Center for Biotechnology Information), Homo sapiens (human) (312,165 sequences) as taxonomy, propionamide (cysteine) as fixed modification, acetylation (ly-sine), oxidation (methionine), phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) as variable modifications, ±1.3 Da as peptide mass tolerance (one 13C isotope), ±0.8 Da fragment mass tolerance and maximum of 3 missed cleavages. The identified proteins with Mascot score lower than 50 were verified by de novo sequencing on MS/MS raw data files

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common cancers and one of the most common causes for cancer-related mortality. Discovery of protein biomarkers associated with cancer is considered important for early diagnosis and prediction of the cancer risk. Protein biomarkers could be investigated by large-scale protein investigation or proteomics, using mass spectrometry (MS)-based techniques. Our group applies MS-based proteomics to study the protein pattern in human breast milk from women with BC and controls and investigates the alterations and dysregulations of breast milk proteins in comparison pairs of BC versus control. These dysregulated proteins might be considered potential future biomarkers of BC. Identification of potential biomarkers in breast milk may benefit young women without BC, but who could collect the milk for future assessment of BC risk. Previously we identified several dysregulated proteins in different sets of human breast milk samples from BC patients and controls using gel-based protein separation coupled with MS. Here, we performed 2D-PAGE coupled with nano-liquid chromatography-tandem MS (nanoLC-MS/MS) in a small-scale study on a set of six human breast milk pairs (three BC samples vs. three controls) and we identified several dysregulated proteins that have potential roles in cancer progression and might be considered potential BC biomarkers in the future.

### Keywords
Breast cancer; breast milk; biomarkers; protein dysregulation; 2d-page; proteomics; mass spec-trometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Danielle Whitham

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY


