### Accession
PXD022725

### Title
An Alveolata secretory machinery adapted to parasite-host cell invasion _ ND10

### Description
Apicomplexa are unicellular eukaryotes and obligate intracellular parasites, including Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria and Toxoplasma, one of the most widespread zoonotic pathogens. Rhoptries, one of their specialized secretory organelles, undergo regulated exocytosis during invasion. Rhoptry proteins are injected directly into the host cell to support invasion and subversion of host immune function. The mechanism by which they are discharged is unclear and appears distinct from those in bacteria, yeast, animals or plants. Here we show that rhoptry secretion in Apicomplexa shares structural and genetic elements with the exocytic machinery of ciliates, their free-living relatives. Rhoptry exocytosis depends on intramembranous particles in the shape of a rosette embedded into the plasma membrane of the parasite apex. Formation of this rosette requires multiple Non-discharge (Nd) proteins conserved and restricted to Ciliata, Dinoflagellata, and Apicomplexa that together constitute the superphylum Alveolata. We identified Nd6 at the site of exocytosis in association with an apical vesicle. Sandwiched between the rosette and the tip of the rhoptry, this vesicle appears as a central element of the rhoptry secretion machine. Our results describe a conserved secretion system that was adapted to provide defense for free-living unicellular eukaryotes and host cell injection in intracellular parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Immunopurification was performed using anti HA magnetic beads (Pierce R88836). Parasites (1500 x 106) were solubilized in 1 ml of lysis buffer (1% Nonidet 40; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8; 150 mM NaCl; 4 mM EDTA; protease inhibitor cocktail) for 4h at 4°C. The lysate was centrifuged 30 min, 12000 rpm at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. For affinity purification, 50 µl of beads slurry were incubated overnight with the supernatant at 4°C. Five washes with 1 ml of lysis buffer at 4°C were performed before eluting the proteins with 30 µl Laemmli buffer (4X), 95°C for 5 min. Purified proteins were loaded on a SDS-PAGE and digested in gel (2 bands per sample). Samples were loaded onto a 25 cm reversed phase column (75 mm inner diameter, Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS analyses were performed in a data-dependent mode. Full scans (375 – 1,500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. For the full scans, 3e6 ions were accumulated within a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The twelve most intense ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated (1e5) with a maximum injection time of 45 ms and fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) in the collision cell (normalized collision energy of 28%) and detected in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.5.0) with standard parameters, label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs. Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt Reference proteomes of T. gondii and Human (respectively Proteome ID UP000001529 and UP000005640) and 250 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries (MaxQuant contaminant database). The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alveolata, Apicomplexa, Rhoptry, Secretion, Invasion

### Affiliations
FPP CNRS
UMR 5235 CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 34095 Montpellier, France

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Maryse Lebrun
UMR 5235 CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 34095 Montpellier, France


