### Accession
PXD005198

### Title
GWI Mouse model SIDL -  Complementary proteomic approaches reveal mitochondrial dysfunction, immune and inflammatory dysregulation in a mouse model of gulf war illness

### Description
Long term consequences of combined pyridostigmine bromide and permethrin exposure in C57BL6/J mice using a well characterized mouse model of exposure to these Gulf War agents. Expanding on earlier work, we used orthogonal proteomic approaches to identify pathways that are chronically impacted in the mouse CNS due to semi-acute GW agent exposure early in life. These analyses were performed on soluble and membrane-bound protein fractions from brain samples using two orthogonal isotopic labeling LC-MS/MS proteomic approaches – stable isotope dimethyl labeling (SIDL) and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). The use of these approaches allowed for greater coverage of proteins than was possible by either one alone and revealed both distinct and overlapping datasets. This combined analysis identified changes in several mitochondrial, as well as immune and inflammatory pathways after GW agent exposure. The work discussed here provides insight into GW-agent exposure dependent mechanisms that adversely affect mitochondrial function and immune and inflammatory regulation at five months post exposure to PB+PER.

### Sample Protocol
The right brain hemispheres from C57BL6/J animals exposed to either GW agents (PB + PER in DMSO) or vehicle (DMSO) were homogenized by sonication in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with a Protease/Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail [PPIC] (Thermo). The homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 150,000 x g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and aliquoted for storage at -80°C until further use. The pellet (“membrane” fraction) was re-suspended to a slurry via bath sonication in chilled 20mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (pH = 8.0) supplemented with a PPIC as above. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay, and the concentrations/sample integrity were verified by SDS-PAGE and Sypro Ruby staining. Equal amounts (100 μg) of sample [n = 6 per group (control/exposed)] from each fraction were spiked with an internal control (1 μg purified large subunit Spinach Rubisco), de-salted using acetone precipitation, and the pellets re-suspended in 10μl of 25mM TEAB and 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Samples were reduced and alkylated in 2mM of tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), followed by addition of iodoacetamide (IAM) to a final concentration of 25 mM. Each step was incubated in darkness for 30 minutes at 37°C. Sample volumes were adjusted to 100 μl by addition of 25mM TEAB and 0.5μg TPCK modified trypsin (1:200 enzyme-to-substrate ratio) (Promega), and the samples were digested overnight at 37°C. A 5μl process aliquot of the digested sample was evaluated by SDS-PAGE and staining with Sypro Ruby to ensure the consistency and completeness of the digestion. Afterwards, 25μg amounts of each tryptic digest were transferred to new tubes and labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to manufacturer’s instruction (Applied Biosystems). Corresponding 25μg aliquots of the each digest were taken to new tubes and dried, followed by SIDL labeling according to Boersema et al. Following their respective isotopic labeling schemes, the reactions were quenched, and the respective poolings were performed. SDC was depleted from the duplexed iTRAQ and SIDL pairs according to Masuda et al., and the samples were taken to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. To decrease the sample complexity at the peptide level, offline two-dimensional high pH/low pH reversed liquid chromatography (RPLC) was performed using a method adapted from Gilar et al. [9]. Briefly, dried samples were re-suspended in 20mM ammonium formate, pH = 10, and loaded onto a C18 reversed phase spin column (Pierce). Peptides were divided into five fractions by stepwise addition of acetonitrile (0-50 %) in binding buffer (20mM ammonium formate, pH = 10). The fractions were taken to dryness, and re-suspended in LC-MS mobile phase A (MPA) (0.1% formic acid in water), and further de-salted using C18 reversed phase ZipTips (Millipore). These were again taken to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge, and reconstituted in 25μl of MPA. A Thermo Easy UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo) was used for all proteomic experiments under the control of Xcalibur v 2.4 software. For SIDL-labeled samples, the samples were loaded onto a 0.1 x 30mm PepMap C18 trapping column, and resolved using a 0.075 x 150mm C18 (1.3μm) Pepmap column (Dionex) upon valve switching. Separation was performed over a 90-minute linear gradient from 2-45% mobile phase B (MPB - acetonitrile) at 300 nl/min, and the column temperature was held to 35°C using a Phoenix S and T Butterfly Heater. The MS was run in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top 5 high/low strategy (full scan MS at 70,000 (FWHM) resolution and 17,500 resolution for Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) MS2 spectra), and dynamic exclusion (60s). This approach was the most suitable compromise between sensitivity and quantitative accuracy . For iTRAQ labeled peptides, both chromatographic and mass spectrometric methods were adjusted to accommodate the different technical demands of MS2-based quantitation inherent to iTRAQ-labeled samples. Following desalting on the trapping column, the iTRAQ labeled peptides were separated on a 0.075 x 500 mm C18 column (2μm particle size) (PepMap, Thermo) that was held at 40°C. The peptides were separated over a 4.5-hour linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile, from 2-30% MPB at 250nl/min. DDA settings for the iTRAQ experiments were as follows: Full scan MS resolution = 140,000 FWHM at 200m/z, full scan range = 380-1,250 m/z, isolation width = 1.2 m/z, HCD relative collision energy (CE) = 29, a minimum m/z setting of 100m/z was used for all MS2 spectra, MS2 resolution = 17,500, dynamic exclusion = 180 seconds, and a Top15 high/low duty cycle was used for precursor ion selection.

### Data Protocol
PMi Preview software (Protein Metrics) was used to survey the data files and, if necessary, to add other modifications to the search criteria. Preview results were also used to choose ideal precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances (4 ppm, 0.02 Da, respectively) as well as dynamic modifications. The Mouse FASTA protein database used in this study was downloaded from the Uniprot website on 12-12-2013. Mass spectrometry data were then searched via the SEQUEST and Byonic (Protein Metrics) search algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo) using the following criteria for SIDL data: maximum allowed missed cleavages for trypsin = 2; static modifications: dimethyl residues = +28.031 Da or +36.076 Da (N-terminus and K) and Carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da (C); and dynamic modifications: Oxidation +15.995 Da (M), Methylation +14.016 Da of (E), Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (Any N-Terminus and H).For duplex iTRAQ data, the following settings were used: static modifications of iTRAQ-2-plex +144.102 (N-Terminus, K) and Carbamidomethyl +57.021 (C); dynamic modifications were: Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), Methyl / +14.016 Da (E), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N, Q). The Percolator feature of Proteome Discoverer was used to set a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the SEQUEST searches; reverse database search was used to set FDR to 0.01 in the Byonic searches. Peptides passing these cutoff values were exported to JMP (SAS) 8.0.2 for data processing and statistical analysis 2.3.1 Statistical analyses of proteomic data For each peptide, ln transformed (PB+PER/DMSO) ratios were calculated. Mean normalization was used to remove the systemic bias. The normalized ratios for a given protein were tested if their mean was significantly different from "0" using one sample ttest. The FDR multiple testing correction as per Benjamini & Hochberg (B-H) was applied to identify a “top tier” of significant proteins and prevent identification of false positives at a FDR of 5 percent [10]. P values and resulting significant protein lists from the SIDL data and iTRAQ data were updated with PB+PER/DMSO ln (natural log) ratios, and uploaded separately to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity® Systems, www.ingenuity.com). Briefly, the Ingenuity knowledgebase comprises a repository of proteins/genes that are grouped based on biological interactions and functional relationships derived from published literature and scientific databases. Once a dataset is uploaded to IPA (e.g. in this case, brain proteins demonstrating significant expression changes in response to GW agent exposure), the proteins are mapped onto biological functions and pathways in IPA from which the biological relevance of the response can be inferred as the IPA platform assigns each uploaded protein to particular biofunctions and pathways. IPA uses a right-tailed Fisher’s exact test to calculate a pvalue to determine the probability of whether each biofunction and/or disease assigned to that dataset is due to chance alone. Canonical pathways (biological pathways curated by IPA using established scientific databases/literature) most significant to the dataset are determined based on: 1) The ratio of the number of proteins mapping to a pathway divided by the total number of proteins represented in that particular pathway, and 2) a right-sided Fisher’s exact test is applied to calculate a p-value (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gulf war illness, Gwi, Sidl, Mouse model

### Affiliations
RoskampInstitute
Roskamp Institute

### Submitter
Gogce Crynen

### Lab Head
Dr Ghania Ait Ghezala
RoskampInstitute


