### Accession
PXD002180

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei SURFEOME: a validated surface proteome of the 
host-parasite interface

### Description
Surface membrane organization and composition is key to cellular function, and membrane proteins serve many essential roles in endocytosis, secretion and cell recognition. The surface of parasitic organisms, however, is a double-edged sword; this is the primary interface between parasites and their hosts, and those crucial cellular processes must be carried out while avoiding elimination by the host immune defenses. For extracellular African trypanosomes, the surface is partitioned such that all endo- and exocytosis is directed through a specific membrane region, the flagellar pocket, in which it is thought the majority of invariant surface proteins reside. However, very few of these proteins have been identified, severely limiting functional studies, and hampering the development of potential treatments. Here we used an integrated biochemical, proteomic and bioinformatic strategy to identify surface components of the human parasite Trypanosoma brucei. This surface proteome contains previously known flagellar pocket proteins as well as multiple novel components, and is significantly enriched in proteins that are essential for parasite survival. Molecules with receptor-like properties are almost exclusively parasite-specific, whereas transporter-like proteins are conserved in model organisms. Validation shows that the majority of surface proteome constituents are bona fide surface-associated proteins, and as expected, the majority present at the flagellar pocket. Moreover, the largest systematic analysis of trypanosome surface molecules to date provides evidence that the cell surface is compartmentalized into three distinct domains with free diffusion of molecules in each, but selective, asymmetric traffic between. This work provides a paradigm for the compartmentalization of a cell surface and a resource for its analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Bloodstream-form Trypanosoma brucei Lister 427 expressing VSG221 (BES1/MITat 1.2/VSG427-2/TAR 40) cells were labelled with fluorescein-hexanoate-NHS (referred hereafter to as fluorescein) for 15 minutes on ice, during which time cells remained actively motile and morphologically normal (as assessed by light microscopy). At the end of this period, unreacted fluorescein was quenched and removed by washes. Fluorescein-labeled cells were lysed with detergents, and centrifuged to separate soluble labelled proteins from the insoluble fraction. To increase identification sensitivity towards less abundant surface membrane proteins, a VSG-depletion step by affinity chromatography was included. The soluble fraction was allowed to bind to polyclonal antibody anti-VSG221 conjugated to protein G-sepharose. Then the soluble fraction partially-depleted of VSG was allowed to bind to protein G-Dynabeads cross-linked to polyclonal antibody anti-fluorescein. Bound proteins were deglycosylated native on column before acid then basic elutions. To control for non-specific binding to anti-fluorescein column, a parallel isolation was carried out with unlabeled cells. To account for possible cell lysis during the surface labeling step, cells were subjected to hypotonic lysis by resuspension in hypotonic buffer, and then pulsed with fluorescein as above. Proteins in the final eluate were precipitated with cold acetone, solubilized in Laemmli buffer, and treated with iodoacetamide to alkylate reduced cysteines. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE. Mass spectrometry analysis of proteins that were digested in-gel was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Label-free Quantitation of Mass Spectrometry Results. mzXML data files were uploaded onto the Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline (Release version 2.1.1; www.proteomics.ox.ac.uk), which uses Mascot, X!Tandem and OMSSA search engines [Trudgian DC et al 2010, Bioinformatics 26(8):1131-2. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq081; Trudgian DC et al 2011, Proteomics 11(14):2790-7. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000800]. The data were searched with the following peptide modifications: fluorescein (K), acetylation (protein N-terminus), carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), and deamidation (N/Q). Searches were performed against a custom, non-redundant trypanosome protein sequence database [containing 20195 entries] combining predicted protein sequences from TREU927 and Lister 427 genomic data [tritrypdb.org], with the inclusion of ES and VSG sequences [Hertz-Fowler C et al. (2008) Telomeric expression sites are highly conserved in Trypanosoma brucei. PLoS One 3: e3527; Cross GA et al. (2014) Capturing the variant surface glycoprotein repertoire (the VSGnome) of Trypanosoma brucei Lister 427. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 195: 59]. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, MS/MS fragment ion tolerance at 0.5 Da, and number of missed cleavages permitted at 2. The resulting peptide identifications from each search engine were validated with PEPTIDEPROPHET and PROTEINPROPHET and lists compiled at the peptide and protein level. IPROPHET was used to combine the identifications from three search engines and further refine identifications and probabilities. Normalized spectral index quantitation (SINQ) was applied to the grouped meta-searches to give protein-level quantitation between labeled samples and controls. All lists of peptide and protein identifications were generated with a probability cut-off corresponding to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) relative to a target decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Surface membrane organization and composition is key to cellular function, and membrane proteins serve many essential roles in endocytosis, secretion, and cell recognition. The surface of parasitic organisms, however, is a double-edged sword; this is the primary interface between parasites and their hosts, and those crucial cellular processes must be carried out while avoiding elimination by the host immune defenses. For extracellular African trypanosomes, the surface is partitioned such that all endo- and exocytosis is directed through a specific membrane region, the flagellar pocket, in which it is thought the majority of invariant surface proteins reside. However, very few of these proteins have been identified, severely limiting functional studies, and hampering the development of potential treatments. Here we used an integrated biochemical, proteomic and bioinformatic strategy to identify surface components of the human parasite Trypanosoma brucei. This surface proteome contains previously known flagellar pocket proteins as well as multiple novel components, and is significantly enriched in proteins that are essential for parasite survival. Molecules with receptor-like properties are almost exclusively parasite-specific, whereas transporter-like proteins are conserved in model organisms. Validation shows that the majority of surface proteome constituents are bona fide surface-associated proteins and, as expected, most present at the flagellar pocket. Moreover, the largest systematic analysis of trypanosome surface molecules to date provides evidence that the cell surface is compartmentalized into three distinct domains with free diffusion of molecules in each, but selective, asymmetric traffic between. This work provides a paradigm for the compartmentalization of a cell surface and a resource for its analysis.

### Keywords
Esag, Cell surface proteome, Plasma membrane, Surfeome, Vsg, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, UK
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Catarina Gadelha

### Lab Head
Dr Catarina Gadelha
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, UK


