### Accession
PXD013087

### Title
Comparative membrane-associated proteome of Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum and L.(L.) amazonensis

### Description
Protozoan parasites of the genus Leishmania are causative agents of leishmaniasis, a wide range of diseases affecting 12 million people worldwide. The species L. (L.) infantum and L. (L.) amazonensis are causative agents of visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis, respectively. Most proteome analyses of Leishmania have been carried out on whole-cell extracts. However, this approach tends to underrepresent membrane-associated proteins because of their high hydrophobicity and low solubility. Due to the great importance of membrane-associated proteins in biological processes, including host–parasite interactions, virulence and invasiveness, this study applied label-free shotgun proteomics to characterize and evaluate abundance levels of plasma membrane sub-proteome of promastigotes life-stage. The total number of proteins identified in L. (L.) infantum and L. (L.) amazonensis was 2033 and 2243, respectively. Both species shared 1908 of these quantified proteins. After cell localization prediction of all identified proteins, 394 proteins were described as plasma membrane-associated proteins and their majority (320 proteins) was presented in both species. Considering only exclusive proteins, 18 proteins were detected only in L. (L.) infantum and 56 proteins in L. (L.) amazonensis. We used two criteria to define “regulated” proteins; i) proteins with p-value < 0.05 after One-Way ANOVA analysis (quantitative analysis) and proteins detected only in L. (L.) infantum or L. (L.) amazonensis (qualitative analysis).

### Sample Protocol
- Promastigotes (1 x 109 cells) were harvested in the stationary phase (5th day to L. (L.) infantum and 6th day to L. (L.) amazonensis) by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were washed three times in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.2, and then homogenized on ice in ice-cold 0.1 M Na2CO3 lysis buffer, pH 11.5, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Protease Inhibitor Mix, GE Healthcare, USA). The lysates were sonicated for 2 x 20 s, incubated on ice for 1 h with rotation and submitted to ultracentrifugation at 150,000 x g for 90 min at 4°C (Sorvall Ultra Pro 80 Ultracentrifuge) to separate soluble proteins (supernatant) from membrane-associated proteins (pellet). Pellets were washed twice with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (500 mM and 50 mM, respectively). Finally, membrane-associated proteins were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM TEAB. Protein concentration was determined using 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA).;  - Membrane fractions from three independent biological replicates (n = 3) per species (L. (L.) infantum and L. (L.) amazonensis) were submitted to reduction of disulfide bonds using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration) for 1 hour at room temperature. Next, thiol groups were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (final concentration) for 1 hour at room temperature and protected from light. For protein digestion, samples were initially incubated with endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI) for 3 hours at room temperature. Then, samples were diluted eight-times with 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) and finally subjected to trypsin digestion (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Samples were acidified with 1% formic acid (final concentration; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min to quench enzyme activity and remove lipids.   - LC-MSE analysis (DIA) on a Synapt G2-Si (Waters).

### Data Protocol
- LC-MSE raw spectra data were analyzed in the Progenesis QI for Proteomics (QIP) v.2.0; - Data was searched against the L. (L.) infantum (8,237 entries) and L. (L.) mexicana (8,426 entries) databases obtained from TryTripDB release 35. As the database for L. (L.) amazonensis was incomplete at the time of analyses, the protein identification of this species was carried out using the L. mexicana database; - We used carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. We allowed up to 1 missed cleavages. Only peptides with FDR < 1% and proteins containing at least 1 unique peptide were used in this study; - Protein intensities were normalized based on median. Since data presented a normal distribution, we used One-Way ANOVA to identify regulated features using p < 0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma membrane proteins, Leishmania (leishmania) amazonensis, Leishmania (leishmania) infantum, Label free proteomics

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofisica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Thiago Verano-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Thiago Verano-Braga
Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofisica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais


