### Accession
PXD008293

### Title
Histone deacetylase inhibitors mediate selective degradation of nuclear uracil-DNA glycosylase 2 and increased genomic uracil

### Description
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) belong to a new group of chemotherapeutics that are increasingly used to treat B-cell-derived malignancies. Such malignancies regularly carry mutational signatures that conform to off-target induction of uracil by the AID/APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases, or downstream processing of uracil.  . HDACi suppress thymidylate synthase increasing the cellular dUTP/dTTP ratio and leading to increased pressure on uracil repair machinery due to misincorporated uracil lesions. To investigate potential effect upon other enzymes involved in genomic uracil induction and processing, Jurkat (T-cell lymphoma) and SUDHL5 (B-cell lymphoma) cells were treated with pan-HDACi SAHA prior to SILAC based MS/MS investigation. HDACi treatment mediated significant differential expression of xx and xx proteins in Jurkat and SUDHL5, respectively, and had a substantial impact upon enzymes involved in in pyrimidine metabolism. Surprisingly, uracil N-glycosylase, UNG, was strongly downregulated by HDACi treatment. Further analysis in HEK and HeLa cells revealed that HDACis induce specific loss of the nuclear isoform UNG2 independent of transcription and cell-cycle alterations. More than 80% of UNG2 is degraded proteasomally after 24 hours treatment with SAHA, MS275, Valproate or Na-butyrate, indicating a universal ability of HDACis to mediate loss of UNG2.  Targeted MS/MS analysis in HEK cells against a panel of proteins involved in DNA repair, translesion synthesis and nucleotide metabolism, revealed that UNG2 was the most pronounced differentially expressed among these after HDACi treatment. 48 hour treatment lead to a 30-40% increase in uracil lesions in the nuclear genome of HeLa and HEK cells and MS275 treatment in murine CH12F3 cell line mediated robust UNG2-loss accompanied by reduced class switch recombination. Furthermore, our analysis identified the PCNA-associated factor PAF15 among the downregulated proteins. PAF15 is overexpressed in many cancers and suppress TLS by inducing double monoubiquitinylation of PCNA and recruitment of the replicative polymerases. In summary, our findings demonstrate that HDAC inhibition affects the levels of proteins involved in DNA base excision repair, translesion synthesis and pyrimidine metabolism. These findings are important for a wide range of clinical applications of HDACi, such as in rheumatology, HIV-, and cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) interfaced with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Thermo Scientific, USA). 10 μL of the peptide solution was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C-18 trap column (75 μm i.d. 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, USA) and an acclaim PepMap100 C-18 analytical column (75 μm i.d. 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, USA) using a 120 min multi-step gradient (5 min 2%–6% B, 26 min 6%–12% B, 49 min 12%–20% B, 15 min 20%–28% B, 7 min 28% −4 0% B, 3 min 40%–100% B, 15 min at 100% B; where B is 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and A is 0.1% formic acid in water) at 250 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed in positive ion mode under data dependent acquisition (DDA) using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 30, automatic gain control target value of 3 × 106 for Orbitrap MS and 1 × 105 for MS/MS scans. Each MS scan (400–1600 m/z) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, followed by 10 MS/MS scans with isolation window 4.0 m/z, triggered for intensities above 1.7 × 104, at a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms for MS and 60 ms for MS/MS scans. A dynamic exclusion of 40 s was used as well as charge exclusion for unassigned, 1, and greater than 4.

### Data Protocol
review 2.3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.) was used to determine optimal search criteria. These were plugged in Max Quant v 1.5.30 mapping the spectra over Human canonical proteome with isoforms (Uniprot March 2016). The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; deamidation of asparagine/glutamine, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and dimethylation of lysine/arginine as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 (high confidence) for peptide as well as protein group identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to estimate the protein amounts in the sample using match between the runs with alignment time of 20 min and match time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aa, Activation induced deaminase;, Amino acid; aid

### Affiliations
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin  Erling Skjalgssons g 1, aboratoriesenteret * * Laboratoriesenter Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim 7030 Norway ( lab head )
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin  Erling Skjalgssons g 1, aboratoriesenteret * * Laboratoriesenter Norwegian University of Science and Technology Trondheim 7030 Norway ( lab head )


