### Accession
PXD004164

### Title
Proteomics and network analyses reveals inhibition of Akt-mTOR signaling in CD4+ T cells by Mycobacterium tuberculosis Mannose-capped Lipoarabinomannan

### Description
CD4+ T cells have a central role in controlling Mtb infection (1). Despite immune control, Mtb persists by interfering with macrophage and T cell function, allowing for pathogen survival. Our group has demonstrated direct and indirect inhibition of CD4+ T cell activation by different Mtb molecules including lipoproteins LpqH, LprA and LprG, and ManLAM (2-5). ManLAM is an abundant glycolipid in the Mtb cell wall and interferes with TCR signaling by down-regulating phosphorylation of Lck, CD3, ZAP70 and LAT (6).  Activation through the TCR-CD3 complex leads to marked changes in the proteome of T cells. Entry into cell cycle, production of cytokines and differentiation from naïve to effector and memory T cell are all reflected in the production and modification of multiple proteins. Mass spectrometry (MS) has been used to characterize TCR complex formation (7-11) and the effect of a range of stressors on the T cell proteome (12-14). Recent advances have overcome technical issues in quantitative MS and allow analysis of the complexity and dynamic range of the cellular proteome (15). To extract biological meaning different bioinformatic tools have been developed for MS based cellular studies (16, 17).    In this study we used label-free quantitative MS to characterize the effect of ManLAM on the proteome of activated CD4+ T cells. Approximately 5000 peptides were identified and quantitated from three biological experimental datasets in primary murine CD4+ T cells treated with or without ManLAM and activated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 monoclonal antibodies (mAb). Peptides with varying abundance were selected by likelihood ratio based statistical significance by comparing the intensities under different experimental conditions. ManLAM treatment resulted in abundance changes for 149 peptides representing 131 proteins in the activated CD4+ T cell proteome that affected a variety of enriched cluster modules and pathways. Validation experiments confirmed Man LAM induced inhibition of Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) that regulates cell cycle progression. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis revealed a central role for the Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. WB studies revealed decreased phosphorylation of both Akt and mTOR in ManLAM treated CD4+ T cells as well as decreased expression of Otub1, a key molecule regulated by mTOR. Thus disruption of the activated CD4+ T cell proteome by ManLAM-mediated inhibition of proximal TCR signaling is primarily mediated through inhibition of Akt-mTOR signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation and activation of CD4+ T cells Murine CD4+ T cells were isolated from spleens of 8- to 10-week old mice. Prior to activation, cells were pre-treated with or without purified ManLAM (40 g/ml) for 1 hr at 37oC in a 5% CO2 incubator.  ManLAM from M. tuberculosis H37Rv was obtained from the Tuberculosis Vaccine Testing and Research Materials contract (NIAID HHSN266200400091C) at Colorado State University (CSU). Stimulation of CD4+ T cells was performed in serum-free HL-1 medium (BioWhittaker, East Rutherford, NJ) supplemented with 0.5 mM 2-merchatoethanol, 10 mM HEPES buffer, nonessential amino acids, 2 mM L-glutamine, penicillin/streptomycin). CD4+ T cells (2 x106 cells/well) were activated in 6-well plates with 1 g/ml of soluble anti-mouse CD28 (clone 37.51) in wells pre-coated with 1 g/ml of hamster anti-mouse CD3ε (145-2C11) mAb (both from BD Biosciences) as previously described (6, 18).  After 24h cells were harvested for MS analysis and supernatants for IL-2 measurements to confirm that ManLAM had inhibited CD4+ T cell activation, as described (6, 18). For experiments with rapamycin (10nM; Cell Signaling Technology), T cells were pretreated as described for ManLAM. Sample preparation for solution-based label-free proteomics Samples were prepared and digested using a protocol adapted from the Filter-Aided based Sample Preparation (FASP) method (19). Each sample was solubilized and lysed in 5% SDS and 0.1M DTT in 0.1M Tris HCL pH 7.6.  Total protein concentration was determined using a modified Bradford assay (Bio- Rad Laboratories. A dual proteolytic digestion was performed with endopeptidase Lys C (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) and trypsin with a final enzyme to protein ratio of 1/20 (w/w). Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry for discovery LC/MS/MS was performed using a Waters ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography NanoAcquity (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), an LTQ Orbitrap Velos and an Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Samples from three independent experiments were run with 500 - 700 ng of protein. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate, resulting in 36 analytical runs (three biological replicates X four experimental conditions X three technical replicates). Repeat analyses of sample material were performed to improve protein identification. Mobile phase A (aqueous) contained 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN and mobile phase B (organic) contained 0.1% formic acid in 85% ACN. Samples were trapped and desalted on-line in mobile phase A at 10 μL/min for 10 min using a Waters UPLC PST C18 nanoACQUITY 300 (75 μm x 25 cm) reversed phase column with 5% mobile phase B. The column was washed at 99% mobile phase B for 10 min, followed by re-equilibration at 100% A for 15 min. Positive mode electrospray was conducted using a nanospray source and the mass spectrometer was operated at a resolution of 60,000. Quantitative and qualitative data were acquired using alternating full MS scan and MS/MS scans in normal mode. Survey data were acquired from m/z of 400 to 1600 and up to 20 precursors based on intensity were interrogated by MS/MS per switch. Two micro scans were acquired for every precursor interrogated and MS/MS was acquired as centroid data. All mass spectrometry analytical parameters for the discovery samples of the LC/MS/MS analytical run time was extended to 240 min (4h). The whole data set was processed via Rosetta Elucidator 11 (Version 3.3.01 SP4 25) (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle). The MS/MS peak lists were subsequently searched by Mascot (Version 2.2.0, IPI_mouse_06_2010) (Matrix Science, London, UK).  The database used was mouse International Protein Index (IPI) (56957 sequences). Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 10 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8Da; variable modifications including carbamidomethlylation of cysteines, 1 missed cleavage and oxidation of methoinine. To provide additional confidence in the assignments we considered proteins that had ≥ 2 peptides matching the above criteria to be confirmed assignments while proteins identified with one peptide with the above criteria as tentative assignments. Automated differential quantification of peptides was performed with Rosetta Elucidator. LC/MS/MS raw data was imported and for each MS spectrum profile of each LC/MS/MS run, chromatographic peaks and monoisotopic masses were extracted and aligned. Peak lists with the monoisotopic mass and corresponding MS/MS data were then generated for each sample and searched using Mascot. Resultant peptide identifications were imported into Elucidator and monoisotopic masses annotated with peptide identifications. Average peptide intensities from the same protein from triplicate samples were summed together to provide fold changes and log transformed with respect to their control groups for each protein.

### Data Protocol
Statistical Model:  Prior to analysis, data quality/reproducibility was addressed by Intra class Correlation Coefficient (ICC). The results showed that the median value of ICC was greater than 0.72, which indicated that data reproducibility was good overall and could proceed for further detailed analysis. The rate ratio (RR) of average value of one treatment group verse average value of another treatment group was calculated. {There were 6 RRs designated in to different experiment groups, namely, control vs. treatment1 [Experimental groups 1], control vs. treatment 2 [Experimental groups 2], control vs. treatment3 [Experimental groups 3], treatment 1 vs treatment 2 [Experimental groups 4], treatment 1 vs. treatment 3[Experimental groups 5], and treatment 2 vs treatment 3[Experimental groups 6]}. [Note for easy coding the treatment were renamed, i.e, Control = Resting CD4+ T cells (un-stimulated); Treatment-1 = Resting CD4+ T cells + antiCD3/ antiCD28 (Activated CD4+ T cells); Treatment-2 = CD4+ T cells + antiCD3/ antiCD28 + ManLAM (activated CD4+ T cells + ManLAM); Treatment-3 = Resting CD4+ T cells + ManLAM (Unstimualetd +ManLAM)]. Selecting “winner” peptides were based on to the expression differences between treatments groups (there are 6 pairwise comparisons). Likelihood ratio test based on mixed effect model was applied to correctly handle the correlation structure of data that had three technical measurements for each biological sample. The FDR (False Discovery Rate) controlling procedure was adapted to handle multiple comparisons issues when testing many peptides simultaneously. The final peptides were based on a P value cut off 0.1. (Since the peptide search was in the “exploratory” stage, the potential number of winner peptides was suggested only based on their un-adjusted p value in this analysis). In this study we focused on the effect of ManLAM on activated CD4+ T cells. Rate Ratio, P values, FDR adjusted P values were saved for all 4 pair of comparisons and listed in Tables 1 A- D.   Construction of Proteome functional networks and pathway analysis Following statistical analysis, winner peptides were listed as differentially regulated proteins and imported into Crosstalker Analysis (http://proteomics.case.edu/crosstalker/). Once imported, the software utilized biomedical literature and protein interaction databases such as STRING 10 (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) (20) to elucidate biological networks and pathways within the uploaded protein lists. To define functionally enriched modules in the constructed network, Crosstalker used a page-rank type algorithm and exhaustive search by staring a random walk form each seed gene provided. The resulting networks were visualized and annotated for pathway enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) cell wall glycolipid mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan (ManLAM) inhibits CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell activation by inhibiting proximal T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling when activated by anti-CD3. To understand the impact of ManLAM on CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell function when both the TCR-CD3 complex and major costimulator CD28 are engaged, we performed label-free quantitative MS and network analysis. Mixed-effect model analysis of peptide intensity identified 149 unique peptides representing 131 proteins that were differentially regulated by ManLAM in anti-CD3- and anti-CD28-activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. Crosstalker, a novel network analysis tool identified dysregulated translation, TCA cycle, and RNA metabolism network modules. PCNA, Akt, mTOR, and UBC were found to be bridge node proteins connecting these modules of dysregulated proteins. Altered PCNA expression and cell cycle analysis showed arrest at the G2M phase. Western blot confirmed that ManLAM inhibited Akt and mTOR phosphorylation, and decreased expression of deubiquitinating enzymes Usp9x and Otub1. Decreased NF-&#x3ba;B phosphorylation suggested interference with CD28 signaling through inhibition of the Usp9x-Akt-mTOR pathway. Thus, ManLAM induced global changes in the CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell proteome by affecting Akt-mTOR signaling, resulting in broad functional impairment of CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell activation beyond inhibition of proximal TCR-CD3 signaling.

### Keywords
Pathway analysis, Label free proteomics, Mycobacterium tuberculosis mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
1Departments of Medicine & 2Pathology, Case Western Reserve University and University Hospitals Case Medical Center; 3Department of Molecular Biology & Microbiology Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106,USA.
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Kathleen Lundberg

### Lab Head
Dr W. Henry Boom
1Departments of Medicine & 2Pathology, Case Western Reserve University and University Hospitals Case Medical Center; 3Department of Molecular Biology & Microbiology Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106,USA.


