### Accession
PXD011044

### Title
PCNA-targeting peptide modifies and increases the response to EGFR/HER2/VEGF inhibition in breast cancer cells

### Description
To combine inhibition of EGFR/HER2 and targeting of the cytosolic roles of PCNA using the APIM-peptide, and study the anti-cancer effects of this combinatory therapy in in vitro and in vivo breast cancer models.

### Sample Protocol
Samples A= Untreated for cells/vehicle (PEG300) for tumors, B=APIM-peptide 6uM for cells/6 mg/kg for tumors, C=AEE788 1 uM for cells/25 mg/kg for tumors, D=APIM-peptide+AEE788

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification values for all 67NR cell samples (n=12, four treatment groups: untreated, APIM-peptide, AEE788 and combination, three biological replicas) were log2-transformed and subjected to principal component analysis (PCA) (IDs found in at least two out of three replicas, missing values replaced with downshift mean and compressed standard deviation). Control values were subtracted from the treatment values, and the average of the three biological replicas used to represent the relative change to untreated control. Significant differentially expressed (DE) proteins (p<0.25) were identified by Wilcoxon Sign Rank Test (two-sided, non-parametric). The same procedure was done on tumor tissue samples, but no significantly changed proteins could be identified relative to control. The uniprot accession IDs of the significant proteins were mapped to KEGG pathways using the online KEGG mapper tool. Additionally, those identified in the combination treated group were submitted to database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID, 6.7) for functional annotation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), such as HER2 and/or EGFR are important therapeutic targets in multiple cancer cells. Low and/or short response to targeted therapies are often due to activation of compensatory signaling pathways, and therefore a combination of kinase inhibitors with other anti-cancer therapies have been proposed as promising strategies. PCNA is recently shown to have non-canonical cytosolic roles, and targeting PCNA with a cell-penetrating peptide containing the PCNA-interacting motif APIM is shown to mediate changes in central signaling pathways such as PI3K/Akt and MAPK, acting downstream of multiple RTKs. In this study, we show how targeting PCNA increased the anti-cancer activity of EGFR/HER2/VEGFR inhibition <i>in vitro</i> as well as <i>in vivo.</i> The combination treatment resulted in reduced tumor load and increased the survival compared to either single agent treatments. The combination treatment affected multiple cellular signaling responses not seen by EGFR/HER2/VEGFR inhibition alone, and changes were seen in pathways determining protein degradation, ER-stress, apoptosis and autophagy. Our results suggest that targeting the non-canonical roles of PCNA in cellular signaling have the potential to improve targeted therapies.

### Keywords
Multi-targeting therapy, Pr- progesterone receptor, Pi3k- the phosphoinositide 3-kinase, Egfr- epidermal growth factor receptor, Her2/erbb2- human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, Tnbc- triple negative breast cancer, Er- estrogen receptor, Combination therapy, Autophagy, Pcna- proliferating cell nuclear antigen, Signaling pathways, Mapk- mitogen-activated protein kinase, Vegf- vascular endothelial growth factor

### Affiliations
Professor Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet Erling Skjalgssons g 1, Laboratoriesenteret * 231.05.036 Trondheim 7030 Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Professor Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet Erling Skjalgssons g 1, Laboratoriesenteret * 231.05.036 Trondheim 7030 Norway


