### Accession
PXD012523

### Title
Secretome analysis of glioblastoma cells

### Description
PKR-like kinase (PERK) plays a significant role in inducing angiogenesis in various cancer-types including glioblastoma. Mass spectrometry screen on conditioned media from LN308 glioblastoma cell line treated with hypoxia revealed Peptidylglycine α-amidating monooxygenase (PAM) as a potential target inducing angiogenesis. PERK is found to be regulating PAM at mRNA level. PERK activation via CCT020312 (PERK activator) also increased the cleavage and thus the generation of sfCD domain of PAM in an oxygen-independent manner which acts as a signaling molecule from cytoplasm to the nuclei. PERK was found interacting with PAM in immuno-precipitation experiments suggesting a possible involvement in the generation of the PAM sfCD domain. Knockdown of PERK or PAM in LN308 cells reduced the formation of tubes by HUVECs in vitro. In vivo data also highlighted the importance of PAM in growth of glioblastoma where reduction of PAM expression in engrafted tumor significantly increased the survival in mice. In summary, PAM acts as a potential target for therapy against angiogenesis in glioblastoma.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the conditioned media were precipitated using ice cold ethanol followed by in-solution digest with Trypsin. The generated peptides were then desalted using SPE protocol. 1µg of peptide was used for each injection on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) nanoLC system coupled to a Q ExactivePlus mass spectrometer. The linear gradient was run from 3 to 42% for 180min at a flowrate of 250 nl/min. For the mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70.000 FWHM, AGC target: 3e6, maxIT of 120 ms. Data dependent MS scans were acquired using top15 strategy at normalized collision energy of 27%, resolution of 17.500 FWHM, isolation window of 1.2 m/z, target value of 5e4 and maximum injection time of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis, Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 3.0 NonLinear Dynamics) was used. The peptide identification was done using two search algorithms: X!Tandem via SearchGUI interface version 2.5.0 and Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science). The Uniprot human database (downloaded on 22sd of July 2015) was used with the following search parameters: Trypsin as protease (maximum 2 miss cleavages), fixed modification: carbamidomethylation at cysteine, variable modification: oxidation at methionine, 10 ppm as MS1 tolerance and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerance. To combine search results from X!Tandem and Mascot, PeptideShaker version 1.9.0 was used at a false discovery rate of 1 %. Only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
PKR-like kinase (PERK) plays a significant role in inducing angiogenesis in various cancer types including glioblastoma. By proteomics analysis of the conditioned medium from a glioblastoma cell line treated with a PERK inhibitor, we showed that peptidylglycine &#x3b1;-amidating monooxygenase (PAM) expression is regulated by PERK under hypoxic conditions. Moreover, PERK activation via CCT020312 (a PERK selective activator) increased the cleavage and thus the generation of PAM cleaved cytosolic domain (PAM sfCD) that acts as a signaling molecule from the cytoplasm to the nuclei. PERK was also found to interact with PAM, suggesting a possible involvement in the generation of PAM sfCD. Knockdown of PERK or PAM reduced the formation of tubes by HUVECs in vitro. Furthermore, in vivo data highlighted the importance of PAM in the growth of glioblastoma with reduction of PAM expression in engrafted tumor significantly increasing the survival in mice. In summary, our data revealed PAM as a potential target for antiangiogenic therapy in glioblastoma.

### Keywords
Dda, Shot-gun proteomics, Glioblastoma, Perk inhibitor, Secretome, Label-free

### Affiliations
Dr. Robert Ahrends Group leader lipidomics Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Straße 11 | 44139 Dortmund, Germany 

### Submitter
Chi Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Ahrends
Dr. Robert Ahrends Group leader lipidomics Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


