### Accession
PXD001368

### Title
Yeast phosphoproteome -  Glucose intake hampers PKA-regulated HSP90 chaperone activity

### Description
To study the effect of sucrose for yeast phosphoproteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
The in-house-constructed IMAC tip was capped at one end with a 20 μm polypropylene frits disk (Agilent, Wilmington, DE, USA) enclosed in a tip-end fitting. The tip was packed with 20 mg of Ni-NTA silica resin. All purification steps for buffer exchange and sample loading involved manipulation via centrifugation. Ni2+ ions were removed with 50 mM EDTA in 1 M NaCl. The tip was then activated with 100 mM FeCl3 and equilibrated with loading buffer (6% (v/v) Acetic acid at pH 3.0) prior to sample loading. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in loading buffer and loaded onto the IMAC tip. After successive washes with 6% (v/v) Acetic acid, 25% ACN and 6% (v/v) AA, the bound peptides were eluted with 200 mM NH4H2PO4. The eluted peptides were desalted using reversed phase-StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data from the LTQ-Orbitrap were transformed to msm-files using RAW2MSM software (version 1.1.)

### Publication Abstract
Aging is an intricate phenomenon associated with the gradual loss of physiological functions, and both nutrient sensing and proteostasis control lifespan. Although multiple approaches have facilitated the identification of candidate genes that govern longevity, the molecular mechanisms that link aging pathways are still elusive. Here, we conducted a quantitative mass spectrometry screen and identified all phosphorylation/dephosphorylation sites on yeast proteins that significantly responded to calorie restriction, a well-established approach to extend lifespan. Functional screening of 135 potential regulators uncovered that Ids2 is activated by PP2C under CR and inactivated by PKA under glucose intake. <i>ids2&#x394;</i> or <i>ids2</i> phosphomimetic cells displayed heat sensitivity and lifespan shortening. Ids2 serves as a co-chaperone to form a complex with Hsc82 or the redundant Hsp82, and phosphorylation impedes its association with chaperone HSP90. Thus, PP2C and PKA may orchestrate glucose sensing and protein folding to enable cells to maintain protein quality for sustained longevity.

### Keywords
Yeast, Phosphorylation imac

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry
Institute of Chemistry, Academia sinica

### Submitter
Chia-Feng Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Feng Tsai
Institute of Chemistry, Academia sinica


