### Accession
PXD002195

### Title
Fly Stress -  Fasting, but Not Aging, Dramatically Alters the Redox Status of Cysteine Residues on Proteins in Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
Altering the redox state of cysteine residues on protein surfaces is an important response to environmental challenges. While ageing and fasting alter many redox processes, the role of cysteine residues is uncertain. To address this we used a redox proteomic technique, Oxidative Isotope Coded Affinity TAgs (OxICAT), to assess cysteine residue redox changes in Drosophila melanogaster during ageing and fasting. This approach enabled us to simultaneously identify and quantify the redox state of several hundred cysteine residues in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
The head and thorax of flies exposed to various conditions were treated with acid to stabilise thiol redox state. Reduced thiols were alkylated with light-ICAT reagent. Oxidised thiols were reduced with TCEP and alkylated with heavy ICAT-reagent. Samples were trypsinized and ICAT-labelled peptides were affinity purified for LC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by MaxQuant allowing for methionine oxidation and two missed cleavages. Subsequently evidence.txt files from MaxQuant were processed by PgAdmin3 to generate Heavy/(Heavy+Light) ratios for each individual cysteine containing peptide, i.e. peaks from the evidence.txt file corresponding to the same cysteine were amalgamated.

### Publication Abstract
Altering the redox state of cysteine residues on protein surfaces is an important response to environmental challenges. Although aging and fasting alter many redox processes, the role of cysteine residues is uncertain. To address this, we used a redox proteomic technique, oxidative isotope-coded affinity tags (OxICAT), to assess cysteine-residue redox changes in Drosophila melanogaster during aging and fasting. This approach enabled us to simultaneously identify and quantify the redox state of several hundred cysteine residues in vivo. Cysteine residues within young flies had a bimodal distribution with peaks at &#x223c;10% and &#x223c;85% reversibly oxidized. Surprisingly, these cysteine residues did not become more oxidized with age. In contrast, 24 hr of fasting dramatically oxidized cysteine residues that were reduced under fed conditions while also reducing cysteine residues that were initially oxidized. We conclude that fasting, but not aging, dramatically alters cysteine-residue redox status in D. melanogaster.

### Keywords
Starvation, Drosophila, Ros, Aging

### Affiliations
MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge, UK.
MRC

### Submitter
Andrew James

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Patrick Murphy
MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge, UK.


