### Accession
PXD029210

### Title
Influence of polysaccharides from Polygonatum kingianum on short-chain fatty acid production and quorum sensing in Lactobacillus faecis

### Description
Set the bacteria solution without polysaccharides from Polygonatum kingianum(PS) as the control group (CON group), and the bacteria solution with PS added as the administration group (PS group), the target strain treated with and without PS (20 μg/mL) was used for  proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Lactobacillus faecis was inoculated into MRS medium. Then 1% mixed bacterial culture was added to MRS medium containing different concentrations of PS (0 μg/mL, 20 μg/mL), incubated under anaerobic conditions at 37°C, 180 rpm. Take the bacterial solution with OD600= 0.05 as the samples. Three parallel samples for each group and were processed in the same manner. Collect the bacterial cells and wash them repeatedly with sterile 1 × PBS. Finally, transfer the bacterial cells to a -80°C refrigerator for storage.  Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). For the protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% at protein, peptide and PSM levels. Protein identifications were accepted if they could pass quality control. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was performed using InterProScan (http://www. ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database

### Publication Abstract
Polysaccharide is one of the main active ingredients of <i>Polygonatum kingianum</i>, which has been proven to regulate the balance of gut microbiota. For the first time, this study focused on the regulation of polysaccharides from <i>Polygonatum kingianum</i> (PS) on <i>Lactobacillus faecis</i>, a specific probiotic in the intestinal tract. PS effectively promoted the biomass, biofilm and acetic acid production in <i>L. faecis</i> 2-84, and enhanced quorum sensing (QS) signaling. The characteristics of gene sequence were analyzed using genomics approaches, and <i>L. faecis</i> 2-84 was found to encode 18 genes that are closely related to QS and 10 genes related to short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Additionally, transcriptome and proteome analysis demonstrated that PS could promote the QS system of <i>L. faecis</i> by enhancing the transcription of <i>oppA</i> gene and expression of oppD protein. PS also regulated the production and metabolism of SCFAs of <i>L. faecis</i> by upregulating the expression of <i>ldh</i> and <i>metE</i> gene and adh2 protein, and downregulating the expression of <i>mvK</i> gene. In conclusion, it was speculated that PS could affect intestinal SCFAs production by affecting the QS system and SCFAs production in <i>L. faecis</i>. The present study implied that PS might have a role in promoting the growth of intestinal probiotics, where the QS system and SCFAs might be two of the important mechanisms for the probiotic activity of PS.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus faecis

### Affiliations
Yunnan University of Chinese Medicine
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Southern Medicine Utilization, College of Pharmaceutical Science, Yunnan University of Chinese Medicine, Kunming, Yunnan Province, China

### Submitter
Meng Fanying

### Lab Head
Dr Fanying Meng
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Southern Medicine Utilization, College of Pharmaceutical Science, Yunnan University of Chinese Medicine, Kunming, Yunnan Province, China


