### Accession
PXD008238

### Title
Analysis of Polysaccharide Utilization Loci from 53 sequenced North Sea Flavobacteriia suggests that major algal glycans exhibit limited structural diversity

### Description
Marine algae convert a substantial fraction of the carbon dioxide they fix into various polysaccharides. Bacteria specialized on the remineralization of these polysaccharides often feature genomic clusters, termed polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs). Such PULs are often prevalent in, but not limited to, marine Flavobacteriia. Since knowledge on extant PUL diversity is sparse, we sequenced the genomes of 53 North Sea Flavobacteriia. We obtained 400 PULs, suggesting usage of a large array of polysaccharides, including laminarin, α- and β-mannans, fucose-, xylose-, galactose-, rhamnose- and arabinose-containing substrates, pectins, and chitins. Many of the PULs were novel, some indicating substrates that have rarely been described in marine environments. PUL repertoires of isolates often differed significantly within genera, corroborating ecological niche-associated glycan partitioning. Polysaccharide uptake in Flavobacteriia is mediated by SusCD. Respective protein trees revealed clustering according to polysaccharide specificities. Analysis of SusCD expression in multiyear phytoplankton bloom-associated metaproteomes indicated changes in microbial utilization of glucan, ß-mannan and sulfated xylan, suggesting that distinct substrates are temporarily abundant.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from 0.2 µm filtered bacterioplankton biomass and separation was carried out as described previously (Teeling et al., 2012) with the modification that gel lanes were cut into 10 equal pieces prior to tryptic digestion (1 µg/ml, Promega, Madison WI, USA) and subsequent mass spectrometric detection in an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data was analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; v27, r11) as described previously (Teeling et al., 2012). Searches were carried out against forward-decoy protein databases of all ORFs from metagenomes of individual years (2009: 558,464; 2010: 1,911,043; 2011: 1,814,926; 2012: 1,706,063 sequences) and against a non-redundant database of all proteins from all metagenome samples combined, in order to identify annually recurring abundant proteins. This non-redundant database was constructed from all predicted protein-coding genes of all metagenomes (6,194,278 sequences) using the uclust option of USEARCH v6.1.544 (Edgar, 2010; options: cluster_fast; nucleotide identity 0.99; maxhits 5; maxrejects 30) and contained 3,212,324 sequences. Common laboratory contaminants were included in all databases. Technical duplicates of each sample were searched together (including all 20 subsamples) to obtain averaged spectral counts. Validation of protein- and peptide identifications was performed with Scaffold v4 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) using the parameters previously described, and normalized spectral abundance factors (%NSAF) were calculated (Zhang et al., 2010) to allow for semi-quantitative analysis

### Publication Abstract
We investigated Bacteroidetes during spring algae blooms in the southern North Sea in 2010-2012 using a time series of 38 deeply sequenced metagenomes. Initial partitioning yielded 6455 bins, from which we extracted 3101 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) including 1286 Bacteroidetes MAGs covering ~120 mostly uncultivated species. We identified 13 dominant, recurrent Bacteroidetes clades carrying a restricted set of conserved polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs) that likely mediate the bulk of bacteroidetal algal polysaccharide degradation. The majority of PULs were predicted to target the diatom storage polysaccharide laminarin, alpha-glucans, alpha-mannose-rich substrates, and sulfated xylans. Metaproteomics at 14 selected points in time revealed expression of SusC-like proteins from PULs targeting all of these substrates. Analyses of abundant key players and their PUL repertoires over time furthermore suggested that fewer and simpler polysaccharides dominated early bloom stages, and that more complex polysaccharides became available as blooms progressed.

### Keywords
Pul, Polysaccharide

### Affiliations
MPI for Marine Microbiology Celsiusstr. 1 D-28359 Bremen Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Frank Unfried

### Lab Head
Dr Rudolf Amann
MPI for Marine Microbiology Celsiusstr. 1 D-28359 Bremen Germany


