### Accession
PXD027808

### Title
Expansion of the Drosophila melanogaster sperm proteome

### Description
Given the continued advances in mass spectrometry technology and methods for database searching since the previous characterization of the Drosophila melanogaster sperm proteome, a new proteomic analysis of sperm samples was conducted to expand the size and coverage of the sperm proteome. This dataset is part of a larger project examining the molecular life history of Drosophila sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Flies (D. melanogaster w1118) were maintained on standard cornmeal medium at ambient light and room temperature and collected within 24 hours of eclosion. Sperm samples were collected from 7-day old virgin and mated males. Virgin males were aged in vials for 7 days and then frozen in liquid nitrogen. Mated males were aged in vials for 3 days (to become sexually mature), paired with an excess of females for 2 days, separated from females and aged in fresh vials for an additional 2 days, and then frozen in liquid nitrogen. Sperm from approximately 300 males were isolated from seminal vesicles and pooled in PBS per replicate. Two biological replicates were collected per condition (mated and virgin).  Sperm samples were resuspended in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer with NuPAGE reducing agent (Thermo Fisher) and solubilized by heating. Samples were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 µL/min for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All m/z values of eluting ions (range between 380-1500 Da) were measured at a resolution of 70,000. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (Top 20) to isolate and fragment the most abundant precursor ions at 32.5% NCE. Fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 35,000. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis, and dynamic exclusion was 60s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data were searched against the Drosophila melanogaster protein database (dmel-all-translation-r6.32, FlyBase.org), appended with the cRAP v1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org), using the standard workflow in PEAKS X+ (de novo + PEAKS DB + PEAKS PTM + SPIDER; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The search database only included the longest protein sequence for genes with multiple isoforms. Spectral data from virgin and mated samples were run together in a combined analysis using the following search parameters: mass tolerance of 15 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), acetylation (K), phosphorylation (STY), and ubiquitination (GG and LRGG) as variable modifications, and up to three missed tryptic cleavages. Peptide identifications were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% based on the decoy-fusion approach. Protein identifications were filtered to a -10lgP score ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceIn species with internal fertilization, sperm spend an important part of their lives within the female. To examine the life history of the sperm during this time, we used semiquantitative proteomics and sex-specific isotopic labeling in fruit flies to determine the extent of molecular continuity between male and female reproductive tracts and provide a global catalog of sperm-associated proteins. Multiple seminal fluid proteins and female proteins associate with sperm immediately after mating. Few seminal fluid proteins remain after long-term sperm storage, whereas female-derived proteins constitute one-fifth of the postmating sperm proteome by then. Our data reveal a molecular "hand-off" from males to females, which we postulate to be an important component of sperm-female interactions.

### Keywords
Seminal fluid proteins, Lc-msms, Fertility, Sperm, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University
Syracuse University

### Submitter
Erin McCullough

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University


