### Accession
PXD020757

### Title
Mechanisms and Novel Proteins for Iron Oxide Mineral Reduction in the Hyperthermophilic Crenarchaeon Pyrodictium delaneyi

### Description
Dissimilatory iron reduction by hyperthermophilic archaea occurs in many geothermal environments and generally relies on microbe-mineral interactions that transform various iron oxide minerals. In this study, the physiology of dissimilatory iron and nitrate reduction was examined in the hyperthermophilic crenarchaeon Pyrodictium delaneyi Su06T. Protein electrophoresis showed that the c-type cytochrome and general protein compositions of P. delaneyi changed when grown on ferrihydrite relative to nitrate. Differential proteomic analyses using tandem mass tagged protein fragments and mass spectrometry detected 660 proteins and differential production of 127 proteins. Among these, two putative membrane-bound molybdopterin-dependent oxidoreductase complexes increased in relative abundance 60- to 3,000-fold and 50-100-fold in cells grown on iron oxide. A putative 8-heme c-type cytochrome was 60-fold more abundant in iron grown cells and was unique to the Pyrodictiaceae. There was also a >14,700-fold increase in a membrane transport protein in iron grown cells. There were no changes in the abundances of flagellin proteins nor a putative nitrate reductase, but a membrane nitric oxide reductase was more abundant on nitrate. These data help to elucidate the mechanisms by which hyperthermophilic crenarchaea generate energy and transfer electrons across the membrane to iron oxide minerals.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from 8 cell pellets, four from each growth condition (ferrihydrite versus nitrate). Each pellet was obtained from 1.2 L of cells grown until late logarithmic growth phase. Cell pellets were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 1 h at 4°C and washed two times with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 buffer. For cells grown with ferrihydrite, prior to centrifugation, 250 ml of TPE buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, 300 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.0) and 1 L of oxalate solution (226 mM ammonium oxalate, 167 mM oxalic acid) was added to dissolve the iron minerals and dissociate cells from the mineral particles. To ensure thorough mixing without compromising protein integrity, this step was performed on ice for 20 min. The harvested pellet was stored at -20°C until further use. Cell lysis, protein extraction, reduction, alkylation, acetone precipitation, and in-solution protein digestion were performed using the PierceTM Mass Spec Sample Prep Kit for Cultured Cells kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Prior to beginning protocols as described by the manufacturer, cell pellets were thawed and disrupted on ice by sonication. Cell lysis was confirmed using phase-contrast light microscopy, and this suspension was processed through the kit. Extracted proteins were quantified using the DC protein assay kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Bovine serum albumin was used as a protein standard.  Differential protein abundances were determined quantitatively by labeling equal amounts of digested peptides (50 μg) using TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). This labeling kit can be used to label up to ten different peptide samples for identification and quantification using mass spectrometry. Eight isobaric tags (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N) were used to label four biological replicates per growth condition, and each condition was technically replicated with a different isobaric label. Labeled peptide samples associated with each technical replicate were combined in equal amounts, resulting in two samples containing eight isobarically labeled biological samples (4 for ferrihydrite, 4 for nitrate). The combined samples were analyzed two times (instrumental technical replicates) using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 nanoLC system at the University of Massachusetts Mass Spectrometry Center. Briefly, 5 μL of sample were loaded onto a trap column and desalted with 15 μL buffer A (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were then eluted through a 50 cm nano-column (PepMap RSLC 500 mm x 75 µm, Thermo) over 180 min using a gradient from 5% B to 45% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min into the mass spectrometer. Eluted peptides were detected with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Electron). MS1 spectra were acquired at 120,000 resolution over a range 375-1500 m/z with a 2 second cycle time. Data dependent MS/MS spectra for peptide identification were acquired in the linear ion trap using an isolation width of 1.2 m/z and CID with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. TMT quantitation was achieved by synchronous precursor selection (SPS) of the top 5 precursors (MS1 charge state +2, isolation width 1.3 m/z) or top 10 precursors (MS1 charge state +3, isolation width 0.7 m/z or MS1 charge state +4—+6, isolation width 0.5 m/z) and subsequent MS3 using HCD at 65% NCE with Orbitrap detection at 50,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.3 software. Instrumental technical replicates were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with the P. delaneyi Su06T proteome (Jung et al. 2020). The search was configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, and trypsin cleavage with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. A reversed sequence decoy strategy was used to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q-values ≤ 0.05 were used, and at least one unique peptide was required for reporting identified proteins. Reporter ions were corrected for isotopic impurities (specific to the lot of label reagents provided by Thermo Scientific) and quantified with a co-isolation threshold of 75, and synchronous precursor selection (SPS) mass matches threshold of 65%. Protein abundances were quantified by summing the reporter ion intensities across all matching peptide spectrum matches (PSMs). The abundance values were normalized to the total peptide amount for each reporter ion channel to account for equal protein loading. Normalized reporter ion intensities from Proteome Discoverer v. 2.3 were used to identify differentially produced proteins within the software as well as using ‘edgeR’ in the Bioconductor software framework and the ‘debrowser’ package in R (version 3.6.1 [http://www.r-project.org]) (Robinson et al. 2010, Kucukural et al. 2019). Low intensity proteins were filtered to exclude proteins for which maximum intensities for each protein across all conditions were less than 10. Trimmed mean of m-values (TMM) normalization was performed using the ‘edgeR’ package. edgeR uses an empirical Bayes dispersion estimation, fits a negative binomial generalized log-linear model and performs protein-wise statistical tests. Proteins were reported as differentially produced if |log2FC|>1 and adjusted p value <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt; hyperthermophile; archaea; iron reducer

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA, USA

### Submitter
Srishti Kashyap

### Lab Head
Dr James F Holden
Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA, USA


