### Accession
PXD041955

### Title
Extending MS Annika for MS2-MS3-based Cross-linking Workflows

### Description
Over the past few decades cross-linking mass spectrometry (XLMS) has become a powerful tool for identification of protein-protein interactions and for gaining insight into the structures of proteins in living cells, tissues, and organelles. The development of new crosslinkers, enrichment strategies and data acquisition methods led to the establishment of numerous new software tools specifically for the analysis and interpretation of cross-linking data. We previously published one of these tools called MS Annika, a cross-linking search engine which can accurately identify cross-linked peptides in MS2 spectra from a variety of different MS-cleavable crosslinkers. In this publication we present an updated MS Annika and a new search algorithm that additionally supports processing of data from MS2-MS3-based approaches and identification of peptides from MS3 spectra. In the new MS2-MS3 search algorithm, MS3 spectra are matched to their corresponding precursor doublet peak in the MS2 scan to identify the crosslink modification and the monoisotopic peptide mass. This information is then used to adjust the MS3 spectra for search with MS Amanda, our in-house developed peptide search engine, to identify the cross-linked peptides. Peptides that are identified in the MS2 scan and one or more of the associated product MS3 scans are re-scored with a novel scoring function to reflect the increased confidence. Finally, the detected cross-links are validated by estimating the false discovery rate (FDR) using a target-decoy approach. We evaluated the MS3-search-capabilities of MS Annika on five different datasets covering a variety of experimental approaches and compared it to XlinkX and MaXLinker, two other cross-linking search engines that support MS3 crosslink identification. Three of the datasets were benchmark datasets of synthetic peptides that allow calculation of an experimentally validated FDR, and we show that MS Annika detects up to 4 times more true unique crosslinks than MaXLinker and up to 35% more than XlinkX while simultaneously yielding less false positive hits and therefore a more accurate FDR than the other two search engines. Additionally, for the other two datasets we could show that MS Annika finds between 74% to 2.5 times more crosslinks at 1% estimated FDR and reveals protein-protein interactions that are not detected by either XlinkX or MaXLinker.

### Sample Protocol
9.3 mM crosslinker reagent (DSSO/DSBSO) stock solutions were freshly prepared in dry dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and 0.5 μL of stock solution was added to 1 μL of each of the synthesised peptide groups in separate vials. Additional stock solution was added 4x every 30 min up to a total of 2.5 μL of crosslinker stock solution. The resulting 3.5 μL reaction mixes were quenched using 31.5 μL 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) buffer for 30 min and pooled to a single tube. 5 ng of trypsin/group was added for digestion overnight at 37 °C. Reduction of the azide protection groups to the respective amines was achieved by incubation to 50 mM (final concentration) tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TECEP) for 30 min at room temperature. The reduced peptides were finally pooled to a single vial, aliquoted and stored at -70 °C until further usage. The cross-linked and digested peptide pools were then mixed with a 5-100x excess (by mass) of tryptic HEK peptides to mimic complex mixtures. The spiked samples were subsequently enriched either by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) or via affinity enrichment. For SEC approximately 10 μg of the cross-linked peptides + tryptic HEK peptides mix was fractionated on a TSKgel SuperSW2000 column (300 mm x 4.5 mm x 4 μm, Tosoh Bioscience) which was operated at 200 μl/min in 30% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Fractions were collected every minute and ACN was removed under reduced pressure to obtain concentrated samples for LC-MS/MS. DSBSO cross-linked peptides were affinity enriched using dibenzylcyclooctyne (DBCO) immobilised beads as described in another publication by Matzinger and co-workers. Samples were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano-system coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer with FAIMS pro interface (all by Thermo Scientific™) that was operated using Thermo Scientific™ Xcalibur™ v4. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fischer Scientific™, PepMap C18, 500 mm x 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, with the following gradient: 0 - 10 min 2% buffer B, followed by an increasing concentration of buffer B up to 40% until min 130. This is followed by a 5 min gradient from reaching 95% B, washing for 5 min with 95% B and then re-equilibration of the column in buffer A at 30 °C (buffer B: 80% ACN, 19.92% H2O and 0.08% TFA; buffer A: 99.9% H2O and 0.1% TFA). The Orbitrap Eclipse was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 375 - 1500, nominal resolution 120K, Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target value 4E5). MS2 scans were acquired in the orbitrap using CID fragmentation at a collision energy of 25, an isolation width of 1.2 m/z, a resolution of 30K and an AGC target value of 5E4. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (± 10 ppm) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 25 s. MS3 scans were triggered by the crosslinker specific mass difference (DSSO: 31.9721 Da, DSBSO: 182.0071 Da) and either acquired in the orbitrap or in the ion trap, depending on the experiment, using CID fragmentation at a collision energy of 35 and an isolation width of 2.0 m/z. For MS3 scans recorded in the orbitrap, the resolution was set to 15K, maximum injection time 22 ms and AGC target value 2E4. For MS3 scans recorded in the ion trap, the ion trap was operated in rapid mode, maximum injection time 150 ms and AGC target value 4E3. Compensation voltage for FAIMS was set to -55V. The MS3 acquisition was designed as described by Wheat and co-workers.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed with MS Annika (v1.1.3) in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Scientific, v2.5.0.400), XlinkX (v2.5) in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific, v3.0.0.757) and MaXLinker (v1.0.0) and results were compared against each other to assess the performance of each search engine. MS1 Tolerance was set to 5-10 ppm, MS2 Tolerance between 10-20 ppm and MS3 Tolerance to 10 ppm for orbitrap spectra and 0.5 Da for ion trap spectra. A maximum number of 4 missed cleavages was allowed and carbamidomethyl (C, +57.021 Da) was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) was considered as a variable modification. For identification of monolinks DSSO amidated, hydrolysed and tris were considered (K, +175.030 Da; K, +176.014 Da; K, +279.078 Da) in DSSO experiments. In DSBSO experiments monolink modifications of DSBSO amidated, hydrolysed and tris were considered (K, +325.065 Da; K, +326.049 Da; K, +429.113 Da). Results were validated for 1% FDR. For a detailed description of all search settings please refer to the publication.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry has become a powerful tool for the identification of protein-protein interactions and for gaining insight into the structures of proteins. We previously published MS Annika, a cross-linking search engine which can accurately identify cross-linked peptides in MS2 spectra from a variety of different MS-cleavable cross-linkers. In this publication, we present MS Annika 2.0, an updated version implementing a new search algorithm that, in addition to MS2 level, only supports the processing of data from MS2-MS3-based approaches for the identification of peptides from MS3 spectra, and introduces a novel scoring function for peptides identified across multiple MS stages. Detected cross-links are validated by estimating the false discovery rate (FDR) using a target-decoy approach. We evaluated the MS3-search-capabilities of MS Annika 2.0 on five different datasets covering a variety of experimental approaches and compared it to XlinkX and MaXLinker, two other cross-linking search engines. We show that MS Annika detects up to 4 times more true unique cross-links while simultaneously yielding less false positive hits and therefore a more accurate FDR estimation than the other two search engines. All mass spectrometry proteomics data along with result files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD041955.

### Keywords
Crosslinker, Xlms, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Search engine, Ppi, Crosslinking, Protein-protein-interaction, Ms3, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Bioinformatics Research Group, Softwarepark 11, 4232 Hagenberg, Austria
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria

### Submitter
Micha Johannes Birklbauer

### Lab Head
Dr Viktoria Dorfer
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Bioinformatics Research Group, Softwarepark 11, 4232 Hagenberg, Austria


### SDRF
- cell type: not available
- organism: Escherichia coli
- organism part: Ribosomal complex
- disease: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Eclipse

