### Accession
PXD014756

### Title
Function of the MYND domain and C-terminal region in regulating the subcellular localization and catalytic activity of the SMYD family lysine methyltransferase Set5

### Description
SMYD lysine methyltransferases target histones and non-histone proteins for methylation and are critical regulators of muscle developmental and implicated in neoplastic transformation. They are characterized by a split catalytic SET domain and an intervening MYND zinc finger domain, as well as an extended C-terminal domain. Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains two SMYD family members, Set5 and Set6, which share similar structural elements with the mammalian SMYD proteins. Set5 is a histone H4 lysine 5, 8, and 12 methyltransferase, implicated in the regulation of stress responses and genome stability. While the SMYD proteins have diverse roles in cells, there are many gaps in our understanding of how these enzymes are regulated. Here, we performed mutational analysis of Set5, combined with phosphoproteomics, to identify regulatory mechanisms for its enzymatic activity and subcellular localization.  Our results indicate that the MYND domain promotes Set5 chromatin association in cells and mediates its interaction with DNA. Phosphoproteomics revealed extensive phosphorylation of Set5 and phosphomimetic mutations enhance Set5 catalytic activity and diminish its ability to interact with chromatin in cells.  These studies uncover multiple regions within Set5 that regulate its localization and methyltransferase activity and highlight potential avenues for understanding mechanisms controlling the diverse roles of SMYD enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype (yEG001) and SET5::SET5-2xFLAG::KANMX (yEG139) yeast strains were grown in 2 L of YPD at 30 °C to late log-phase, harvested, lysed and subjected to anti-FLAG immunoprecipitations as described (51, 53). Phosphatase inhibitors (Roche phosSTOP tablet) were included in the lysis buffer to preserve protein phosphorylation. Set5-FLAG was eluted from the beads during two 30-min incubations with 0.2 mg/mL 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma) at 4 °C. Samples were pooled, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C until processing for mass spectrometry. Proteins were precipitated with 23% TCA and washed with acetone. Protein pellets were solubilized in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich), and alkylated with 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Fluka Analytical). Digested proteins were analyzed by  four–step MudPIT using an Agilent 1200 G1311 quaternary pump and a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos using an in-house built electrospray stage (54).

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and protein quantitation were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter (55) with monoisotopic peak option. Peptide matching was done against a Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database with reversed sequences and recombinant proteins using ProLuCID (56, 57) with a fixed modification of 57.02146 on cysteine and differential modification of 79.9663 on serine, threonine and tyrosine. Peptide candidates were filtered using DTASelect, with these parameters; -p 2 -y 1 --trypstat --sfp 0.01 --modstat --extra --pI -DM 10 --DB --dm -in -t 1 -a true --brief --quiet  (55, 58). Phosphosite localization score was calculated (59)

### Publication Abstract
SMYD lysine methyltransferases target histones and nonhistone proteins for methylation and are critical regulators of muscle development and implicated in neoplastic transformation. They are characterized by a split catalytic SET domain and an intervening MYND zinc finger domain, as well as an extended C-terminal domain. <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> contains two SMYD proteins, Set5 and Set6, which share structural elements with the mammalian SMYD enzymes. Set5 is a histone H4 lysine 5, 8, and 12 methyltransferase, implicated in the regulation of stress responses and genome stability. While the SMYD proteins have diverse roles in cells, there are many gaps in our understanding of how these enzymes are regulated. Here, we performed mutational analysis of Set5, combined with phosphoproteomics, to identify regulatory mechanisms for its enzymatic activity and subcellular localization. Our results indicate that the MYND domain promotes Set5 chromatin association in cells and is required for its role in repressing subtelomeric genes. Phosphoproteomics revealed extensive phosphorylation of Set5, and phosphomimetic mutations enhance Set5 catalytic activity but diminish its ability to interact with chromatin in cells. These studies uncover multiple regions within Set5 that regulate its localization and activity and highlight potential avenues for understanding mechanisms controlling the diverse roles of SMYD enzymes.

### Keywords
Methyltransferase, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD 21230

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Erin. M. Green
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD 21230


