### Accession
PXD004691

### Title
Comparison of FFPE and fresh frozen prostate tissues using PCT SWATH

### Description
We compared the proteomes of FFPE and fresh frozen tissues (both tumorous and non-tumorous) from 16 prostate cancer patients using pressure cycling technology and SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Each tssue sample was lyzed and digested using pressure cycling technology (PCT) (Pubmed ID: 25730263). Each digest was analyzed in a tripleTOF 5600 under SWATH mode (variable windows).

### Data Protocol
The SWATH data were first analyzed using OpenSWATH with a SWATH assay library built from prostate tissues. Then the results were refined using DIA-expert (manuscript in preparation)

### Publication Abstract
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE), biobanked tissue samples offer an invaluable resource for clinical and biomarker research. Here, we developed a pressure cycling technology (PCT)-SWATH mass spectrometry workflow to analyze FFPE tissue proteomes and applied it to the stratification of prostate cancer (PCa) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) samples. We show that the proteome patterns of FFPE PCa tissue samples and their analogous fresh-frozen (FF) counterparts have a high degree of similarity and we confirmed multiple proteins consistently regulated in PCa tissues in an independent sample cohort. We further demonstrate temporal stability of proteome patterns from FFPE samples that were stored between 1 and 15&#xa0;years in a biobank and show a high degree of the proteome pattern similarity between two types of histological regions in small FFPE samples, that is, punched tissue biopsies and thin tissue sections of micrometer thickness, despite the existence of a certain degree of biological variations. Applying the method to two independent DLBCL cohorts, we identified myeloperoxidase, a peroxidase enzyme, as a novel prognostic marker. In summary, this study presents a robust proteomic method to analyze bulk and biopsy FFPE tissues and reports the first systematic comparison of proteome maps generated from FFPE and FF samples. Our data demonstrate the practicality and superiority of FFPE over FF samples for proteome in biomarker discovery. Promising biomarker candidates for PCa and DLBCL have been discovered.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer; pct-swath; ffpe

### Affiliations
Westlake University
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich


