### Accession
PXD031706

### Title
Antibacterial Activities and Action Mode of Anti-hyperlipidemic Lomitapide Against Staphylococcus aureus_1

### Description
Lomitapide has been approved by FDA for years in reducing levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) in cases of familial hypercholesterolemia, whereas the antibacterial effect of lomitapide remains elusive. In this study, the inhibitory activities of lomitapide against Staphylococcus aureus, including both methicillin sensitive and resistant S. aureus, were first time discovered by drug repositioning. Lomitapide has shown the inhibitory activities not only on the planktonic cell growth but also on the biofilm formation of S. aureus. Moreover, lomitapide has shown mild bactericidal effect on planktonic cells of clinical S. aureus strains as indicated in time killing assay. In order to investigate the mechanism of actions of lomitapide, quantitative proteomics analysis was then applied and suggested that the pathways involved in the cell wall biosynthesis and protein biosynthesis might participate in its action mode, whereas the clinical applications of lomitapide antibacterial activities need to be extensive investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Clinically isolated MRSA strain was inoculated and cultured to exponential growth phase (OD600 at 0.5) in TSB and divided into two groups, the control group and the drug treated group. Lomitapide was added to the drug treated group until a final concentration of 1/2× MIC (12.5 uM) reached, and DMSO added as Lomitapide in the control group. Then, cultures in both groups were cultivated for 2h at 180rpm. The microbial was centrifuged at 12000rpm for 10min, washed twice with Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS). Lyse the cells by bead-beating at 4 °C in RIPA lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), The protein reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion were followed as filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The digestion products were analyzed with liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS), followed by label-free quantitative analysis. The MS experiment was performed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were quantitatively analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer software (ver 2.4.0.305) and matched with the reference database of Staphylococcus aureus (strain NCTC 8325 / PS 47).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus; lomitapide; antibiotic resistance; drug reposition

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Sixth People's Hospital: Shenzhen, Guangdong, CN

### Submitter
Yuxi Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxi Zhao
Shenzhen Sixth People's Hospital: Shenzhen, Guangdong, CN


