### Accession
PXD042684

### Title
Phosphorylation bar-coding of Free Fatty Acid receptor 2 is generated in a tissue-specific manner

### Description
Free Fatty Acid receptor 2 (FFA2) is activated by short-chain fatty acids and expressed widely, including in white adipocytes and various immune and enteroendocrine cells. Using a Designer Receptor Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs (DREADD) variant of human FFA2 we explored the activation and phosphorylation profile of the receptor, both in a heterologous cell line and in tissues from a transgenic knock-in mouse line expressing this DREADD. FFA2 phospho-site specific antisera targeting either pSer296/pSer297 or pThr306/pThr310 provided sensitive biomarkers of both constitutive and agonist-mediated phosphorylation as well as an effective means to visualise agonist-activated receptors in situ. In white adipose tissue phosphorylation of residues Ser296/Ser297 was enhanced upon agonist activation whilst Thr306/Thr310 did not become phosphorylated. By contrast, in immune cells from Peyer’s patches Thr306/Thr310 become phosphorylated in a strictly agonist-dependent fashion. This was also true in enteroendocrine cells of the colon. The concept of phosphorylation bar-coding has centred to date on the potential for different agonists to promote distinct receptor phosphorylation patterns. Here we demonstrate that this occurs for the same agonist-receptor pairing in different patho-physiologically relevant target tissues. This may underpin why a single G protein-coupled receptor can generate different functional outcomes in a tissue-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 cells expressing an eYFP-tagged human FFAR2 DREADD receptor were cultured to confluence. Receptor expression was induced with 100 ng/mL of doxycycline for 24 hours, followed by 5 minutes stimulation at 37 °C with 100 M of sorbic acid or 100 M of 4-Methoxy-3-methyl-benzoic acid (MOMBA). The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, and TE buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails was added to the dishes followed by transfer of cells into pre-chilled tubes. The cells were homogenised and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 50,000 rpm for 45 minutes at 4 °C. The resulting pellet was solubilised in RIPA buffer [50 mM tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, and 0.1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol (pH 7.5)] and the protein content was determined using a BCA protein assay kit. The FFAR2 DREADD receptor was immunoprecipitated using GFP-Trap® Agarose resin (Proteintech) followed by separation on a 4-12% polyacrylamide gel. The gels were stained with Coomassie blue and the bands corresponding the human FFAR2 DREADD receptor ( 75 kDa) were excised. Gel pieces were destained in 50% EtOH and subjected to reduction with 5mM DTT for 30min at 56 °C and alkylation with 10mM Iodoacetamide for 30min before digestion with trypsin at 37 °C  overnight. The peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and concentrated to 20 uL. The peptides were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 beads packed into a StageTip column, and phosphorylated peptides were then eluted, dried, and then injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a nanoLC Ultra 2D plus loading pump and nanoLC as-2 autosampler (Eksigent).  Peptides were loaded onto the trap column for 5 min at a flow rate of 5 ul/min of loading buffer (98% water/2% ACN/ 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid). Trap column was then switched in line with the analytical column and peptides were eluted with a gradient of increasing ACN, containing 0.1 % formic acid at 300 nl/min. The eluate was sprayed into a TripleTOF 5600+ electrospray tandem mass spectrometer (AB Sciex Pte. Foster City, U.S.A.) and analysed in Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode, performing 120 ms of MS followed by 80 ms MS/MS analyses on the 20 most intense peaks seen by MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data file generated was analysed using the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, U.S.A.), against the SwissProt as well as against our in-house database to which we added the protein sequence of interest, using trypsin as the cleavage enzyme.  Carbamidomethylation was entered as a fixed modification of cysteine and methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine  as a variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance to ± 0.1 Da. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 20.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem and Mascot were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
White adipose tissue, Hffar2-dread, Peyer’s patches, G protein–coupled receptor phosphorylation, Phospho-site specific antisera

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
Advanced Research Centre (ARC) College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Graeme Milligan
Advanced Research Centre (ARC) College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.


