### Accession
PXD025717

### Title
HDX-MS analysis of PLIN3 membrane binding

### Description
Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry of PLIN3 in the presence of three different membrane vesicles to analyze structural changes induced by membrane binding.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions for PLIN3 deuterium pulse were conducted in a final reaction volume of 10 µL with a final concentration 2.12 µM PLIN3. Exchange was carried out in triplicate for a single time point (3 s at 0 °C). Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 9 µl of D2O buffer solution (20 mM HEPES pH 7, 100 mM NaCl) to 1 µl of protein, to give a final concentration of 84.9% D2O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80 °C. Fully deuterated samples were generated by first denaturing the protein in 6M guanidine for 1 hour at 20°C. Following denaturing, 9 μL of D2O buffer was added to the denatured protein and allowed to incubate for 10 minutes at 20°C before quenching with 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80 °C, and all timepoints were created and run in triplicate.  HDX reactions comparing PLIN3 in the presence of PA liposomes (60% 4ME-PC, 20% 4ME-PE, 20% 4ME-PA) were conducted in a final reaction volume of 10 µL with a final protein concentration of 3µM and final liposome concentration of 1mM. Protein and liposomes were preincubated together for 2 minutes at room temperature before the addition of 7ul D2O buffer solution (50 mM HEPES pH 8, 50 mM NaCl) for a final concentration of 72% D2O. Exchange was carried out for 3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s, and exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80 °C, and all timepoints were created and run in triplicate.   HDX reactions comparing PLIN3 in the presence of two different liposomes (60% DOPC, 20% DOPE, 20% DAG liposomes and 80% 4ME-PC, 20% 4ME-PE liposomes) were conducted in a final reaction volume of 10 µL with a final protein concentration of 3µM and final liposome concentration of 500uM. Protein and liposomes were preincubated together for 2 minutes at room temperature before the addition of 8ul D2O buffer solution (20 mM HEPES pH 7, 100 mM NaCl) for a final concentration of 72% D2O. Exchange was carried out for 3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s, and exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80 °C, and all timepoints were created and run in triplicate.   Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over either one (at 10°C) or two (at 10°C and 2°C) immobilized pepsin columns (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of PLIN3 using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of known contaminants found in Sf9 and E. coli cells (PMID: 32869988). The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had -10logP scores of 22.8 for the pulse experiment and 20.9 for the liposome experiment.   HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation, with the only correction being applied correcting for the deuterium oxide percentage of the buffer utilized in the exchange (84.9% and 72%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: : ≥5% change in exchange and ≥0.4 Da difference in exchange. The raw HDX data are shown in two different formats. Samples were only compared within a single experiment and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D2O level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Plin3, Hdx

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


