### Accession
PXD014150

### Title
Hepatoprotective effect of picroside I on thioacetamide-induced hepatic fibrosis determined by proteomic analyses

### Description
We explored whether and how picroside I protects against TAA-induced liver fibrosis in mice through proteomic analysis of the liver. The proteomic studies were conducted based on liquid-chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry.Importantly,the iTRAQ 8plex reagent kits were used for protein labeling.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction, digestion, and labeling The liver tissues (0.1 g) from control, model, positive, and high-dose group were ground in liquid nitrogen. Then, 1 mL of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 1× Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the samples, followed by sonication on ice and centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). Then, 100 µg of protein solution was adjusted to a final volume of 100 µL with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). After adding 5 µL of the 200 mM dithiothreitol, the solution was incubated at 55 °C for 1 h. The solution was added into 5 µL of the 375 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 30 min protected from light. For each sample, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone, and the sediments were redissolved in 100 µL of TEAB. Proteins were digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), and the resultant peptide mixture was labeled using iTRAQ 8plex reagent kits (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA). The samples were labeled as follows: 113, 114; 115, 116; 117, 118; and 119, 121. The labeled samples were combined, desalted using C18 SPE column (Sep-Pak C18, Waters, Milford, MA, USA), and dried in vacuo.  2. High pH reverse phase separation The peptide mixture was redissolved in buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and then fractionated by a UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) with a BEH C18 column (2.1 mm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm). Buffer B was 10 mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN (pH 10). The gradient elution conditions were as follows: 0–35 min, 0%–45% B; 35–37 min, 45%–80% B; 37–40 min, 80% B; 40–42 min, 80%–0% B; and 42–45 min, 0% B. The flow rate was 250 µL/min, and the UV detector was set at 215 nm. Twelve fractions were collected, and each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step.  3. Low pH nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis The fractions were resuspended with 40 µL of 0.1% formic acid. The experiments were performed on a Waters Nano UPLC system connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mobile phase was water with 0.1% formic acid (C) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (D). Then, 4 µL peptide sample was separated on the analytical column (Thermo Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm × 25 cm). The gradient elution conditions were as follows: 0–80 min, 5%–30% D; 80–85 min, 30%–80% D; 80–85.1 min, 80%–5% D; and 85.1–90 min, 5% D. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the electrospray voltage was set at 2.0 kV. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–1600) were acquired with a mass resolution of 70,000, followed by 15 sequential high-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17,500. In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS/MS fixed first mass was set at 100.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) and then analyzed using Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.3) for protein identification and quantification. Mascot was set up to search the UniProt–SwissProt database (Taxonomy: Mus musculus, reviewed entries 16992) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, iTRAQ 8plex of lysine and n-terminus were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification.  The percolator algorithm was used to control peptide level false discovery rates lower than 1%. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification, and proteins contained at least two unique peptides. The method of normalization on protein median was used to correct experimental bias, and the minimum number of proteins that must be observed to allow was set to 1000. A 1.2-fold change and p value < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was used to illustrate the biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components of DEPs by DAVID database (david.ncifcrf.gov). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis was also carried out.

### Publication Abstract
Picroside I, a hepatoprotectant isolated from Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth and P. scrophulariiflora Pennell, can reduce liver injury in humans and animals. However, its anti-fibrosis effect remains elusive. This work aimed to explore the mechanism underlying the hepatoprotective effect of picroside I against hepatic fibrosis. Male mice (12 mice per group) were randomly divided into six groups: the control group; the model group, which received thioacetamide (TAA); the positive group, which received TAA + S-(5'-adenosyl)-l-methionine (SAMe, 10 mg/kg); the low-dose group, which received TAA + picroside I (25 mg/kg); the middle-dose group, which received TAA + picroside I (50 mg/kg); and the high-dose group, which received TAA + picroside I (75 mg/kg). Serum biochemical indicators were detected, and histological evaluation was performed. Metabolomics and proteomic analyses were conducted via liquid-chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Data showed that picroside I could decrease the serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), collagen type IV (CIV), N-terminal peptide of type III procollagen (PIIINP), laminin (LN), and hyaluronic acid (HA) and reduced fibrosis area. Picroside I altered metabolomic profiles, including energy, lipid, and glutathione (GSH) metabolism, in ice with fibrosis. Additionally, 25 differentially expressed proteins in the picroside I high-dose-treated group were reversed relative to in the model group. These proteins were involved in the sphingolipid signaling pathway, primary bile acid biosynthesis, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathway. Moreover, this study revealed how picroside I could protect against TAA-induced liver fibrosis in mice. Results indicated that picroside I can serve as a candidate drug for hepatic fibrosis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Liver

### Affiliations
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Experiment Center for Teaching and Learning, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201210, China.

### Submitter
kai xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Han Han
Experiment Center for Teaching and Learning, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201210, China.


