### Accession
PXD008563

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Global Proteome and Lysine Acetylome for Human CD4+ T Follicular Helper Cells

### Description
Follicular helper T (Tfh) are a subset of CD4+ T helper cells that provide help to germinal center B cells and mediate the development of long-lived humoral immunity. Tfh cells dysregulation is associated with several major autoimmune diseases. Although recent studies showed Tfh cells differentiation is controlled by the transcription factor Bcl6, cytokines and cell-cell signals, limited information is available on the proteome and post-translational modifications (PTM) of proteins in human Tfh cells. In this study, using TMT labeling technique, antibody-based affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, we investigated quantitative proteome and acetylome in human naive CD4+ T cells and in vitro induced Tfh (iTfh) cells. In total, we identified 802 up-regulated proteins and 598 down-regulated proteins at the threshold of 1.5 folds in iTfh cells compared to naive CD4+ T cells. With the aid of intensive bioinformatics, biological process, cellular compartment, molecular function, KEGG pathway and protein-protein interaction of these differentially expressed proteins were revealed. Moreover, our acetylome data showed that 22 lysine acetylated proteins are up-regulated and 26 lysine acetylated proteins are down-regulated in iTfh cells compared to the naive CD4+ T cells, among which 11 differentially acetylated lysine residues in core histone were identified, indicating proteins acetylation and epigenetic mechanism are involved in regulating Tfh cells differentiation. These data provide a significant resource for studies of Tfh differentiation and normal and perturbed Tfh cell function.

### Sample Protocol
1. Isolation of naive CD4+ T cells and induced differentiation of Tfh cells in vitro PBMCs were separated from the peripheral blood of healthy controls by density gradient centrifugation (GE Healthcare). CD4+CD45RA+ naïve T cells were isolated by negative selection using Naive CD4+ T Cell Isolation Kit II (Miltenyi) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The purity of the enriched subset was validated by flow cytometry with anti-CD4 and CD45RA antibodies (BD) and was generally higher than 95%. Tfh cell differentiation: purified CD4+CD45RA+ naïve T cells were seeded in anti-CD3 antibody (5 μg/ml, Calbiochem) pre-coated 24-well plates (5 × 105 cells/ml) in the presence of anti-CD28 antibody (2 μg/ml, Calbiochem), IL-6 (20 ng/ml, Peprotech), IL-21 (20 ng/ml, Peprotech), IL-12 (10 ng/ml, Peprotech) and TGF-β (5 ng/ml, Peprotech) for 5 days [8, 25]. The medium was refreshed on Day 3. iTfh cells were identified by flow cytometry with anti-CXCR5 and PD-1 antibodies (BD). The cells were harvested for proteome and acetylome analysis.    2. Proteome TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis 2.1 Protein Extraction Cells were transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM Ethylene Diamine Tetraacetic Acid (EDTA), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. The protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 4 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM tetraethyl-ammonium bromide (TEAB), pH 8.0) and the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2.2 Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 200 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. 2.3 TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 1 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl acetonitrile (ACN). The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
3. Database Search 3.1 Proteome The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20. 3. 2 Acetylome The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swissprot Human database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6plex was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.  4. Bioinformation analysis 4.1 Protein classification, KEGG, protein domains and subcellular location prediction. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. Wolfpsort (a subcellular localization predication software) was selected to perform the subcellular localization analysis51.   4.2 Motif analysis. Soft motif-x52 was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of acetyl-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default.  4.3 Functional enrichment-based Clustering. All the substrates categories obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.  5. Protein-protein interaction analysis  All differentially expressed protein or all identified acetylated protein name identifiers were searched against the STRING database version 9.1 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.9 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in Cytoscape. a graph the oretical clustering algorithm, molecular complex detection (MCODE) was utilized to analyz densely connected regions. MCODE is part of the plug-in tool kit of the network analysis and visualization software Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cells; post-translational modifications; histone; epigenetics; cell differentiation

### Affiliations
PTM
No.139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha, 410011, Hunan, PR China

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Qianjin Lu
No.139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha, 410011, Hunan, PR China


