### Accession
PXD020038

### Title
Bacterial respiratory cytochrome bc1-cbb3 supercomplex

### Description
Cryo-EM Structures of Respiratory bc1-cbb3 type CIII2CIV Supercomplex and Electronic Communication Between the Complexes

### Sample Protocol
Complex purification, crosslink reaction, S-trap, SEC peptide fractionation

### Data Protocol
MeroX(DSBU and DMTMM), MassAI(DSBU), FindXL(DMTMM) with default settings. Only overlapping identifications were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Respiratory electron transport complexes are organized as individual entities or combined as large supercomplexes (SC). Gram-negative bacteria deploy a mitochondrial-like cytochrome (cyt) bc<sub>1</sub> (Complex III, CIII<sub>2</sub>), and may have specific cbb<sub>3</sub>-type cyt c oxidases (Complex IV, CIV) instead of the canonical aa<sub>3</sub>-type CIV. Electron transfer between these complexes is mediated by soluble (c<sub>2</sub>) and membrane-anchored (c<sub>y</sub>) cyts. Here, we report the structure of an engineered bc<sub>1</sub>-cbb<sub>3</sub> type SC (CIII<sub>2</sub>CIV, 5.2&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution) and three conformers of native CIII<sub>2</sub> (3.3&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution). The SC is active in vivo and in vitro, contains all catalytic subunits and cofactors, and two extra transmembrane helices attributed to cyt c<sub>y</sub> and the assembly factor CcoH. The cyt c<sub>y</sub> is integral to SC, its cyt domain is mobile and it&#xa0;conveys electrons to CIV differently than cyt c<sub>2</sub>. The successful production of a native-like functional SC and determination of its structure illustrate the characteristics of membrane-confined and membrane-external respiratory electron transport pathways in Gram-negative bacteria.

### Keywords
Rhodobacter capsulatus, Qe hf

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Hee Jong Kim

### Lab Head
Dr benjamin aaron garcia
University of Pennsylvania


