### Accession
PXD022571

### Title
Pevonedistat inhibits aberrant protein NEDDylation in Polycystic Liver Diseases.

### Description
Background: Polycystic liver diseases (PLD) are genetic disorders characterized by progressive growth of numerous liver cysts, causing significant morbidity. Previous studies revealed genes affecting protein biogenesis and more recently, protein SUMOylation, a posttranslational modification (PTM), has been implicated in PLD pathobiology. On the other hand, protein NEDDylation is a newly-characterized PTM, modulating a plethora of biological processes and its dysregulation is associated with development and progression of several human diseases. In this regard, the role of NEDDylation in PLD remains elusive and unraveling its role in the pathogenesis of these genetic disorders could open new avenues for the development of novel treatments in the future. Objective: To explore the role of protein NEDDylation in PLD and its potential therapeutic regulatory value.  Methods: Expression and function of NEDDylation, including response to Pevonedistat (first-in-class selective inhibitor of the NEDDylation E1 enzyme NAE1), were assessed in vitro. Proteomic analyses of immunoprecipitated NEDDylated proteins were performed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS. Samples were incubated for 30 min at RT under agitation and digested following the filter-aided FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al [Wisniewski 2009] with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA.  Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). Peptides (200ng) were directly loaded in a 15 cm Bruker nanelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nl/min with a 30 min gradient. Column was heated to 50ºC using an oven.

### Data Protocol
Searches were carried out using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.) through Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo). Mgf files generated by DataAnalysis software (Bruker) were used for searches, using 50ppm and 0.05Da tolerances fo precursor adn fragments, respectively. A database consisting of human entries (Uniprot/Swissprot) was used for the searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatic cystogenesis; mln4924; pevonedistat; neddylation; therapy; nae1.

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain


