### Accession
PXD008154

### Title
Proteomic profiles of INS1 cells

### Description
In this study, we obtained proteomic profiles of INS1 cells with lipotoxicity and glucolipotoxicity in a time-course fashion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from INS1 cells were digested into peptides by trypsin (Promega). 6-plex TMT-labeled peptides mixtures from different samples were equally pooled respectively, high pH reverse-phase chromatography was adopted to generate 12 fractions for each sample mixture. Each fraction of peptides was analyzed by the nanoLC-MS/MS experiments, data-acquired on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed with Proteome Discovery (version 1.4). Both Sequest HT and Mascot 2.3 search engine were employed for maximal peptide identifications. The peptides confidence was set as high level (q-value < 0.01) for peptides filter. At protein level, precursor intensity fraction of 50% was selected as an optimal trade-off value for both identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic hyperlipidemia causes the dysfunction of pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells, such as apoptosis and impaired insulin secretion, which are aggravated in the presence of hyperglycemia. The underlying mechanisms, such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, oxidative stress and metabolic disorders, have been reported before; however, the time sequence of these molecular events is not fully understood. Here, using isobaric labeling-based mass spectrometry, we investigated the dynamic proteomes of INS-1 cells exposed to high palmitate in the absence and presence of high glucose. Using bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed proteins, including the time-course expression pattern, protein-protein interaction, gene set enrichment and KEGG pathway analysis, we analyzed the dynamic features of previously reported and newly identified lipotoxicity- and glucolipotoxicity-related molecular events in more detail. Our temporal data highlight cholesterol metabolism occurring at 4 h, earlier than fatty acid metabolism that started at 8 h and likely acting as an early toxic event highly associated with ER stress induced by palmitate. Interestingly, we found that the proliferation of INS-1 cells was significantly increased at 48 h by combined treatment of palmitate and glucose. Moreover, benefit from the time-course quantitative data, we identified and validated two new molecular targets: Setd8 for cell replication and Rhob for apoptosis, demonstrating that our temporal dataset serves as a valuable resource to identify potential candidates for mechanistic studies of lipotoxicity and glucolipotoxicity in pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells.

### Keywords
Ins1 lipotoxicity glucolipotoxicity

### Affiliations
THE INSTITUTE OF BIOPHYSICS, CAS

### Submitter
JUNJIE HOU

### Lab Head
Dr TAO XU
THE INSTITUTE OF BIOPHYSICS, CAS


