### Accession
PXD022178

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Foxc1-interacting proteins in HEK293T cells

### Description
Foxc1 has been identified to participate in regulating genes expression directly by binding their promoters as well as playing various roles in signal transduction within the cells. In this study, we found that, in F9 Embryonal Carcinoma cells, Foxc1 repressed the promoter’s transcription activity by binding the region of 1Kb upstream of Transcription Start Site within Nanog promoter.To understand more functions of Foxc1, streptavidin-biotin affinity purification combined with Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) analysis was carried out.Bioinformatic analysis identified 360 proteins which may act as Foxc1 interactors.

### Sample Protocol
The expression vector,pBiotin (pCDH-Kozak-Flag-BAD-MCS-P2A-Myc-BirA-T2A-Puro-MSCV)or pBiotin-Flag-Foxc1 (pCDH-Kozak-Flag-BAD-Foxc1-P2A-Myc-BirA-T2A-Puro-MSCV),was transfected into H293T cells to screen stably transfected cells (293-Biotin or 293-Biotin-Foxc1).Sufficient amounts of stably transfected HET293T cells (293-Biotin and 293-Biotin-Foxc1) were collected and lysed by Nuclear Extract buffer A (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9; 10 mM KCl; 1mM EDTA; 0.1 mM NaVO4; 0.2% NP40; 10% Glycerin; 0.5μM DTT; 0.5μM PMSF ) on ice for 10 minutes, after which cell nucleus were collected by centrifugation at 5000g, 4℃ and lysed by Nuclear Extract buffer B (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9; 10 mM KCl; 1mM EDTA; 0.1 mM NaVO4; 350 mM NaCl; 20% Glycerin; 0.5μM DTT; 0.5μM PMSF) for 30 minutes on ice with mixing by inversion. The lysates were centrifuged at 17000g for 10 minutes at 4℃ and the supernatants were transferred to new centrifuge tubes and protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Takara, T9300A). IP350 buffer (350 mM NaCl; 20mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5; 0.5% NP40; 1mM EDTA; 10% Glycerin) was used for diluting the protein samples to a final concentration of 2mg/L and 100μl of streptavidin-agarose per 10mg of protein was added into samples (293-Biotin and 293-Biotin-Foxc1) for enrichment the protein complexes. After adjusting the pH to 8.5 with 1 M an ammonium bicarbonate, total protein (100μg) extracted from each sample was chemically reduced for 1 h at 60 °C by adding DTT to 10 mM and carboxyamidomethylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Then Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to a final substrate/enzyme ratio of 30:1 (w/w). The trypsin digest was incubated at 37°C for 16 h. After digestion, the peptide mixture was acidified by 10 μl of formic acid for further MS analysis. After protein digestion, each peptide sample was desalted using a Strata X column (Phenomenex), vacuum-dried and then resuspended in a 200 μL volume of buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1%FA). After centrifugation at 20000g for 10 min, the supernatant was recovered to obtain a peptide solution with a final concentration of approximately 0.5 μg/μl. 10μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4min, then the 35min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 to 35% B (95%ACN, 0.1%FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 60%, then, followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80%, and maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, and finally return to 5% in 1 min.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150 ℃. The MS was operated with a RP of greater than or equal to 30 000 FWHM for TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 100 ms and as many as 40 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 150 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 2.8 s. Q2 transmission window was 80 and 100Da for 50%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode channel detect ion. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Publication Abstract
FOXC1, a transcription factor involved in cell differentiation and embryogenesis, is demonstrated to be a negative regulator of Nanog in this study. FOXC1 is up-regulated in retinoic acid-induced differentiation of F9 Embryonal Carcinoma (EC) cells; furthermore, FOXC1 specifically inhibits the core pluripotency factor Nanog by binding to the proximal promoter. Overexpression of FOXC1 in F9 or knockdown in 3T3 results in the down-regulation or up-regulation of Nanog mRNA and proteins, respectively. In order to explain the mechanism by which FOXC1 inhibits Nanog expression, we identified the co-repressor HDAC2 from the FOXC1 interactome. FOXC1 recruits HDAC2 to Nanog promoter to decrease H3K27ac enrichment, resulting in transcription inhibition of Nanog. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that FOXC1 is involved in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

### Keywords
Foxc1, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University
1. College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest Agriculture and Forestry University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China; 2. Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China

### Submitter
Hongni Xue

### Lab Head
Dr Zekun Guo
1. College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest Agriculture and Forestry University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China; 2. Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China


