### Accession
PXD040033

### Title
Peptidomic analysis reveals seasonal neuropeptide and peptide hormone changes in the hypothalamus and pituitary of a hibernating mammal

### Description
During the winter, hibernating mammals undergo extreme changes in physiology which allow them to survive without access to food. These animals enter a state of torpor, which is characterized by a decreased metabolism, near-freezing body temperatures, and a dramatically reduced heart rate. The neurochemical basis of this regulation is largely unknown. Based on prior evidence suggesting that the peptide-rich hypothalamus plays critical roles in hibernation, we hypothesized that changes in specific cell-cell signaling peptides (neuropeptides and peptide hormones) underlie physiological changes during torpor/arousal cycles. To test this hypothesis, we used a mass spectrometry-based peptidomics approach to examine seasonal changes of endogenous peptides that occur in the hypothalamus and pituitary of a model hibernating mammal, the thirteen-lined ground squirrel (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus). In the pituitary, we observed changes in a number of distinct peptide hormones as animals prepare for torpor in October, exit torpor in March, and progress from Spring (March) to Fall (August). In the hypothalamus, we observed an overall increase in neuropeptides in October (pre-torpor), a decrease as the animal enters torpor, and an increase in a subset of neuropeptides during normothermic interbout arousals. Notable changes were observed for feeding regulatory peptides from NPY and proSAAS prohormones, opioid peptides from PENK, PDYN, and POMC prohormones, and a number of peptides without well-established functions. In contrast to transcriptome and antibody-based measurements, our mass spectrometry-based approach allowed the identification and measurement of the final processed forms of these peptides after extensive post-translational modifications. Overall, our study provides critical insight into changes in endogenous peptides in the hypothalamus and pituitary during mammalian hibernation that were not available from transcriptome measurements. Understanding the molecular basis underlying the hibernation phenotype may pave the way for future efforts to employ hibernation-like strategies for organ preservation, combating obesity, and treatments for stroke.

### Sample Protocol
All animal experiments and procedures were completed in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (Project ID 1927) and performed according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) used in this study were captured in the vicinity of Lincoln, Nebraska during the summer months and transported to the veterinary facilities of the UNL Institutional Animal Care Program. During the “active” season (March–October), animals were housed individually in standard rodent cages under 12:12 h light:dark cycle, ambient temperature of ~20 °C, with water and food (rodent chow ad libitum and sunflower seeds). During the hibernation season (November–February) squirrels were housed in an environmental chamber with constant conditions (water available, no food provided, 24 hours of darkness, and ambient temperature of 5 °C). On the day of necropsy, the animal was removed from its cage, body weight was recorded, and the animal was sacrificed by rapid decapitation. The body temperature of animals in the “October”, “torpor”, and “IBA” groups were measured by rectal thermometer immediately after decapitation. Following decapitation, the hypothalamus and pituitary were dissected, immediately placed in cryogenic vials, and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissues were stored on dry ice after flash freezing, and then moved to -80 °C until peptide extraction. Peptides were extracted from tissues on the same day as necropsy.  Tissues were transferred to microcentrifuge tubes and homogenized using plastic pestles (Bel-Art, BEL-19923-0001) in 400 μL of ice-cold acidified acetone (acetone:H2O:HCl = 40:6:1, v/v/v), briefly vortexed, sonicated for 5 min, and centrifuged (15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C). Following centrifugation, the supernatant was carefully transferred to clean microcentrifuge tubes and stored on ice, and the pellet was subjected to a second stage of extraction using 400 μL iced-cold acidified water (0.25% (v/v) acetic acid in water) using the same procedure as the first stage. Following centrifugation, the supernatants from both stages were combined and solvent removed via vacuum concentrator. The resulting dried extracts were resuspended in 300 L of 5% acetonitrile (ACN)/H2O + 0.1% formic acid (FA), sonicated for 3 min, and centrifuged (15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C). The supernatant was removed and passed through a pre-rinsed 30 kDa molecular weight filtration device (MilliporeSigma, UFC503024) to remove high molecular weight species (14,000 × g, ~15 min, 4 °C). To ensure maximum recovery, 200 μL of 5% ACN/H2O + 0.1% FA was added to the filtration device and centrifuged, and this was repeated for a total of two rinses. The collected filtrate was then dried via vacuum concentrator. Dried peptide extracts were dissolved in 200 μL of 5% ACN/H2O + 0.1% FA and then desalted by using a C18 spin column (ThermoFisher Scientific, 89873). Eluted desalted peptide extracts were dried via vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on peptide samples after all tissues had been collected and peptides extracted. Desalted peptide extracts were dissolved in 12 μL of 3% ACN/H2O + 0.1% FA. 2 μL of this redissolved extract were removed and used to determine the total protein concentration by BCA protein assay (Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific, 23235). Each sample was then diluted to allow sample injections of 300 ng total protein for hypothalamus or 200 ng total protein for pituitary. For each tissue, a pooled QC sample was created by mixing an equal volume of each sample.  Within each tissue, samples were analyzed by LC-MS and LC-MS/MS in a randomized injection order with regular injections of pooled QC sample. LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Waters G2-SX Q-Tof mass spectrometer equipped with a Waters UPLC M-Class system with reversed-phase separation and a Waters NanoESI source (Zspray, NanoLockSpray). For reversed-phase separation, Solvent A contained H2O + 0.1% FA and Solvent B contained ACN + 0.1% FA. After sample injection, samples were loaded onto a Waters C18 trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, 186008821) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min and 1% Solvent B for 10 min. Peptide separation was carried out over 60 min with a 0.35 μL/min flow rate and 35 °C column temperature using a Waters nanoEase-C18 column (75 μm × 250 mm, 186008818). The gradient for separation was as follows: 0 – 40 min, 3 – 40% B; 40 – 44 min, 40 – 85% B; 44 – 48 min, 85% B; 48 – 50 min, 85 – 3% B; 50 – 60 min, 3% B. MS/MS was performed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using the following settings: mass range, 100–2000 m/z; 3 precursor ions, peak intensity threshold of 5000, the MS scan time was 0.1 s, MS/MS scan time was 0.5 s, and in collision energy ramp mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were made using PEAKS Studio X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), searching against the Ictidomys tridecemlineatus proteome database available from Uniprot. Peptide identifications were conducted using the following parameters: parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da, and the following PTMs were considered: oxidation (M), amidation, acetylation, pryoglutamylation (Q or E), and phosphorylation (S, T, or Y). A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was used for peptide identifications. Label-free quantification was performed with using the PEAKS Q Module, which helps to reduce missing values using ID-transfer and calculates peptide peak areas. For the Q Module, a mass error tolerance of 20.0 ppm and a retention time shift tolerance of 2.5 minutes were used. Peptide peak intensities were normalized to the total ion current (TIC) and exported from the Q Module for further analysis. During ID-transfer, distinct peptides with close m/z and retention times may be assigned to the same peak in the absence of MS/MS spectra. In such cases, the identity of the given peptide is ambiguous and not reliable for making comparisons. Peptide peaks with ambiguous assignments or peptides with <5 total MS/MS identifications were filtered out during this preprocessing step.   Data were batch corrected using the statTarget R package, where a peptide was considered present if it was measured in at least 50% of the samples per group. Signal imputation were performed using k-nearest neighbor (knn; k=10). Present peptides underwent a log2 transformation and were normalized using EigenMS. Data preprocessing was prepared using the R statistical software version 4.2.1.  Differentially abundant peptides were assessed using parametric (t-test) and non-parametric (Wilcoxon rank-sum) statistical tests to account for the degree, direction, and difference between each pair of time points within each tissue. For both statistical tests, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure was applied to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. Peptides were considered differentially abundant when they passed with a BH corrected p-value less than 0.05 in both statistical tests. The fold change (FC) was calculated for each peptide to quantify the magnitude difference between each pair of time points. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using R package pcaMethods.

### Publication Abstract
During the winter, hibernating mammals undergo extreme changes in physiology, which allow them to survive several months without access to food. These animals enter a state of torpor, which is characterized by decreased metabolism, near-freezing body temperatures, and a dramatically reduced heart rate. The neurochemical basis of this regulation is largely unknown. Based on prior evidence suggesting that the peptide-rich hypothalamus plays critical roles in hibernation, we hypothesized that changes in specific cell-cell signaling peptides (neuropeptides and peptide hormones) underlie physiological changes during torpor/arousal cycles. To test this hypothesis, we used a mass spectrometry-based peptidomics approach to examine seasonal changes of endogenous peptides that occur in the hypothalamus and pituitary of a model hibernating mammal, the thirteen-lined ground squirrel (<i>Ictidomys tridecemlineatus</i>). In the pituitary, we observed changes in several distinct peptide hormones as animals prepared for torpor in October, exited torpor in March, and progressed from spring (March) to fall (August). In the hypothalamus, we observed an overall increase in neuropeptides in October (pre-torpor), a decrease as the animal entered torpor, and an increase in a subset of neuropeptides during normothermic interbout arousals. Notable changes were observed for feeding regulatory peptides, opioid peptides, and several peptides without well-established functions. Overall, our study provides critical insight into changes in endogenous peptides in the hypothalamus and pituitary during mammalian hibernation that were not available from transcriptomic measurements. Understanding the molecular basis of the hibernation phenotype may pave the way for future efforts to employ hibernation-like strategies for organ preservation, combating obesity, and treatment of stroke.

### Keywords
Pituitary, Hibernation, Neuropeptides, Peptidomics, Hypothalamus, Peptide hormones

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry University of Nebraska-Lincoln Lincoln, NE 68588 USA
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
James Checco

### Lab Head
Dr James Checco
Department of Chemistry University of Nebraska-Lincoln Lincoln, NE 68588 USA


