### Accession
PXD027037

### Title
Ubiquitome profiling reveals metabolism related cell senescence and protein translation modified by UPL3

### Description
The HECT domain-containing UPL3 ligase plays critical roles in plant development and stress protection, but its mechanism of action remains unclear. To identify its targets in Arabidopsis thaliana, we conducted proteomic analyses of enriched ubiquitinated proteins in upl3 mutants via label-free mass spectrometry. In 6-week-old plants, a landscape of UPL3-dependent ubiquitinated proteins is constructed based on correlated datasets of ubiquitome, proteome, and transcriptome. Preferential ubiquitination of proteins related to carbon fixation and cell senescence represented the largest set of enriched ubiquitinated proteins that occurred in the upl3 plant, while a small set of reduced ubiquitinated proteins caused by the upl3 mutation were linked to cysteine/methionine synthesis and protein translational processes. Furthermore, the upl3 mutation led to an increase in ubiquitination of some of its targets including chromatin remodeling ATPase (BRM), histone proteins, and carbon metabolic enzymes, but decreased the ubiquitination of Hexokinase 1 (HXK1), Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 2 (PPC2), ribosomal protein S5, and H1/H5 domain proteins. Notably, ubiquitin hydrolase 12 (UBP12), BRM, HXK1, and PPC2 were among the UPL3-interacting partners identified by both GFP-nanotrap-Mass-Spectroscopy analyses and yeast two-hybrid assay. Characterization of upl3, and brm-em, ubp12, ubp12ubp13 double mutant plants suggested that UPL3 fine-tuned carbon metabolism during cellular senescence by interacting, in the nucleus, with dually modified targets specific to histone variants, cell senescence, and the carbon metabolic pathway. Our results highlight an important function of UPL3 as a hub of regulated degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The 6-week-old plant leaves pool samples of the upl3 and wildtype were ground in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube, in three biological replicates. Each tube was added four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz), then centrifuged at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to remove the remaining debris. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C and then centrifuged at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and was determined its concentration with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion For digestion, 5 mM dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution for reduction for 30 min at 56 °C, and the solution was alkylated with 11 mM indoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was added 100 mM NH4HCO3 to dilute to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin digestion was done by adding trypsin at a 1:50 trypsin to protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin to protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 µg of protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated into 60 fractions with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment To enrich Kub peptides, tryptic peptides were firstly dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5% Nonidet P-40, pH 8.0) and the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with distilled, deionized water. Then the dissolved tryptic peptides were incubated with prewashed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted fractions were collected, vacuum dried and then cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting peptides were followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. According to previously described protocols (Wu et al., 2015) LC-MS/MS analysis was performed. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and loaded onto a home-made reverse-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d. Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, and climbing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography system. The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive TM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the ultra-performance liquid chromatograph. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using normalized collision energy setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan A data-dependent procedure of alternative scanning between one mass spectrometry scan and 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5E4 in the mass spectrometry survey scan with 30-s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage was set to 2 kV. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for the generation of MS/MS spectra. For mass spectrometry scans, the mass-to-charge ratio scan range was 350 to 1,800. The fixed first mass was set as 100 mass-to-charge ratios.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot database (Arabidopsis thaliana Columbia database, current total of 39211 reads) concatenated with reverse decoy database. For proteomic peptides, Trypsin/P was used as cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass error was set as 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6plex (N-term), and TMT-6plex (K) was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was adjusted to less than 1%, and peptide ion score was set to greater than 20. For Kub peptides, the first search range was set to 20 ppm, and the main search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, and 0.02 D for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and GlyGly on Lys and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) method was employed to calculate the relative abundance of the modified peptides, FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40 (Xu et al., 2010).  Bioinformatic Analysis Bioinformatic analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Xie et al., 2015). Briefly, GO database, KEGG database, InterPro domain database, WoLF PSORT, CORUM database, and Motif-X software were used for analysis. In addition, the IPI Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) proteome was used as the background database, and the other parameters were set to default values. The parameter settings for searching motifs using Motif-X software were occurrences 20 and the Bonferroni corrected P = 0.005. Protein-protein interaction networks were analyzed with the IntAct database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/). The protein-protein interaction network map was generated with Cytoscape software (Shannon et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
The HECT-type UPL3 ligase plays critical roles in plant development and stress protection, but understanding of its regulation remains limited. Here, the multi-omics analyses of ubiquitinated proteins in &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;upl3&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt; mutants were performed. A landscape of UPL3-dependent ubiquitinated proteins is constructed: Preferential ubiquitination of proteins related to carbon fixation represented the largest set of proteins with increased ubiquitination in the &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;upl3&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt; plant, including most of carbohydrate metabolic enzymes, BRM, and variant histone, whereas a small set of proteins with reduced ubiquitination caused by the &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;upl3&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt; mutation were linked to cysteine/methionine synthesis, as well as hexokinase 1 (HXK1) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 2 (PPC2). Notably, ubiquitin hydrolase 12 (UBP12), BRM, HXK1, and PPC2 were identified as the UPL3-interacting partners in vivo and in vitro. Characterization of &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;brm&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt;, &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;upl3&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt;, &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;ppc2&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt;, &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;gin2&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt;, and &amp;lt;i&amp;gt;ubp12&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt; mutant plants and proteomic and transcriptomic analysis suggested that UPL3 fine-tunes carbohydrate metabolism, mediating cellular senescence by interacting with UBP12, BRM, HXK1, and PPC2. Our results highlight a regulatory pattern of UPL3 with UBP12 as a hub of regulator on proteolysis-independent regulation and proteolysis-dependent degradation.

### Keywords
Dubs, Senescence, Histone, Carbon fixation, Hect-type ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Biology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China
Fujian provincial key laboratory of Plant Functional Biology, College of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
Wei Lan

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Miao
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Biology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China


