### Accession
PXD016149

### Title
TFEB regulates protein synthesis to sustain autophagy during starvation

### Description
In response to starvation, cells undergo a metabolic shift to ensure their survival by shutting down protein synthesis and activating catabolic processes, including autophagy, to degrade proteins and recycle nutrients. These processes, however, do require protein synthesis. We asked how this fundamental conflict is resolved. Upon starvation, cells activate the Integrated Stress Response (ISR) and inhibit mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1).  The ISR inhibits protein translation through the phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2), whereas mTORC1 inhibition induces activation of the transcription factors TFEB/TFE3.  We discovered that PPP1R15A (aka GADD34), a member of the protein phosphatase 1 complex (PP1) is a direct and early target of TFEB. GADD34 recruits PP1 to dephosphorylate eIF2 and thus fine-tunes protein synthesis to enable translation of the transcriptional program induced by starvation leading to a sustained autophagic flux.

### Sample Protocol
The protein content of HEK293 cells was reduced, alkylated, trypsin-digested and analyzed by reversed phase nanoLC-MS/MS using the SWATH approach.

### Data Protocol
High-quality MS/MS data were first acquired in DDA mode to collect qualitative information on proteins specific for these models and we added the corresponding assays to the Pan Human ion library by using a text editor. Label-free quantitative proteomics was then performed in DIA mode, and the whole peptide content eluting from the column (400–1250 m/z range, 120 min gradient) was fragmented. Fragment-to-precursor profile realignment was then performed by using the dedicated SWATH software application. The collected data were then analyzed by using a t-test and only proteins showing p < .05 were considered significantly altered between the two groups (CF patients versus non-CF controls).

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to starvation by shutting down protein synthesis and by activating catabolic processes, including autophagy, to recycle nutrients. This two-pronged response is mediated by the integrated stress response (ISR) through phosphorylation of eIF2&#x3b1;, which represses protein translation, and by inhibition of mTORC1 signaling, which promotes autophagy also through a stress-responsive transcriptional program. Implementation of such a program, however, requires protein synthesis, thus conflicting with general repression of translation. How is this mismatch resolved? We found that the main regulator of the starvation-induced transcriptional program, TFEB, counteracts protein synthesis inhibition by directly activating expression of GADD34, a component of the protein phosphatase 1 complex that dephosphorylates eIF2&#x3b1;. We discovered that GADD34 plays an essential role in autophagy by tuning translation during starvation, thus enabling lysosomal biogenesis and a sustained autophagic flux. Hence, the TFEB-GADD34 axis integrates the mTORC1 and ISR pathways in response to starvation.

### Keywords
Human hek293

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy

### Submitter
Andrea Armirotti

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy


