### Accession
PXD034898

### Title
Comparative surfaceome analysis of clonal Histomonas meleagridis strains with different pathogenicity reveals strain-dependent profiles

### Description
Surface proteome of microbial pathogens is a crucial component of host-pathogen interactions. We applied cell surface biotinylation in association with high-throughput proteomic analysis to identify and quantify the surface proteome of a virulent and an attenuated strain, originating from the same single cell of H. meleagridis. In total 1485 proteins were identified amongst the two strains. Quantification revealed 22 and 45 up-regulated proteins in the virulent and in the attenuated strain, respectively. In the virulent strain proteins such as alpha-amylase, Clan CD family C13 asparaginyl endopeptidase-like cysteine peptidase, two Clan SC family S33, methylesterase-like serine peptidases, LysM peptidoglycan-binding domain-containing protein and surfactant B were up-regulated and could be linked to putative virulence factors involved in the colonization of the host and establishment of an infection. In the attenuated strain structural proteins such as actin-related proteins, fimbrin, coronin, were up-regulated, alongside with various transport and energy production proteins. Our results speak for the protozoan’s adaptation to the in vitro environment, with a clear tendency for up-regulation of mainly metabolic and structural proteins. We present a comprehensive profiling of H. meleagridis surface proteome. These results provide not only a better understanding of the surface molecules that may participate in establishing and maintaining infection but also highlights the pathogen’s in vitro adaptation processes.

### Sample Protocol
Histomonas meleagridis cultures were co-cultivated with the bacterial strain E. coli DH5α as a supplement in RPMI growth media (Gibco™, Invitrogen, Austria) with 15% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco™, Invitrogen) and 0.25% of sterilized rice starch (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany) at 40°C for 48h. The parasites precipitated and re-suspended with 0.5 mg/ml EZ-Link sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin (Pierce™, Thermo Fisher Scientific™, Austria) for 30 min at 40°C. Upon completion, the biotinylation reaction was quenched by addition of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5.  Membrane and membrane associated proteins were enriched by ultracentrifugation at 100,000xg for 1hour and 45 minutes at 4°C and re-suspended in buffer (20mM HEPES (pH7.4), 10mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA). Biotinylated proteins were bound onto the neutravidin-coated beads (Pierce™, Thermo Scientific™) during an one-hour incubation at room temperature on an end-over-end rotator. Biotinylated proteins were eluted using CHAPS-DTT lysis buffer (150mM KCl, 50mM HEPES, 0.1% CHAPS, 50mM DTT) in a one-hour incubation at room temperature on an end-over-end rotator. Protein extracts were submitted to on-filter digestion to remove excess reagents, detergents and salts with adaptations for the use of Trypsin/Lys-C mix. In brief, Pall Nanosep centrifugal devices with Omega membrane and a cut-off of 10 kDa were washed with 8 M urea in 50 mM TRIS (pH 8.0): 500 µl/500 µl/300 µl followed by centrifugation between each step (10 000 rcf for 15 to 20 min). Thirty micrograms of protein were diluted with 8 M urea in 50 mM TRIS (pH 8.0) to a total volume of 500 µl and loaded onto the filter before centrifugation. Reduction in 20 mM aqueous dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37°C on a thermomixer, followed by alkylation in 60 mM aqueous iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25°C were performed on filter. After two washing steps with 100 µl 50 mM TRIS, proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) for 14 h over night at 37°C. Peptides were extracted in three steps each of 50 µl 50 mM TRIS with subsequent centrifugation. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a pH below 2. Peptide clean-up was achieved with C18 spin columns (Pierce Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions before peptide analysis using nanoRSLC-ESI-Orbitrap MS/MS (Gutiérrez et al., 2019). Three technical replicates were injected and analysed per biological replicate.

### Data Protocol
The H. meleagridis proteome database was derived by conceptual translation of coding genomic sequences from virulent and attenuated H. meleagridis strains. Evaluation of raw data was accomplished in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A combination of the H. meleagridis proteome database described above, the UniProt database for E. coli (taxonomy 83333, www.uniprot.org) and a common contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) was used. The following search parameters were applied: Trypsin as an enzyme, maximally 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, dynamic modifications allowed were oxidation / +15.995 Da (M)/Biotin:Thermo-21328 / +389.090 Da (K)/CAMthiopropanoyl / +145.020 Da (K), N-terminal modifications Biotin:Thermo-21328 / +389.090 Da/Acetyl / +42.011 Da/CAMthiopropanoyl / +145.020 Da and static modification Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C). Resulting protein abundance raw values were exported for further analysis with the DEP package in R (Zhang et al., 2018). Prior to the import into R, E. coli proteins and the remaining proteins with more than two missing values per group were excluded within the nine technical/biological replicates. “ON/OFF proteins” were included. Afterwards the technical replicates were aggregated by the mean (see attached Excel file). Following statistical analysis of the virulent vs. the attenuated strain by t-test was performed according to the DEP script including normalization of protein abundances and imputation of missing values by zero. From these, proteins with more than two peptides displaying a fold change higher than 2-fold with an adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be up-regulated in our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Histomonas meleagridis,</i> a poultry-specific intestinal protozoan parasite, is histomonosis's etiological agent. Since treatment or prophylaxis options are no longer available in various countries, histomonosis can lead to significant production losses in chickens and mortality in turkeys. The surfaceome of microbial pathogens is a crucial component of host-pathogen interactions. Recent proteome and exoproteome studies on <i>H. meleagridis</i> produced molecular data associated with virulence and <i>in vitro</i> attenuation, yet the information on proteins exposed on the cell surface is currently unknown. Thus, in the present study, we identified 1485 proteins and quantified 22 and 45 upregulated proteins in the virulent and attenuated strains, respectively, by applying cell surface biotinylation in association with high-throughput proteomic analysis. The virulent strain displayed upregulated proteins that could be linked to putative virulence factors involved in the colonization and establishment of infection, with the upregulation of two candidates being confirmed by expression analysis. In the attenuated strain, structural, transport and energy production proteins were upregulated, supporting the protozoan's adaptation to the <i>in vitro</i> environment. These results provide a better understanding of the surface molecules involved in the pathogenesis of histomonosis, while highlighting the pathogen's <i>in vitro</i> adaptation processes.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Protozoa, Surface proteome, Virulence factors, Lc-ms/ms, Attenuation, Histomonas meleagridis

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


