### Accession
PXD028274

### Title
Matrix and sampling effects on quantification of protein biomarkers of drug-induced liver injury

### Description
Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor 1 Receptor (MCSF1R), Osteopontin (OPN), High mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), Glutamate Dehydrogenase (GLDH), Keratin 18 (K18), and caspase-cleaved Keratin 18 (ccK18) are considered promising mechanistic biomarkers for the diagnosis of drug-induced liver injury (DILI). Here, we aim to elucidate the impact of sample matrix and handling on the quantification of these emerging protein biomarkers. We investigated effects such as time to centrifugation during serum (±gel) or EDTA plasma separation on two assay platforms - immunoaffinity liquid chromatography mass spectrometric assays and sandwich immunoassays. Furthermore, we measured GLDH activity with an enzymatic activity assay. Matrix effects were observed particularly for HMGB1 and MCSF1R. HMGB1 levels were higher in serum than in plasma, whereas higher concentrations of MCSF1R were observed in plasma than in serum. A comparison of sample collection to centrifugation time ranging from 15 min to 60 min demonstrated increasing levels of HMGB1 in serum, while MCSF1R, OPN, GLDH, and ccK18 concentrations remained stable. Additionally, there was a poor correlation in HMGB1 and ccK18 levels between serum and plasma. Considering the observed matrix effects, we recommend plasma as matrix of choice and cross-study comparison studies to be limited to those using the same matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic digestion: All samples were prepared in a 96-well microtiter plate for proteolytic digestion and subsequent immunoaffinity enrichment. A detailed protocol for the IA-LC-MS/MS workflow is described elsewhere(21) with the following modifications. Briefly, 15 µL of serum or plasma sample was mixed with 95 µL digestion buffer comprising 100 mM triethanolamine and 0.5% (w/v) n-octylglucoside. Accordingly, 15 µL of bovine serum albumin (BSA) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with a concentration of 60 mg/mL was added to 95 µL digestion buffer as matrix for the calibration curve and blank samples. All samples were then denatured at 99°C for 5 min. After cool down, protein disulfide bridges were reduced in 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at RT for 5 min. The protein samples were alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT in the dark. Proteolysis was performed with a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20 assuming a total protein concentration of 60 mg/mL in serum and plasma. The proteolysis was inactivated by heating at 99°C for 5 min and addition of 10 mM phenylmethanesulfonylﬂuoride (PMSF) in a final sample volume of 150 µL.  Immunoaffinity enrichment: The following reagents were added to the proteolyzed samples after digest inactivation with PMSF. Stable isotope labeled standards (SIS) were used as internal standards (Intavis AG, Tuebingen, Germany), 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS) in a final concentration of 0.03%, and peptide-specific antibodies (prepared in-house as described elsewhere(22)) were added in each microtiter plate well. The labeled surrogate was added to ensure the peptide identity by three parameters including retention time, mass-to-charge accordance and fragment pattern comparison. Additionally, synthetic non-labeled surrogate peptides were added in serial dilution to the calibration curve samples comprising digested BSA. The immunoprecipitation was performed semi-automated with a magnetic particle processor (KingFisher™ 96, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The procedure included 1 h incubation of the sample-antibody mixture and 1 h incubation with protein G-coated magnetic micro-spheres (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Furthermore, the samples were washed twice in PBS with 0.03% (w/v) CHAPS and three times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.03% (w/v) CHAPS. Peptide elution from antibodies was performed in 20 µL 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA).   Chromatography: The peptide eluates were analyzed in a nanoﬂow UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) using a trap-elute-workflow with an injection volume of 5 µL per sample. Trapping was performed with 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 μ-precolumn (0.3 mm I.D. × 5 mm, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Chromatographic peptide separation was per-formed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (75 μm I.D. ×150 mm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) with a mobile phase flowrate of 1 µL/min at 55°C. The mobile phase gradient included a 5.75 min peptide separation time from 4% to 40% mobile phase buffer (80% ACN in 0.1% FA) followed by column washing and equilibration time up to 10 min total gradient run time.  Mass spectrometry: A QExactive Plus™-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) coupled to the nanoflow UHPLC system was used for peptide quantification. Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was chosen for targeted MS data acquisition. MS parameters were set to a resolution of 35000, an AGC target of 2x105, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, a MSX count of 2, and a peptide isolation window of 1.4 m/z. An inclusion list with the corresponding m/z values of non-labeled and label peptides was used for precursor selection. After optimization, the normalized collision energy was set to 25 for all peptides.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data files were imported in Skyline version 19.1 and the peak areas of non-labeled and iso-tope-labeled peptides were extracted. Further analysis was performed with OriginPro version 2017. The summed peak areas of four to five fragment ions were used for calculating the peak ratios (analyte/ internal standard). The calibration samples comprising known amounts of synthetic non-labeled and isotope-labeled peptides were used for calculation of endogenous analyte concentration in quality control and unknown samples. A logistic four-parametric fit model was used for curve fitting. Protein concentrations were calculated by converting the absolute measured peptide amount (fmol) into a mass concentration (ng/mL) considering the molecular weight of the corresponding protein and 15 µL sample volume. The protein molecular weight values were calculated by the amino acid sequence. For this, the amino acid sequence was inferred from UniProt release 2019_04 (FASTA sequence) and the theoretical molecular weight was calculated using the corresponding amino acid sequence with the online tool ProtParam.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophage colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (MCSF1R), osteopontin (OPN), high-mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH), keratin 18 (K18), and caspase-cleaved keratin 18 (ccK18) are considered promising mechanistic biomarkers for the diagnosis of drug-induced liver injury. Here, we aim to elucidate the impact of the sample matrix and handling on the quantification of these emerging protein biomarkers. We investigated effects such as time from collection to centrifugation during serum (&#xb1; gel) or EDTA plasma preparation on two assay platforms: immunoaffinity liquid chromatography mass spectrometric assays and sandwich immunoassays. Furthermore, we measured GLDH activity with an enzymatic activity assay. Matrix effects were observed particularly for HMGB1 and MCSF1R. HMGB1 levels were higher in serum than in plasma, whereas higher concentrations of MCSF1R were observed in plasma than in serum. A comparison of sample collection to centrifugation time ranging from 15 to 60 min demonstrated increasing levels of HMGB1 in serum, while MCSF1R, OPN, GLDH, and ccK18 concentrations remained stable. Additionally, there was a poor correlation in HMGB1 and ccK18 levels between serum and plasma. Considering the observed matrix effects, we recommend plasma as a matrix of choice and cross-study comparison studies to be limited to those using the same matrix.

### Keywords
Immunoassay, Plasma, Serum gel, Centrifugation, Preanalytical effects, Serum, Drug-induced liver injury, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
SIGNATOPE GmbH, Reutlingen, Germany
Signatope GmbH, Markwiesenstr. 55 72770 Reutlingen

### Submitter
Viktoria Anselm

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Oliver Poetz
SIGNATOPE GmbH, Reutlingen, Germany


