### Accession
PXD019786

### Title
Ordered dephosphorylation initiated by the selective proteolysis of cyclin B drives mitotic exit

### Description
APC/C-mediated proteolysis of cyclin B and securin promotes entry into anaphase, inactivating CDK1 and permitting chromosome segregation, respectively. Reduction of CDK1 activity relieves inhibition of the CDK1-opposing phosphatases PP1 and PP2A-B55 leading to dephosphorylation of substrates crucial for mitotic exit. Meanwhile, continued APC/C activity is required to target various proteins, including Aurora and Polo kinases, for degradation. Together, these activities orchestrate a complex series of events during mitotic exit. However, the relative importance of regulated proteolysis and dephosphorylation in dictating the order and timing of these events remains unclear. Using high temporal-resolution mass spectrometry, we compare the relative extent of proteolysis and protein dephosphorylation. This reveals highly-selective rapid (~5min half-life) proteolysis of cyclin B, securin and geminin at the metaphase to anaphase transition, followed by slow proteolysis (>60 min half-life) of other mitotic regulators. Protein dephosphorylation requires APC/C-dependent destruction of cyclin B and was resolved into PP1-dependent fast, intermediate and slow categories with unique sequence motifs. We conclude that dephosphorylation initiated by the selective proteolysis of cyclin B drives the bulk of changes observed during mitotic exit.

### Sample Protocol
Mitotically arrested HeLa cells were synchronously released into anaphase using CDK inhibition and sampled over time. Cells were lysed in 8M urea, 100 mM AMBIC supplemented with 100 nM okadaic acid as well as protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Samples were subjected to double proteolytic digest using Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides were then subjected to di-methyl labelling according to Boersema et al., Nat Protocol, 2009. Peptides from all samples were labelled, while an aliquot of 0 min timepoint was labelled light. Heavy (t) and light (t0) labelled samples were then mixed in equal quantities. 400 ug of labelled sample was enirched for phospho-peptides using TiO2 columns, using spin speeds of 550 rpm/34 x gav. The remaining labelled peptide mixture was dried down, resuspended in 5% formic acid, 5% DMSO and analysed for total proteomic information. High-pH fractionation of total proteome was conducted on stage-tips, peptides were eluted using acetonitrile solutions ranging from 4-80% vol:vol.  PP1 depletion timecourses were depleted of either 1) control (G), 2) PPP1CA and PPP1CC (A) or 3) PPP1CB (B) prior to synchonrization.  AL_BH, AH_BL, AL_GH, AH_GL, BL_GH, BH_GL are crossmixing samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw proteomic data was searched using maxquant and subjected to analysis in Perseus. Data was filtered for contaminants, repeats averaged and missing values imputed with the constant of 0 prior to hierarchical clustering. Phospho-peptide clustering output was used to produce sequence logos using Ice-logo.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pp1, Apcc, Phospho-proteomics, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Dephosphorylation, Mitotic exit

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
James Holder

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Barr
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford


