### Accession
PXD028307

### Title
Characterization of CD44s glycoproteoforms in bladder tumours and bladder cancer cell culture models

### Description
Bladder cancer (BC) is a major health concern retaining high mortality rates when diagnosed at advanced stages. In this context, the clinical management of BC requires the introduction of new biomarkers and molecular targets capable to elicit precision medicine therapeutical approaches. A promising candidate is cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44), a multifunctional and heavily glycosylated transmembrane protein, involved in cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion, and a transducer of several oncogenic signalling cascades. CD44 has been widely explored as a marker of BC aggressiveness and cancer stem cells (CSC), but this is a highly heterogenic protein and the lack of molecular tools for precise molecular characterization has led to conflicting results, delaying clinical application.  CD44 molecular variability results from the number of proteoforms arising from alternative splicing. The human CD44 gene consists of 17 exons, and while the exons 1-5 are constitutively expressed, exons 6-14 are subjected to alternative splicing, generating a myriad of different variants whose functional implications are yet to be fully understood. Furthermore, this number of proteoforms is greatly amplified by O-GalNAc glycosylation, which is predicted to mostly occur in the protein variable regions. This microheterogeneity and its relevance for BC can only be addressed by obtaining a comprehensive characterization at the protein level. Herein, we devised a strategy, combining transcriptomics, glycomics and mass spectrometry based proteomics data, to interrogate CD44 proteoform expression in a series of BC cell culture models showing different aggressiveness (5637 and T24) and a sample pool from formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tumours. Glycoengeneered T24 cells expressing the Tn antigen (T24 C1GALT1 knockout (KO)) were also analysed.

### Sample Protocol
Patients sampling 5 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) bladder tumour tissues expressing high levels of CD44 and Tn antigen from the Portuguese Institute of Oncology of Porto biobank were used for this study. All procedures were performed under the approval of the hospital’s ethics committee after obtaining informed patient’s consent.  Cell lines and cell culture conditions  BC cell lines were acquired from ATCC and cultured in RPMI 1640 GlutaMAX™ medium (5637, T24, and T24 C1GALT1 KO ; Thermo Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin (10,000 Units/mL penicillin; 10,000 µg/mL streptomycin; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell lines were cultured at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere.  Protein extraction, CD44 immunoprecipitation, and protein digestion Plasma membrane proteins were extracted by subcellular fractionation using ultracentrifugation. Cultured cells were detached by scrapping with fractionation buffer (20 mM HEPES buffer pH = 7.4, 10 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM EGTA) on ice. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 720g to remove the nuclei. Supernatants were recentrifuged at 10,000g to remove mitochondria. Then, samples were transferred to polycarbonate centrifuge bottles with cap assemblies and centrifuged twice for 1 hour at 100,000g at 4°C. The pellets were recovered and the plasma membrane-enriched fraction was resuspended in TBS with 0.3% SDS.  Regarding bladder tumours, total protein was extracted from CD44-STn/Tn-expressing areas excised from FFPE tumours using the Qproteome FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. CD44 was immunoprecipitated (IP) from protein extracts using PierceTM Protein G Agarose Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) loaded with 6µg of monoclonal anti-CD44 antibody (ab157107; Abcam). CD44 IP products were subsequently resolved by electrophoresis under denaturing conditions using 4-20% gradient precast polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad) and bands were excised from gels. Proteins were then reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and desialylated with α-neuraminidase according to standard procedures. Protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with chymotrypsin (25µg/mL; Promega).  Nano-Liquid chromatography-Tandem mass spectrometry CD44 IP digests were analysed by nano liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS), using a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific). Digested samples were pre-concentrated in an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (100 Å, 5 mm × 300 µm, i.d. 160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific); peptide separation was performed in an analytical EASY-Spray column (C18, 100 Å, 2 µm, 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 250 nl/min, by mixing A: 0.1% aqueous formic acid (FA) and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA with the following gradient: 2 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 50 min (10% B to 35% B), 8 min (35% B to 99% B), and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode over the m/z range 380-1580. Nanospray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and full scan nominal resolution was 70k (m/z=200). Full MS settings: maximum injection time (IT) 100 ms; AGC target 3 × 106. Data-dependent settings: intensity threshold 6.4 × 10^4, minimum AGC target 7 x 10^3, dynamic exclusion 20s, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8. Top 10 peaks were selected for data dependent HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%. MS/MS settings: resolution 35k (m/z=200); AGC target 2 × 105, maximum IT 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, HCD first mass at 110 m/z. Mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific).  Additionally, samples were run on a nanoLC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) to allow characterization by collision induced fragmentation (CID). nanoLC was performed on an EASY-Spray C18 PepMap, 100 Å, 2 µm, 150 mm × 75 µm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the gradient mentioned above. CID was triggered from a precursor ion list containing the m/z values of spectra presenting the HexNAc oxonium ion (m/z 204.087 within a ± 0.01 range) in the HCD-MS/MS spectra previously acquired. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode over the m/z range 380-1580. Nanospray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and full scan nominal resolution was 60k (m/z=400). Top 6 peaks from the parent list were selected for CID fragmentation with NCE = 35%. Specific parameters were: MS maximum IT 500 ms, MS/MS maximum IT 50 ms, isolation window 2 Da, AGC target 1 × 10^6 (Orbitrap) and 1 x 10^4  (LTQ MSn), dynamic exclusion 45s, charge rejection: unassigned and 1. Mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur 3.1 software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version2.5.0.400 (Thermo Scientific), and then searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens proteome obtained on March 21 2020, using the SequestHT search engine for protein identiﬁcation and the Percolator algorithm for statistical validation. Prior to the search, the human proteome fasta database was edited to include CD44 sequences inferred from RNAseq characterization previously performed. Searches for HCD tandem spectra were performed with a tolerance of 5 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. For CID, a tolerance of 5 ppm was admitted for precursor and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Chymotrypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed.  A second search was carried out against a new customized databased composed of high confidence identifications resulting from the initial search against the human proteome together with CD44 variants (identified by RNAseq) was then constructed for definitive CD44 glycoproteoforms identification in glycoproteogenomics settings.  For cell lines, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57.021 Da) was elected as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation, while methionine oxidation (+15.994 Da), protein N-terminal formylation (+27.994 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+xxxx), Asparagine deamination (+0.984 Da), ammonia-loss of Cysteine N-terminal (-17.026549 Da) and glutamine to pyro-glutamine modification (-17.026549 Da) were considered as variable modifications.  For tumour samples, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da) was elected as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation and the following oxidative modifications were also included in the variable modifications list: Lysine to Allysine (-1.031 Da), Arginine to glutamic semialdehyde (-43.053 Da), Proline to glutamic semialdehyde (+13.979 Da), Tryptophan to hydroxykynurenin (+19.989 Da), Tryptophan to kynurenine (+3,994 Da), Tryptophan to N-formylkynurenine (+31.989 Da), Threonine to 2-amino-3ketobutyric Acid (-2.015 Da), Lysine methylation (+14.015 Da), Phenylalanine, Proline, Histidine and Tryptophan hydroxylation (+15.999 Da) and Phenylalanine, Proline, Histidine and Tryptophan carbonyl (+13.979 Da).  For identification of CD44 glycoproteoforms the following variable modifications of serine and threonine were also considered: HexNac (+203.079 Da), and/or HexNacNeuAc (+494.174 Da) and/or HexNacHex (+365.132 Da), HexNacHexNeuAc (+656.227 Da), HexNacHexdHex (+511.190 Da), HexNacHexNeuAc(2) (+947.323 Da), Hex(2)HexNac(2)NeuAc (1021.359 Da), HexNac(2) (+406.158 Da), HexNac(2)Hex (+568.211 Da), . The presence of sialic acids was included to contemplate the possibility of incomplete de-sialylation. Glycopeptide assignment was always curated by manual spectra interpretation using the XcaliburTM software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Bladder cancer (BC) management demands the introduction of novel molecular targets for precision medicine. Cell surface glycoprotein CD44 has been widely studied as a potential biomarker of BC aggressiveness and cancer stem cells. However, significant alternative splicing and multiple glycosylation generate a myriad of glycoproteoforms with potentially distinct functional roles. The lack of tools for precise molecular characterization has led to conflicting results, delaying clinical applications. Addressing these limitations, we have interrogated the transcriptome and glycoproteome of a large BC patient cohort for splicing signatures. <b>Methods:</b><i>CD44</i> gene and its splicing variants were assessed by Real Time-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) and RNAseq in tumor tissues. The co-localization of CD44 and short <i>O</i>-glycans was evaluated by proximity ligation assay (PLA), immunohistochemistry and double-immunofluorescence. An innovative glycoproteogenomics approach, integrating transcriptomics-customized datasets and glycomics for protein annotation from nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS experiments, was developed and implemented to identify CD44 variants and associated glycosignatures. The impact of CD44 silencing on proliferation and invasion of BC cell lines and glycoengineered cells was determined by BrdU ELISA and Matrigel invasion assays, respectively. Antibody phosphoarrays were used to investigate the role of CD44 and its glycoforms in the activation of relevant oncogenic signaling pathways. <b>Results:</b> Transcriptomics analysis revealed remarkable CD44 isoforms heterogeneity in bladder cancer tissues, as well as associations between short CD44 standard splicing isoform (CD44s), invasion and poor prognosis. We further demonstrated that targeting short <i>O</i>-glycoforms such as the Tn and sialyl-Tn antigens was key to overcome the lack of cancer specificity presented by CD44. Glycoproteogenomics allowed, for the first time, the comprehensive characterization of CD44 splicing code at the protein level. The concept was applied to invasive human BC cell lines, glycoengineered cells, and tumor tissues, enabling unequivocal CD44s identification as well as associated glycoforms. Finally, we confirmed the link between CD44 and invasion in CD44s-enriched cells <i>in vitro</i> by small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown, supporting findings from BC tissues. The key role played by short-chain <i>O</i>-glycans in CD44-mediated invasion was also demonstrated through glycoengineered cell models. <b>Conclusions:</b> Overall, CD44s emerged as biomarker of poor prognosis and CD44-Tn/ Sialyl-Tn (STn) as promising molecular signatures for targeted interventions. This study materializes the concept of glycoproteogenomics and provides a key vision to address the cancer splicing code at the protein level, which may now be expanded to better understand CD44 functional role in health and disease.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Glycosylation, Bladder cancer, Cd44, Glycoproteogenomics

### Affiliations
REQUIMTE/LAQV, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
Experimental Pathology and Therapeutics Group, IPO Porto Research Center (CI-IPOP), Portuguese Oncology Institute (IPO Porto), 4200-072 Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
André Silva

### Lab Head
Dr José Alexandre Ferreira
Experimental Pathology and Therapeutics Group, IPO Porto Research Center (CI-IPOP), Portuguese Oncology Institute (IPO Porto), 4200-072 Porto, Portugal


