### Accession
PXD033766

### Title
Human Immunoglobulin Repertoire-Guided Immunogen Design Targeting HIV V2-Apex Broadly Neutralizing Antibody Precursors

### Description
Broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) to the HIV envelope (Env) V2-apex region are important leads for HIV vaccine design. Most V2-apex bnAbs engage Env with an uncommonly long heavy chain complementarity-determining region 3 (HCDR3), suggesting that rarity of bnAb precursors poses a challenge for vaccine priming. We created precursor sequence definitions for V2-apex HCDR3-dependent bnAbs and searched for related precursors in human antibody heavy chain ultradeep sequencing data from 14 HIV-unexposed donors. We found potential precursors in a majority of donors for only two long-HCDR3 V2-apex bnAbs, PCT64 and PG9, identifying these bnAbs as priority vaccine targets. We then engineered ApexGT Env trimers that bind inferred germlines for PCT64 and PG9 and have higher affinities for bnAbs; determined cryo-EM structures of ApexGT trimers bound to inferred germline and bnAb forms of PCT64 and PG9; and developed an mRNA-encoded cell-surface trimer for our lead ApexGT candidate. The methods and immunogens developed here have promise to assist the development of an HIV vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
DeGlyPHER (Baboo et al., 2021) is used to ascertain site-specific glycan occupancy and processivity on the examined glycoproteins.  Proteinase K treatment and deglycosylation: HIV Env glycoprotein was exchanged to water using Microcon Ultracel PL-10 centrifugal filter. Glycoprotein was reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide in 100 mM ammonium acetate for 20 min at room temperature (RT, 24ᵒC). Initial protein-level deglycosylation was performed using 250 U of Endo H for 5 µg trimer, for 1 h at 37ᵒC.  Glycorotein was digested with 1:25 Proteinase K (PK) for 30 min at 37ᵒC. PK was denatured by incubating at 90ᵒC for 15 min, then cooled to RT. Peptides were deglycosylated again with 250 U Endo H for 1 h at 37ᵒC, then frozen at –80ᵒC and lyophilized. 100 U PNGase F was lyophilized, resuspended in 20 µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate prepared in H218O, and added to the lyophilized peptides. Reactions were then incubated for 1 h at 37ᵒC, subsequently analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS: Samples were analyzed on an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Samples were injected directly onto a 25 cm, 100 μm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 μm C18 resin. Samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC. Buffers A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 5% and 80% acetonitrile, respectively. The following gradient was used: 1–25% B over 160 min, an increase to 40% B over 40 min, an increase to 90% B over another 10 min and 30 min at 90% B for a total run time of 240 min. Column was re-equilibrated with solution A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.8 kV at the back of the column. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution. The ten most abundant ions per scan were selected for HCD MS/MS at 25 NCE. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with exclusion duration of 10 s and singly charged ions were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter (He et al., 2015) and searched with ProLuCID (Xu et al., 2015) against a database comprising UniProt reviewed (Swiss-Prot) proteome for Homo sapiens (UP000005640), UniProt amino acid sequences for Endo H (P04067), PNGase F (Q9XBM8), and Proteinase K (P06873), amino acid sequences for the examined proteins, and a list of general protein contaminants. The search space included no cleavage-specificity. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 C) was considered a static modification. Deamidation in presence of H218O (+2.988261 N), GlcNAc (+203.079373 N), oxidation (+15.994915 M) and N-terminal pyroglutamate formation (–17.026549 Q) were considered differential modifications. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 50 ppm fragment ion tolerance. Identified proteins were filtered using DTASelect2 (Tabb et al., 2002) and utilizing a target-decoy database search strategy to limit the false discovery rate to 1%, at the spectrum level (Peng et al., 2003). A minimum of 1 peptide per protein and no tryptic end per peptide were required and precursor delta mass cut-off was fixed at 15 ppm. Statistical models for peptide mass modification (modstat) were applied. Census2 (Park et al., 2008) label-free analysis was performed based on the precursor peak area, with a 15 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.1 min retention time tolerance. “Match between runs” was used to find missing peptides between runs. Data analysis using GlycoMSQuant (Baboo et al., 2021) was implemented to automate the analysis. GlycoMSQuant summed precursor peak areas across replicates, discarded peptides without NGS, discarded misidentified peptides when N-glycan remnant-mass modifications were localized to non-NGS asparagines and corrected/fixed N-glycan mislocalization where appropriate. The results were aligned to NGS in Env of HXB2 (Zhang et al., 2004) HIV-1 variant.

### Publication Abstract
Broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) to the HIV envelope (Env) V2-apex region are important leads for HIV vaccine design. Most V2-apex bnAbs engage Env with an uncommonly long heavy-chain complementarity-determining region 3 (HCDR3), suggesting that the rarity of bnAb precursors poses a challenge for vaccine priming. We created precursor sequence definitions for V2-apex HCDR3-dependent bnAbs and searched for related precursors in human antibody heavy-chain ultradeep sequencing data from 14 HIV-unexposed donors. We found potential precursors in a majority of donors for only two long-HCDR3 V2-apex bnAbs, PCT64 and PG9, identifying these bnAbs as priority vaccine targets. We then engineered ApexGT Env trimers that bound inferred germlines for PCT64 and PG9 and had higher affinities for bnAbs, determined cryo-EM structures of ApexGT trimers complexed with inferred-germline and bnAb forms of PCT64 and PG9, and developed an mRNA-encoded cell-surface ApexGT trimer. These methods and immunogens have promise to assist HIV vaccine development.

### Keywords
Hiv antibodies, Aids vaccines, Structural vaccinology, Immunoinformatics

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037 United States

### Submitter
Sabyasachi Baboo

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Yates III
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037 United States


