### Accession
PXD032270

### Title
The role of testosterone in spermatogenesis: lessons from proteome profiling of human spermatozoa in testosterone deficiency

### Description
Testosterone is essential to maintain qualitative spermatogenesis. Nonetheless, no studies have been yet performed in humans to analyze the testosterone-mediated expression of the sperm proteins and their importance in reproduction. Thus, this study aimed to identify sperm protein alterations in male hypogonadism using proteomic profiling. We have performed a comparative proteomic analysis comparing sperm from fertile controls (a pool of 5 normogonadic normozoospermic fertile men) versus sperm from patients with secondary hypogonadism (a pool of 5 oligozoospermic hypogonadic patients due to isolated LH deficiency). Sperm protein composition was analyzed, after peptide labelling with Isobaric Tags, via liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an LTQ Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer. Criteria used to accept protein identification included a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and at least 1 peptide match per protein. Up to 986 proteins were identified and, of those, 43 proteins were differentially expressed: 32 proteins were under-expressed and 11 were over-expressed in the pool of hypogonadic patients. Bioinformatic analyses were performed using UniProt Knowledgebase, and the Gene Ontology Consortium database based on PANTHER. Notably, 13 of these 43 differentially expressed proteins have been previously reported to be related to sperm function and spermatogenesis. Western blot analyses for A-Kinase Anchoring Protein 3 (AKAP3) and the Prolactin Inducible Protein (PIP) were used to confirm the proteomics data. In summary, a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach was used for the first time to describe alterations of the sperm proteome in secondary male hypogonadism. A panel of deregulated sperm proteins was identified, including Prosaposin, Ropporin-1B, SERPINA5, SMOC-1, SPANXB1, GSG1, ELSPBP1, fibronectin, 5-oxoprolinase, AKAP3, AKAP4, HYDIN, ROPN1B, ß-Microseminoprotein and Protein S100-A8, which might represent putative physiological in vivo targets for androgen deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Human semen samples were obtained from 6 male patients diagnosed with secondary hypogonadism due to LH deficiency and 5 fertile controls. The ejaculates were washed with PBS and the sperm cells were selected after 50% Percoll™ gradient (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). Briefly, the sperm samples were centrifuged through a 50% Percoll gradient at 400 g for 30 min at room temperature (RT) without brake. The recovered sperm cells were then resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and subjected to a residual leukocyte depletion using DynabeadsTM CD45 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Basically, 1 ml aliquots of samples were incubated with 50 µl washed dynabeads for 1 hour at RT, with constant shaking. Samples were washed twice by applying magnetic force for 2 min, and the efficiency of the procedure was checked using phase-contrast microscopy (Olympus BX50, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Protein solubilization was independently performed on each sperm sample. Briefly, after sperm purification, the sperm pellet was solubilized in a 2% SDS lysis buffer. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min, and the proteins present in the supernatant were quantified using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).  A comparative sperm proteomic analysis was performed comparing two pools: a fertile control pool (n=5) versus a secondary hypogonadic patients pool (n=5). To prepare the two pools, 25 µg of each sample were used (125 µg of total protein for each pool). The TMTduplex™ Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (TMT 2-plex; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was used for the peptide labeling, following the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. For the preparation of the TMT labeling, 80 µg of proteins from each pool were suspended in 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) and the same concentration (0.85 µg/µl) and volume were acquired for both pools. Proteins were reduced in 9.5 mM TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) for one hour at 55 ºC. Then, proteins were alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT avoiding light exposure. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 ºC with 80% (v/v) cold acetone. Afterward, samples were centrifuged at 17,500 g for 10 min at 4 ºC, and the acetone-precipitated protein pellet were resuspended in 80 µl of 100 mM TEAB. For protein digestion, trypsin was added to the protein pellets at a 1:20 protease-to-protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37 ºC with constant shaking. Regarding peptide labeling, 30 µg of peptides from each pool were labeled with TMT isobaric tags (the control group was labeled with TMT-126, and the secondary hypogonadic patients with TMT-127). Specifically, TMT label reagents (0.8 mg each) were equilibrated at RT, dissolved in 41 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and added to the reduced and alkylated peptides of each pool. After 1 hour of incubation at RT, the reaction was quenched with 8 µl of 0.5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT under shaking. Then, the TMT-labeled pools were combined at equal amounts in a single tube. After, labeled peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-suspended in 20 µl of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 5% ACN before processing with Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions.  The dried peptides pellet was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and injected for analysis by reverse-phase chromatography-MS/MS (Tandem mass spectrometry). Specifically, tryptic peptides were separated by using a reversed-phase nano LC-MS/MS setup comprised of nano-LC Ultra 2D Eksigent (AB Sciex, Brugg, Switzerland) attached to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column (5 µm, 120 Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm in length, Nanoseparations). For analytical separation, a gradient was applied on line with an analytical column (3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm in length, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), and the following buffer system was used: buffer A (97% H2O-3% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid) and buffer B (3% H2O-97 % ACN, 0.1% Formic acid). For the peptide mixtures the following gradient was applied: 0–5 min 0% to 5% B, 5–285 min 5% to 40% B, 285-290 min 40% to 100% B, 290-300 min 100% to 100% B at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS/MS analysis was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a nanoelectrospray ion source with precursor ion selection in the Orbitrap at 30,000 of resolution, in a range of 400-1700 m/z, selecting the 15 most intense precursor ions in positive ion mode. MS/MS data acquisition was completed using Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for MS2 was set to 40%.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For database searching, processed data were submitted to the Homo sapiens UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database with Sus scrufa Trypsin (HUMAN_PIG_UniProt_R_2017_01.fasta; released January 2017; 21,484 protein entries) added to it using SEQUEST, version 28.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The percolator search node was used for re-scoring. The following search parameters were used: five maximum missed cleavages for trypsin, TMT-labeled lysine in N-terminal (+225.156 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) as dynamic modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) as a static modification, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.1 Da fragment mass tolerance, and 100 mmu peak integration tolerance was applied, and most confident centroid peak integration method was used.  Criteria used to accept protein identification included a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and at least 1 peptide match per protein. In addition, proteins have been treated as “ungrouped” to avoid any possible ambiguity among the different isoforms of the same protein. The relative quantification of proteins was achieved by dividing the intensity of reporter ions of HCD MS2 spectra for secondary hypogonadism patients pool (TMT-127) with the controls pool (TMT-126), which were obtained using Proteome Discoverer software. Purity correction factors provided by the manufacturer were applied to the isotopic purities of the reporter ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testosterone, Sperm, Male infertility, Proteomics, Lh deficiency, Tmt, Hypogonadism

### Affiliations
Director Molecular Biology of Reproduction and Development research Group, Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi iSunyer (IDIBAPS), and Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Casanova 143, 08036 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Rafael Oliva

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Oliva Virgili
Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Casanova 143, 08036 Barcelona, Spain


