### Accession
PXD012965

### Title
Divergent polypharmacology-driven cellular activity of structurally similar multi-kinase inhibitors through cumulative differential effects on individual targets: ABPP

### Description
Despite recent successes of precision and immunotherapies there is a persisting need for novel targeted or multi-targeted approaches in complex diseases. Through a systems pharmacology approach including phenotypic screening, chemical and phosphoproteomics and RNA-Seq, we elucidated the targets and mechanisms underlying the differential anticancer activity of two structurally related multi-kinase inhibitors, foretinib and cabozantinib, in lung cancer cells. Biochemical and cellular target validation using probe molecules and RNA interference revealed a polypharmacology mechanism involving MEK1/2, FER and AURKB, which were each more potently inhibited by foretinib than cabozantinib. Based on this, we developed a synergistic combination of foretinib with barasertib, a more potent AURKB inhibitor, for MYC-amplified small cell lung cancer. This systems pharmacology approach showed that small structural changes of drugs can cumulatively, through multiple targets, result in pronounced anticancer activity differences and that detailed mechanistic understanding of polypharmacology can enable repurposing opportunities for cancers with unmet medical need.

### Sample Protocol
H1155 cells were lysed using a 10 M urea/Pierce IP lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1:100). Samples were sonicated for 1 minute and then incubated for 10 minutes on ice. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 minutes. Buffer exchange was performed using Zeba spin desalting columns, which were prepared following manufacters instructions, and protein concentration was determined using Coomassie protein assay reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific). Extra  protease and phosphatase (1:100) was added to the lysates. Lysate was divided into 6 samples of 1 mg of protein (duplicates of DMSO, cabozantinib and foretinib treatment) and 10 ul of 1 M MnCl2 were added to each sample. 20 µM of DMSO, foretinib or cabozantinib was added to the respective tubes and rotated for 15 minutes at room temperature. Desthiobiotin-ATP was added to each sample at a final concentration of 5 µM and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. Reduction and alkylation were performed as described by the manufacturer. Trypsin digestion (20 µg/µl) was performed at 37°C overnight. The 50% high capacity streptavidin agarose resin slurry (50 ul) was added to each sample and rotated for 1 h at room temperature. After washes, peptide elution was performed by adding three times 100 µl of elution buffer (50% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to each sample. Samples were frozen and lyophilized in the speedvac. Samples were resuspended in 20 µl of 2% ACN in 0.1% TFA solution containig Thermo Scientific Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture (PRTC) in order to confirm correct operation of the LC-MS instrument. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) coupled to an electrospray benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo) was used to acquire MS/MS peptide sequences. The samples were loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm, 100 Å) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% ACN and 0.04% TFA. The captured peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex). A 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% ACN + 0.1% FA) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% ACN + 0.1% FA) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. Both MS and MS/MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap part to ensure accurate mass measurement using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks. Each sample was injected twice (technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
Samples were queried using MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 with matching against human entries in the UniProt database. The fragment tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm. Desthiobiotin was set as a lysine modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05.  FOr this upload, data were searched against human entries in UniProt using Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
Despite recent successes of precision and immunotherapies there is a persisting need for novel targeted or multi-targeted approaches in complex diseases. Through a systems pharmacology approach, including phenotypic screening, chemical and phosphoproteomics, and RNA-seq, we elucidated the targets and mechanisms underlying the differential anticancer activity of two structurally related multi-kinase inhibitors, foretinib, and cabozantinib, in lung cancer cells. Biochemical and cellular target validation using probe molecules and RNAi revealed a polypharmacology mechanism involving MEK1/2, FER, and AURKB, which were each more potently inhibited by foretinib than cabozantinib. Based on this, we developed a synergistic combination of foretinib with barasertib, a more potent AURKB inhibitor, for MYC-amplified small-cell lung cancer. This systems pharmacology approach showed that small structural changes of drugs can cumulatively, through multiple targets, result in pronounced anticancer activity differences and that detailed mechanistic understanding of polypharmacology can enable repurposing opportunities for cancers with unmet medical need.

### Keywords
Cabozantinib, Lung cancer, Foretinib, Polypharmacology, Abpp

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


