### Accession
PXD029019

### Title
LC-MS/MS interactomics analysis of Praf2 with timsTOF Pro

### Description
LC-MS/MS interactomics analysis of Praf2 using TurboID with timsTOF Pro.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on half (50µl) of the elution volumes according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 20mM TCEP and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 15min at room temperature. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 2.5% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Four extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 2h30. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 35µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis.  The tryptic peptides (500 ng) were injected on a nanoelute (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. HPLC separation (Solvent A : 0.1% formic acid in water; Solvent B : 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was carried out at 250nL/min using a packed emitter column (C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm) (IonOpticks, Australia) using a 40 min gradient elution (2 to 11% solvent B during 19min; 11 to 16% during 7min; 16% to 25% during 4min;  25% to 80% for 3min and finally 80% for 7min to wash the column). Mass-spectrometric data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. The measurements were carried out over the m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th. The range of ion mobilities values were from 0.8 to 1.3 V s/cm2(1/k0). The total cycle time was set to 1.17s and the number of PASEF MS/MS scans was set to 10.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software 1.6.17.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens database (release 01-02-2021, 20396 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 aminoacids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was not allowed.  LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 2. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (1). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using intensities [Luber, 2010 #1907; Cox, 2008 #1906].  Three independent streptavidin immunoprecipitations replicate for TurboID-Praf2 , TurboID-C1 and untagged Praf2 cells were analysed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (2). The protein intensities were transformed in log2, and proteins identified in at least 3 replicates in at least one group were submitted to statistical test (volcano plot, FDR=0.05 and S0=0.5) after imputation of the missing value by a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 30% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 2.5 standard deviation downshift of the mean.  Proteins never identified in the negative control (untagged PRAF2) were labelled as "discard".  The differentially abundant proteins increased in TurboID vs TurboID-C1  were subjected to bioinformatic analysis using EnrichR software freely available at https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/ for enrichment of GO terms using Reactome library. Ranking of enriched term was performed using adjusted p-value. Proteins network was built using String database ( https://string-db.org/) using highest confidence (0.900) minimum interaction score. The top non redundat networks enriched according to "local network cluster (STRING)" were selected and highlighted in color.

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum exit of some polytopic plasma membrane proteins (PMPs) is controlled by arginin-based retention motifs. PRAF2, a gatekeeper which recognizes these motifs, was shown to retain the GABA<sub>B</sub>-receptor GB1 subunit in the ER. We report that PRAF2 can interact on a stoichiometric basis with both wild type and mutant F508del Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR), preventing the access of newly synthesized cargo to ER exit sites. Because of its lower abundance, compared to wild-type CFTR, CFTR-F508del recruitment into COPII vesicles is suppressed by the ER-resident PRAF2. We also demonstrate that some pharmacological chaperones that efficiently rescue CFTR-F508del loss of function in CF patients target CFTR-F508del retention by PRAF2 operating with various mechanisms. Our findings open new therapeutic perspectives for diseases caused by the impaired cell surface trafficking of mutant PMPs, which contain RXR-based retention motifs that might be recognized by PRAF2.

### Keywords
Timstof pro, Interactomics, Praf2, Lc-ms/ms, Turboid

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Chiara Guerrera, IR1, HDR Head of the Proteomics Platform SFR Necker INSERM US24  Faculty of Medecine,  University of Paris 160 rue de Vaugirard 75015 Paris Tél. : 01 40 61 54 67

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Chiara Guerrera, IR1, HDR Head of the Proteomics Platform SFR Necker INSERM US24  Faculty of Medecine,  University of Paris 160 rue de Vaugirard 75015 Paris Tél. : 01 40 61 54 67


