### Accession
PXD021108

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Marinobacter sp. TT1 reveals Corexit impacts on hydrocarbon metabolism, chemotactic motility and biofilm formation

### Description
The application of chemical dispersants during marine oil spills can affect the community composition and activity of native marine microorganisms. Several studies have indicated that certain marine hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, such as Marinobacter spp., can be inhibited by chemical dispersants, resulting in lower abundances and/or reduced hydrocarbon-biodegradation rates. In this respect, a major knowledge gap exists in understanding the mechanisms underlying these observed physiological effects. Here, we performed comparative proteomics of the Deepwater Horizon isolate Marinobacter sp. TT1 grown under different conditions that varied regarding the supplied carbon sources (pyruvate vs. n-hexadecane) and whether or not dispersant (Corexit EC9500A) was added, or that contained crude oil in the form of a water-accommodated fraction (WAF) or chemically-enhanced WAF (CEWAF). We characterized the proteins associated with alkane metabolism and alginate biosynthesis in strain TT1, report on its potential for aromatic hydrocarbon biodegradation and present a proposed metabolism of Corexit components as carbon substrates for the strain. Our findings implicate Corexit in affecting hydrocarbon metabolism, chemotactic motility, biofilm formation, and inducing solvent tolerance mechanisms like efflux pumps in strain TT1. This study provides novel insights into dispersant impacts on microbial hydrocarbon degraders that should be taken into consideration for future oil spill response actions.

### Sample Protocol
At the start of the experiment, the following treatments for Marinobacter sp. TT1 were established in half-filled 20 ml glass headspace vials (Fig. S1) using four different pre-cultures, adapted to different carbon substrates (see SI). The n hexadecane-adapted pre culture was used to inoculate (1) cultures with no added carbon substrate (Control), (2) cultures with 100 mg l 1 n-hexadecane (Hxdc), and (3) cultures with 100 mg l 1 n hexadecane and 10 mg l 1 Corexit (Hxdc+Cxt). The Corexit-adapted pre culture was used to establish treatments with (4) 100 mg l 1 Corexit (Corexit), whereas the WAF-adapted pre culture was used to inoculate treatments with either (5) 1 ml of WAF solution (6 mg l-1 WAF-derived dissolved organic carbon) or (6) 200 µl of CEWAF solution (6 mg l-1 CEWAF-derived dissolved organic carbon). The pyruvate-adapted pre culture was used to inoculate cultures containing (7) 3 mM (264 mg l 1) pyruvate. All treatments were run in triplicate and sampled sacrificially after 0 and 4 days, except for the pyruvate-containing treatments which were sampled after 1 day due to a faster growth with this substrate, as determined in pre-experiments. Due to concerns about gas-phase losses during sampling, separate triplicate cultures were prepared for treatments (2) and (3) in order to separately obtain samples for cell counts and HC quantification analysis. Separate replicate cultures were prepared for protein analysis from all seven treatments and each sampled after 1 day (pyruvate treatments) or 4 days (all other treatments). Additionally, abiotic controls were prepared for HC or pyruvate quantification, containing no inoculum and either (8) 100 mg l 1 n hexadecane (ab. Hxdc), (9) 100 mg l 1 n hexadecane and 10 mg l 1 Corexit (ab. Hxdc+Cxt), or (10) 3 mM of pyruvate. For protein analysis, 100 ml of culture replicates were pooled per sample triplicate, filtered onto Sterivex filters (Merck Millipore, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and immediately frozen. The filters were cut into small pieces and dissolved in 1 ml lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 1 mM PMSF). Cells on the filters were disrupted by bead beating (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedicals, Sanra Ana, CA, USA; 5.5 ms, 1 min, 3 cycles) followed by ultra-sonication (UP50H, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany; cycle 0.5, amplitude 60%) and centrifugation (10,000 x g, 10 min). The peptide lysates were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and analysed by nanoliquid chromatography mass spectrometry (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometric analyses of eluted peptide lysates were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK). LC gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode were used as described in (Haange et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Data resulting from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using SEQUEST HT. The protein-coding sequences of the reference UniProt proteome of Marinobacter sp. DSM 26291 (= strain TT1; protein-coding sequence entries 4,109, TaxID: 1761792) were used as database. Search settings were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The obtained label-free quantification intensities were further analyzed using Perseus v1.6.1.5 (Tyanova et al., 2016). For statistical tests, abundance data were log2 transformed, normalized (median-centered) and filtered. Only proteins with at least five peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and identified in at least two biological triplicates of at least one growth condition were considered for statistical analysis. A permutation-based FDR approach was used to identify proteins with significantly different abundances between growth conditions, while correcting for multiple testing (parameters: S0 = 0, FDR 0.05, 1,000 randomizations).

### Publication Abstract
The application of chemical dispersants during marine oil spills can affect the community composition and activity of marine microorganisms. Several studies have indicated that certain marine hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria, such as <i>Marinobacter</i> spp., can be inhibited by chemical dispersants, resulting in lower abundances and/or reduced biodegradation rates. However, a major knowledge gap exists regarding the mechanisms underlying these physiological effects. Here, we performed comparative proteomics of the Deepwater Horizon isolate <i>Marinobacter</i> sp. TT1 grown under different conditions. Strain TT1 received different carbon sources (pyruvate vs. <i>n</i>-hexadecane) with and without added dispersant (Corexit EC9500A). Additional treatments contained crude oil in the form of a water-accommodated fraction (WAF) or chemically-enhanced WAF (CEWAF; with Corexit). For the first time, we identified the proteins associated with alkane metabolism and alginate biosynthesis in strain TT1, report on its potential for aromatic hydrocarbon biodegradation and present a protein-based proposed metabolism of Corexit components as carbon substrates. Our findings revealed that Corexit exposure affects hydrocarbon metabolism, chemotactic motility, biofilm formation, and induces solvent tolerance mechanisms, like efflux pumps, in strain TT1. This study provides novel insights into dispersant impacts on microbial hydrocarbon degraders that should be taken into consideration for future oil spill response actions.

### Keywords
Marinobacter sp. tt1; dispersant; corexit; waf; hexadecane; hydrocarbon metabolism; proteomics

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


