### Accession
PXD000849

### Title
Combined Antibody/Lectin-Enrichment Identifies Extensive Changes in the O-GlcNAc Subproteome Upon Oxidative Stress

### Description
O-GlcNAc is thought to regulate proteins in a mannaer analogous to other PTMs, modulating cellular functions including the cellular stress response. The aim of this study was to identify specific cellular networks and protein complexes that are differentially O-GlcNAcylated and/or expressed upon acute oxidative stress (H2O2 for 1 and 2 h). We achieved this by employing SILAC and a novel anti-O-GlcNAc G5 lectibody IP strategy that combind O-GlcNAc specific antibodies and the lectin WGA. We identified 990 proteins among all three treatments including 202 non-redundant O-GlcNAc modified peptides. Differentially expressed proteins clustered into canonical 14-3-3/PI3K signaling pathways including the 14-3-3 complex, chaperonins, RNA Pol II Mediator and nuclear pore complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Inducible OGT null MEFs stably transduced with lentivirus encoding GFP or mutated estrogen receptor (mER)-Cre-2A-GFP were grown in light, medium and heavy SILAC media (lysine, arginine) for 9 generations. Medium and Heavy labelled cells were stressed with H2O2 for 1 and 2 h respectively. Total Nuclear/Cytoplasmic Extractions were performed on cell pellets and O-GlcNAc modified proteins were purified by IP using O-GlcNAc antibodies: CTD110.6, RL2, HGAC39, HGAC85 and the lectin WGA. IP'd proteins were precipitated and tryptically digested. Tryptic peptides were separated by bRP followed by RPLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW spectra files were processed using PD1.3 incorporating the Mascot search algorithm. Peptide IDs were determined using a 30 ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.05 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance. Methylthio modification of Cys were considered complete and oxidation of methionine and threonine, deaminidation of asparagine and glutamine, and HexNAc modification of threonine and serine residues.Neutral loss of HexNAc and reporter ions were used to predict potential O-GlcNAC peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI RefSeq 2012 Mus musculus Accession List (15742024 sequence 5/7/2012) and decoy database searching (reverse and random). Protein IDs were validated using the Mascot percolator employing a q-value of 0.01, including a minimum of 2 unique peptides and 3 peptide Spectral matches (PSMs)

### Publication Abstract
O-Linked N-acetyl-&#x3b2;-d-glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is a dynamic post-translational modification that modifies and regulates over 3000 nuclear, cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial proteins. Upon exposure to stress and injury, cells and tissues increase the O-GlcNAc modification, or O-GlcNAcylation, of numerous proteins promoting the cellular stress response and thus survival. The aim of this study was to identify proteins that are differentially O-GlcNAcylated upon acute oxidative stress (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) to provide insight into the mechanisms by which O-GlcNAc promotes survival. We achieved this goal by employing Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) and a novel "G5-lectibody" immunoprecipitation strategy that combines four O-GlcNAc-specific antibodies (CTD110.6, RL2, HGAC39, and HGAC85) and the lectin WGA. Using the G5-lectibody column in combination with basic reversed phase chromatography and C<sub>18</sub> RPLC-MS/MS, 990 proteins were identified and quantified. Hundreds of proteins that were identified demonstrated increased (&gt;250) or decreased (&gt;110) association with the G5-lectibody column upon oxidative stress, of which we validated the O-GlcNAcylation status of 24 proteins. Analysis of proteins with altered glycosylation suggests that stress-induced changes in O-GlcNAcylation cluster into pathways known to regulate the cell's response to injury and include protein folding, transcriptional regulation, epigenetics, and proteins involved in RNA biogenesis. Together, these data suggest that stress-induced O-GlcNAcylation regulates numerous and diverse cellular pathways to promote cell and tissue survival.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Affinity chromatography, O-glcnac, Silac

### Affiliations
The Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine. The Department of Biological Chemistry.
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Natasha E Zachara
The Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine. The Department of Biological Chemistry.


