### Accession
PXD003365

### Title
Quantification of sulfenic acid modifications in an atherosclerotic model

### Description
Physiological stimuli such as thrombin or pathological stimuli such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) activate platelets. The activated platelets bind to monocyte through P-selectin-PSGL-1 interactions, but also release the contents of their granules, which were defined as platelet releasate. It is known that monocytes in contact with platelet releasate produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). Reversible cysteine oxidation by ROS has been viewed as a potential regulator of protein function. In previous study, we employed a model of THP-1 monocytic cells affected by LPA- or thrombin-induced platelet releasate and a modified biotin switch assay to unravel the biological processes that been influenced by reversible cysteine oxidation. To gain better understanding of the redox regulation of monocyte in atherosclerosis, we now extend the modified biotin switch to quantify protein sulfenic acid, a subpopulation of reversible cysteine oxidation. Using arsenite in the modified biotin-switch assay, we were able to quantify 1161 proteins, in which more than 100 sulfenic acid sites were identified. Bioinformatics analysis of the quantified sulfenic acid sites further highlighted biological processes of monocyte transendothelial migration including integrin β2. Flow cytometry validated the activation of LFA-1 (αLβ2) and Mac-1 (αMβ2), two subfamilies of integrin β2 complexes on human primary monocyte upon platelet releasate treatments. The activation of LFA-1 was mediated by ROS from NADPH oxidase (NOX) activation. Moreover, the production of ROS and the activation of LFA-1 in human primary monocyte induced by platelet releasate were independent of P-selectin-PSGL-1 interaction. The modified biotin switch assay proved to be a powerful tool with the ability to reveal new regulatory mechanisms and identify new therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Ethical approval for platelet and monocyte isolation from whole blood was obtained from the Clinical Research Ethics Board at the University of British Columbia (H12-00757) and written consent was granted by the blood donors. After discarding the first 4 ml, whole blood from healthy donors was collected in acid citrate dextrose (ACD) anti-coagulated tubes (Cat: 364606, BD Biosciences, Canada). Platelet rich plasma (PRP) was separated from whole blood following initial centrifugation at 150 g at room temperature for 15 min. Platelets were pelleted from PRP supplemented with half-volume of ACD by centrifugation at 720 g for 10 min, washed twice with citrate glucose saline buffer (10 mM tri-sodium citrate, 30 mM glucose, 120 mM sodium chloride and 1 U / mL apyrase, pH=6.5) and resuspended in lysine and arginine free Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI) 1640 Medium (Gibco, Life Technologies, Canada) supplemented with 1.8 mM CaCl2. Platelet counts were determined by hemocytometer, and adjusted to physiological concentration (300 × 109 /L). Platelets were rested at room temperature for 30 min and then activated with 1 U / mL thrombin from human plasma or 20 μM 1-O-hexadecyl-2-hydroxy-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidic acid (LPA) at 37°C. Ten minutes after activation, platelet releasate was collected as supernatant after two-time centrifugation at 750 g at 4°C for 10 min and the releasate was stored at -80°C. SILAC labeled THP-1 cells were treated with 100 µM H2O2 or platelet releasate for 6 h in a 37°C incubator. After treatment, light- and heavy-labeled THP-1 cells were mixted, washed twice with PBS, and harvested with lysis buffer in presence of equal amount of NEM (1:1, w/w) to block free thiols and excess NEM was removed by buffer exchange using Amicon Centrifugal Filter Units with 10 kDa cutoff. Sulfenic acids were then reduced by adding 200 mM arsenite for how long?, labeled with 1 mM biotin-maleimide for 2 h at 37°C and enriched with NeutroAvidin. Enriched protein sulfenic acids were eluted through boiling for 5 min with 4 × SDS buffer (composition) and 1mM biotin and loaded onto 10% SDS-PAGE for in gel trypsin digestion. Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, imaged and each lane was cut into 5 bands. In-gel digestion was performed essentially as described previously.11 The gel pieces were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. Trypsin digestion was performed in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C for at least 16 hours. Then, peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by adding extraction buffer (1:2 (vol / vol) 5% formic acid / acetonitrile). Samples were analyzed on Bruker Impact Q-top.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of Q-TOF Data was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8.15 The data were searched against a database comprised of the protein sequences from human using the following parameters: peptide mass accuracy 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the second search; double SILAC as quantitation method. All other parameters as preset: trypsin enzyme specificity, variable modifications: biotin-maleimide, nethylmaleimide and carbamidomethyl on cysteine, oxidation on methionine. Only peptides and proteins with 99% confidence limit (1% false discovery rate) were considered as accurately identified.

### Publication Abstract
Physiological stimuli such as thrombin, or pathological stimuli such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), activate platelets. The activated platelets bind to monocytes through P-selectin-PSGL-1 interactions but also release the contents of their granules, commonly called "platelet releasate". It is known that monocytes in contact with platelet releasate produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). Reversible cysteine oxidation by ROS is considered to be a potential regulator of protein function. In a previous study, we used THP-1 monocytic cells exposed to LPA- or thrombin-induced platelet releasate and a modified biotin switch assay to unravel the biological processes that are influenced by reversible cysteine oxidation. To gain a better understanding of the redox regulation of monocytes in atherosclerosis, we have now altered the modified biotin switch to selectively quantify protein sulfenic acid, a subpopulation of reversible cysteine oxidation. Using arsenite as reducing agent in the modified biotin switch assay, we were able to quantify 1161 proteins, in which more than 100 sulfenic acid sites were identified. Bioinformatics analysis of the quantified sulfenic acid sites highlighted the relevant, previously missed biological process of monocyte transendothelial migration, which included integrin &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>. Flow cytometry validated the activation of LFA-1 (&#x3b1;<sub>L</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>) and Mac-1 (&#x3b1;<sub>M</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>), two subfamilies of integrin &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> complexes, on human primary monocytes following platelet releasate treatment. The activation of LFA-1 was mediated by ROS from NADPH oxidase (NOX) activation. Production of ROS and activation of LFA-1 in human primary monocytes were independent of P-selectin-PSGL-1 interaction. Our results proved the modified biotin switch assay to be a powerful tool with the ability to reveal new regulatory mechanisms and identify new therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Sulfenic acid, Atherosclerosis, Biotin switch assay

### Affiliations
Univerisity of British Columbia
Professor, Unversity of British Columbia

### Submitter
Ru Li

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Kast
Professor, Unversity of British Columbia


