### Accession
PXD034357

### Title
Endometrial gland impacts on stromal cell decidualization

### Description
Uterine glands and, by inference, their secretions impact uterine receptivity, blastocyst implantation, stromal cell decidualization, and placental development. Changes in gland function across the menstrual cycle are impacted by steroid hormones, estrogen and progesterone, as well as stroma-derived factors. Using an endometrial epithelial organoid (EEO) system, transcriptome and proteome analyses identified distinct responses of the EEO to steroid hormones and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Notably, steroid hormones and PGE2 modulated the basolateral secretion of EEO proteins, where cystatin C (CST3) was significantly increased by progesterone and PGE2. CST3 treatment of decidualizing stromal cells significantly decreased the decidualization markers PRL and IGFBP1. The attenuation of stromal cell decidualization via CST3 suggests a role for uterine gland-derived proteins in controlling the extent of decidualization. These findings provide evidence that uterine gland-derived factors directly impact stromal cell decidualization, which has strong implications for better understanding pregnancy establishment and female fertility in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The samples were mixed with 3 volumes of 5% trichloroacetic acid in acetone and allowed to precipitate over the weekend at -20C. Protein pellets were recovered by centrifugation at 16K x g and pellets washed once with 80% acetone in water.  Note: as no protein pellets were observed after precipitation, protein was not quantified.  Trypsin digestion Protein was digested with digested with trypsin according to our SOP (available upon request).  Following overnight digestion, peptides were purified and concentrated using C18 tips (Cat# 87784) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce/Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were lyophilized and resuspended in 10uL of solvent (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Peptides were transferred to vials and placed in a refrigerated autosampler (7 °C). Spectral Library Generation To generate the spectral library 5ug of each sample (C18 desalted peptides, total of 125 ug) was combined into one pool. This peptide pool was then fractionated using high pH reversed phase columns according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce). Eight fractions were collected and then run individually by DDA as described below.  Mass Spectrometry  DDA-PASEF: Peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry as follows: a 1uL injection was made directly onto a C18 analytical column (20cm long x 75µm inner diameter pulled-needle analytical column packed with Waters BEH-C18, 1.7um reversed phase resin). Peptides were separated and eluted from the analytical column with a gradient of acetonitrile at 300nL/min. The Bruker nanoElute system is attached to a Bruker timsTOF-PRO mass spectrometer via a Bruker CaptiveSpray source.  LC gradient conditions: Initial conditions were 3%B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by 10 min ramp to 17%B, 17-25%B over 30 min, 25-37%B over 30 min, 37-80%B over 5 min (see-saw column wash: 2min to 40%, 2min to 80%, 2min to 40%, and 2min to 80%), ramp back (2min) and hold (5min) at initial conditions. Total run time was 90min. (Internal ref: ”No trap_90min_BEHC18_20cmx75um”).  DIA-PASEF: PASEF and TIMS were set to “on”. MS data were collected in positive-ion data-independent PASEF mode over an m/z range of 400 to 1200 and an ion-mobility range of 0.57 to 1.47 1/k0. A total of 64 DIA_PASEF windows were used (25 m/z steps and 0.18 IM steps) with two collision energies based on ion mobility.

### Data Protocol
Database searches (protein identification)  The DDA spectral library data were searched against UniProt-Human (20,598 entries) and false discovery rate (FDR) determined by simultaneously searching a reversed-sequence decoy database. The Spectronaut algorithm (V14, Biognosys Inc) was used with the following parameters: trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages allowed, specific; precursor and fragment mass error = dynamic (examines data for match tolerances); carbamidomethyl-Cys fixed modification; oxidized-Met and protein-N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications. The spectral library was generated using the following data filters: spectrum, peptide, and protein FDR 1%; min 3 and max 6 best fragments per peptide.   For dia-pasef data analysis: precursor Q-value (precursor FDR), protein Q-value (protein FDR) was set at <1%. MS2 (MS/MS fragment intensity) area quantification were filtered based on Q-value. And final PG.quantity was cut-off by 23 (1% quantile). A protein was identified in at least 3 samples per group.

### Publication Abstract
Uterine glands and, by inference, their secretions impact uterine receptivity, blastocyst implantation, stromal cell decidualization, and placental development. Changes in gland function across the menstrual cycle are primarily governed by the steroid hormones estrogen (E2) and progesterone (P4) but can also be influenced by extrinsic factors from the stroma. Using a human endometrial epithelial organoid system, transcriptome and proteome analyses identified distinct responses of the organoids to steroid hormones and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Notably, P4 and PGE2 modulated the basolateral secretion of organoid proteins, particularly cystatin C (CST3), serpin family A member 3 (SERPINA3), and stanniocalcin 1 (STC1). CST3, but not SERPINA3 or STC1, attenuated the in vitro stromal decidualization response to steroid hormones and PGE2. These findings provide evidence that uterine gland-derived factors impact stromal cell decidualization, which has implications for pregnancy establishment and fertility in women.

### Keywords
Hormone, Pge2, Stroma, Gland, Endometrium, Decidualization

### Affiliations
University of Missouri, Columbia
Curators’ Distinguished Professor of Animal Sciences and Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women’s Health, University of Missouri, Columbia

### Submitter
Brian Mooney

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas E Spencer
Curators’ Distinguished Professor of Animal Sciences and Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women’s Health, University of Missouri, Columbia


