### Accession
PXD041032

### Title
Identification of PP2A-B55 targets in Drosophila uncovers regulation of Emerin during nuclear envelope reassembly

### Description
Entry into mitosis is triggered by mitotic kinases that phosphorylate multiple proteins to induce profound cellular changes including nuclear envelope breakdown, chromosome condensation and spindle assembly. Conversely, mitotic exit requires protein dephosphorylation as cells return to their interphase organization. Protein Phosphatase 2A in complex with its B55/Tws regulatory subunit (PP2A-B55) is known to play a crucial role in this transition. However, the precise events and substrates that it regulates are incompletely understood. We used proteomic approaches in Drosophila to identify proteins that interact with PP2A-B55 and are dephosphorylated in a PP2A-B55 dependent manner. Among several candidates, we identified Otefin (also known as Emerin) as a target of PP2A-B55 in the process of nuclear envelope reformation after mitosis. Emerin is a protein of the inner nuclear membrane that interacts with the DNA-binding protein Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor (BAF) via a LEM domain. Our results indicate that phosphorylation of Emerin at Ser50 and Ser54 near its LEM domain negatively regulates its association with BAF, Lamin and additional Emerin. Using live imaging, we show that dephosphorylation of Emerin at the identified sites determines the timing of nuclear envelope reformation. Genetic rescue experiments indicate that this regulation is required in vivo during embryonic development. Phosphoregulation of the Emerin-BAF complex formation by PP2A-B55 appears as a key event of mitotic exit that is likely to be conserved across species.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomics, harvested cells were lysed in ice cold 1% (w/v) SDC (Sodium deoxycholate, Sigma D6750) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by adding Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, 5 mM final) to the lysates. Alkylation of cysteine residues was achieved by adding chloroacetamide (CAA, 20 mM final). Samples were incubated at 37°C with 500 rpm shaking for 30 minutes for the reduction/alkylation procedure and then digested (overnight, 37°C) with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:25 (w:w). Tryptic digests were acidified with 1% formic acid (FA), centrifuged (17,000xg, 10 min) and desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) previously conditioned with acetonitrile (ACN) 1% FA, solid-phase extraction (SPE) buffer (50% ACN1% FA), and finally 1% aqueous FA. Peptide samples were applied, desalted with 3 ml of 1% FA and eluted in 1 ml of SPE buffer. Peptide eluates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, lyophilized in a SpeedVac centrifuge and stored at -80°C. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on 5 μm titansphere particles (Canadian Life Science, Peterborough, ON, Canada) according to published protocols (Kanshin et al., 2012; Kanshin et al., 2013). Loading of protein extracts on the titansphere beads, washing, and elution steps were performed using custom spin columns (Ishihama et al., 2006) made from 200 μl pipette tip containing a SDB-XC membrane (Empore, 3M) frit and filled with TiO2 beads. Peptides were desalted in 100 μl of 1% FA and subsequently eluted from spin columns using 100 μl of 50% ACN, 0.5% FA. LC-MS/MS analyses were per-formed on a Q-Exactive HF or an Orbitrap tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer using homemade capillary LC columns (18 cm length, 150 μm inner diameter, 360 μm outer diameter). Capillary LC columns were packed with C18 Jupiter 3 μm particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) at 1,000 psi. Samples were directly injected on LC-columns and separations were performed at a flow rate of 0.6 μl/min using a linear gradient of 5–35% aqueous ACN (0.2% FA) in 150 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis of SILAC experiments was performed using Maxquant software 1.5.3.8. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%, the minimum peptide length was set to 6. The Uniprot fly proteome database was used for all database searches. Further bioinformatics analyses were performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
Mitotic exit requires the dephosphorylation of many proteins whose phosphorylation was needed for mitosis. Protein phosphatase 2A with its B55 regulatory subunit (PP2A-B55) promotes this transition. However, the events and substrates that it regulates are incompletely understood. We used proteomic approaches in <i>Drosophila</i> to identify proteins that interact with and are dephosphorylated by PP2A-B55. Among several candidates, we identified emerin (otefin in <i>Drosophila</i>). Emerin resides in the inner nuclear membrane and interacts with the DNA-binding protein barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF) via a LEM domain. We found that the phosphorylation of emerin at Ser50 and Ser54 near its LEM domain negatively regulates its association with BAF, lamin and additional emerin in mitosis. We show that dephosphorylation of emerin at these sites by PP2A-B55 determines the timing of nuclear envelope reformation. Genetic experiments indicate that this regulation is required during embryonic development. Phosphoregulation of the emerin-BAF complex formation by PP2A-B55 appears as a key event of mitotic exit that is likely conserved across species.

### Keywords
Lamin, Emerin, Mitosis, Baf, Pp2a, Otefin, Nuclear envelope, Mitotic exit

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Archambault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


