### Accession
PXD031589

### Title
Mitochondrial COA7 is a heme-binding protein with disulfide reductase activity, which is involved in the early stages of complex IV assembly

### Description
Cytochrome c oxidase assembly factor 7 (COA7) is a metazoan-specific assembly factor, critical for the biogenesis of mitochondrial complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase). Although mutations in COA7 have been linked to complex IV assembly defects and neurological conditions such as peripheral neuropathy, ataxia and leukoencephalopathy, the precise role COA7 plays in the biogenesis of complex IV is not known. Here we show that the absence of COA7 leads to arrest of the complex IV assembly pathway after the initial step where the COX1 module is built, progression from which requires the incorporation of copper, through the biogenesis of the CuA site. The crystal structure of COA7, determined to 2.4 Å resolution, reveals a ‘banana-shaped’ molecule composed of five helix-turn-helix repeats, tethered by disulfide bonds. We find that in solution, purified COA7 binds heme with micromolar affinity, through axial ligation to the central iron atom by histidine and methionine residues. COA7 interacts transiently with the copper metallochaperones SCO1 and SCO2 that function in copper delivery to COX2 and catalyzes the reduction of disulfide bonds within these proteins, which constitute the protein copper binding sites. We therefore propose that COA7 is a heme-binding disulfide reductase that acts in the biogenesis of the CuA site, that underpins complex IV assembly.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC proteomics was performed as described in Stroud et al. 2016 Nature Native affinity enrichment was performed as described in Formosa et al. 2021 Cell Reports. Cross-linking AE-MS was performed as described in Kang et al. 2019 eLife.   For SILAC experiments, data were acquired on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus instrument connected to an 3000 HPLC. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Dionex-C18 trap column 75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) at 5 μl/min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (Dionex-C18 analytical column 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nL/min using a 125 min non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A [0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN, 5% DMSO] and buffer B [0.1% formic acid in ACN, 5% DMSO]. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. Lockmass of 401.92272 from DMSO was used. Data were collected using the Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375–1400 m/z scan range at 70,000 m/z resolution with AGC target of 3e6. HCD for MS/MS was performed on the top 15 most intense ions with charges ≥2. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 17,500 m/z resolution, AGC target of 5e4 and maximum injection time of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion with of 30 seconds was applied for repeated precursors.  AE-MS was acquired on either an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion-Trap (Fig. S2D), Exploris 480 (Fig. S2C) or Eclipse (Fig. S2E, F) instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed as above but using a 90 min (Elite), 65 min (Exploris 480) or 95 min (Eclipse) non-linear ACN gradient. For the Orbitrap Elite, data were collected in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode using m/z 300–1650 as MS scan range, rCID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions. Lockmass of 401.92272 from DMSO was used. Other instrument parameters were: MS scan at 100,000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1E6, CID at 30% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGC target of 5000. Dynamic exclusion with of 30 seconds was applied for repeated precursors. For the Exploris 480 and Eclipse instruments, the mass spectrometers were operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120000 resolution. The ‘top speed’ acquisition mode with 3 s cycle time on the most intense precursor ion was used, whereby ions with charge states of 2 to 6 (Exploris 480) or 7 (Eclipse) were selected. MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.2 m/z (Exporis 480) or 1.6 m/z (Eclipse) isolation with the quadrupole, fragmented by HCD with collision energy of 30%. MS2 resolution was at 15000. AGC target was set to standard with auto maximum injection mode. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 20 s (Exploris 480) or 30 s (Eclipse)

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the MaxQuant platform (15), searching against a UniProt human database containing reviewed, canonical, isoforms entries and a database containing common contaminants. For label-free (LFQ) AE-MS experiments, default search parameters were used with “Label free quantitation” set to “LFQ” and “Match between runs” enabled. Separate search analyses were performed for each experiment. In all cases, Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. For SILAC experiments, default search parameters were used with multiplicity set to 2 (Lys8, Arg10) and “Match between runs” enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidase (COX) assembly factor 7 (COA7) is a metazoan-specific assembly factor, critical for the biogenesis of mitochondrial complex IV (cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidase). Although mutations in COA7 have been linked to complex IV assembly defects and neurological conditions such as peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and leukoencephalopathy, the precise role COA7 plays in the biogenesis of complex IV is not known. Here, we show that loss of COA7 blocks complex IV assembly after the initial step where the COX1 module is built, progression from which requires the incorporation of copper and addition of the COX2 and COX3 modules. The crystal structure of COA7, determined to 2.4 &#xc5; resolution, reveals a banana-shaped molecule composed of five helix-turn-helix (&#x3b1;/&#x3b1;) repeats, tethered by disulfide bonds. COA7 interacts transiently with the copper metallochaperones SCO1 and SCO2 and catalyzes the reduction of disulfide bonds within these proteins, which are crucial for copper relay to COX2. COA7 binds heme with micromolar affinity, through axial ligation to the central iron atom by histidine and methionine residues. We therefore propose that COA7 is a heme-binding disulfide reductase for regenerating the copper relay system that underpins complex IV assembly.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Cytochrome c oxidase, Mitochondria, Coa7, Heme, Cox

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Australia


