### Accession
PXD030080

### Title
Time-resolved phosphoproteomic analysis of murine CD8+ T cells upon stimulation with ligands of different affinity to the TCR

### Description
T cells have the remarkable ability to sense and discriminate between a wide range of antigenic peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex molecules (pMHC). Here, we use phosphoproteomics to monitor in a time dependent manner the signalling cascade taking place upon stimulation of murine CD8+ T cells with ligands of different affinity to the TCR. We used the mouse OT-I model in which T cells specifically recognize the ovalbumin OVA257-264 peptide (SIINFEKL, also named N4) bound to the MHC-I molecule H-2Kb (pMHC). The OT-I TCR also recognizes altered peptide ligands amongst which SIITFEKL (T4) and SIIGFEKL (G4) with sub-optimal binding capacities (ligand affinity N4>T4>G4). CD8+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, shortly expanded, and were left unstimulated or stimulated with N4, T4 and G4 soluble pMHC tetramers for 30, 120, 300 or 600s. We conducted six independent multiplexed experiments, each containing either independent stimulations with the N4 and T4 peptides (N4-T4 experiments, 3 replicates) or with the N4 and G4 peptides (N4-G4 experiments, 3 replicates). Samples from each experiment were labeled by TMT10plex, pooled and subjected to phospho-enrichment using first TiO2 beads and then phospho-Tyrosine (pY) immuno-precipitation (IP). Samples were injected before TiO2 enrichment, after TiO2 and after TiO2 followed by pY IP for analysis of the proteome, serine/threonine phospho-proteome and tyrosine phospho-proteome, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 20×106 short-term expanded OT-I CD8+  T cells were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with 20, 50 or 300 nM of N4, T4 or G4 tetramers respectively (engagement of the same number of TCR molecules). Stimulation was stopped after 30, 120, 300 or 600s by snap-freezing in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cell pellets (final volume of 100 L) were resuspended in 303 L of urea 8M, Tris/HCl 100mM pH8 supplemented with PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (04906845001, Roche), cOmplete ULTRA tablets, mini, EDTA-free (04693132001, Roche) and sodium orthovanadate (S6508-10G, Sigma) 1mM final. Lysis was performed with a Bioruptor (position high, 15 cycles of 50s/40s) before centrifugation for 30min (11,860 g) at 4˚C. 1mg of protein per sample were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation with filter units (Sartorius Vivacon 500, 10 or 30 MWCO). Cysteine residues were reduced with 10mM final of dithiothreitol (40min, 20˚C), alkylated with 50mM IAA  (25min in the dark, RT). The urea concentration was then reduced and the filter units were washed 3 times with 100 L of TEAB 100mM. Digestion was performed using trypsin (V5117, Promega) 1% (trypsin/protein) overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were eluted from the filters by three centrifugation steps (1 elution and 2 TEAB washes) before being dried-down. 400 g of peptides were independently labelled with 1.6mg of a given TMT Label Reagent (TMT10plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit, #90111, Thermo Scientific) in TEAB 100mM for 1h at RT. Free regents were quenched with hydroxylamine 5% final and peptides were mixed, resulting in 6 different TMT batches (total of 4mg of peptides per batch). For each of them, an aliquot of 5g was analyzed by MS for non-modified peptides, and the remaining was submitted to phospho-peptide enrichment.  Peptides were resuspended at 1μg/μL in TiO2 loading buffer (80% MeCN, 5% TFA, 1M glycolic acid) and incubated with TiO2 beads (5μm; GL Sciences 5020 75000) at 6:1 (w:w) beads:peptide (15min,RT). Beads were then sequentially washed with loading buffer; 80% MeCN, 1% TFA; and 10% MeCN, 0.2% TFA. Phospho-peptides were eluted with 50 μL of 1% ammonium hydroxide (pH 11.3) x2, pooled and acidified with TFA. The eluates were cleaned up using R3 resin packed in home-made microtips. The phospho-enriched peptides were further subjected to pY-IP using the PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit (#8803, Cell Signaling Technology). Phospho-peptides were resuspended at 14mg/mL in IAP buffer (50mM MOPS/NaOH, 10mM Na2HPO4, 50mM NaCl pH 7.2-7.4) and incubated with pre-washed PTMScan beads (80μl of P-Tyr bead slurry for 20mg of protein starting material) overnight at 4°C. Beads were sequentially washed with IAP buffer  and water before elution with 0.15% TFA (10min, RT). Phospho-tyrosine-containing peptides were then dried down under vacuum before MS analysis. The flow-throughs were analyzed for phospho-serine and phospho-threonine relative quantification. Samples were resuspended in 20 µl of 2% MeCN, 0.05% TFA, and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS, using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoScientific). Peptide samples (6 µL) were loaded and desalted on a C18 trap column (300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific), then peptide separation was performed on an analytical C18 column (75 µm × 50 cm, in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid), using a gradient of solvent B over 240min (total peptides and TiO2 enriched phospho-peptides) or 160min (pY-IP enriched phopho-peptides). The Fusion was operated in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode using a SPS-MS3 method. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at 120,000 resolution, selected parent ions were first isolated by the instrument's quadrupole, and MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35). For TMT reporter detection, MS3 scans were recorded in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution, following selection of the top 10 precursor fragments by synchronous precursor scan (SPS) and fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized CE = 65), with an AGC target of 1E5 and a maximum injection time of 120ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20 or 30s for pY- or TiO2-enriched samples, respectively. Inclusion lists were generated based on the phosphorylation sites regulated in a minimum of one condition from the analysis of the OT1 samples N4/T4. This led to the inclusion of 62 masses for the pY-IP and 610 for the TiO2 for the N4/G4 runs. Matching between run names and samples can be found in the table Sup Info_OT1 phosphoproteomics.xlsx together with the TiO2 and pY inclusion lists.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (pY, pS/T and non-enriched samples were analysed separately) using Mascot with the following parameters: Trypsin/P; max. 3 missed cleavages; fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic modifications Phospho (ST) and (Y),  Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ),  Acetyl (N-term); quantification method TMT10plex; target FDR was calculated using Percolator with strict of 0.01 and relaxed of 0.05 (based on q-value); ptmRS was used for phosphorylation site localization. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries of the UniProt KB protein database (release Swiss-Prot 2017_01, 16844 entries).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Primary cd8+ t cell, Signaling, Tcr, Phosphoproteomics, Ot-i mouse, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


