### Accession
PXD002959

### Title
Determining composition of micron-scale protein deposits in neurodegenerative disease by spatially targeted optical microproteomics

### Description
Spatially targeted optical microproteomics (STOMP) is a novel proteomics technique for interrogating micron-scale regions of interest (ROI) in mammalian tissue, with no requirement for genetic manipulation. Methanol or formalin fixed specimens are stained with fluorescent dyes or antibodies to visualize ROIs, then soaked in solutions containing the photo-tag: 4-benzoylbenzyl-glycyl-hexahistidine.  Confocal imaging along with two photon excitation are used to covalently couple photo-tags to all proteins within each ROI, to a resolution of 0.67 µm in the xy-plane and 1.48 µm axially.  After tissue solubilization, photo-tagged proteins are isolated and identified by mass spectrometry. As a test case, we examined amyloid plaques in an Alzheimer’s disease (AD) mouse model and a postmortem AD case, confirming known plaque constituents and discovering new ones. STOMP can be applied to various biological samples including cell lines, primary cell cultures, ex vivo specimens, biopsy samples and fixed postmortem tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Solubilization and affinity purification.  Each section was lifted from the slide using a clean, sterile razor blade and transferred into a 1.5 mL polypropylene microcentrifuge tube.  For methanol-fixed murine tissue, 200 L of solubilization buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), 8 M urea, 250 mM NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.2), 10% (w/v) glycerol, and 2% -mercaptoethanol (-ME) was added to each tube.  Tubes were immersed in a boiling water bath for 5 minutes, sonicated for 5 minutes in a Branson 1210 bath sonicator (Branson Ultrasonic Corporation, Danbury, CT), incubated at room temperature for 45 minutes, and returned to boiling water for an additional 5 minutes to fully solubilize the tissue sample. For solubilisation of formalin-fixed human tissue, 400 µL of a modified solubilisation buffer containing 200 mM Tris (in addition to the ingredients noted above, as a formaldehyde scavenger) was used. Formalin-fixed sections were held at 90°C for 60 minutes. Each sample was transferred to a 15 mL polypropylene centrifuge tube and combined with a 20-fold excess of room-temperature dilution buffer (8 M urea, 250 mM NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, 1 mM imidazole) to dilute the SDS, -ME, and Tris to concentrations compatible with nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) agarose bead binding.  80 L of Ni-NTA agarose bead slurry (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) was added, and the mixture was tumbled overnight at room temperature to allow the His-tagged proteins to bind to the beads.   After binding, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 500g for 30 seconds.  The supernatant was discarded, and the beads were resuspended in 1 mL wash buffer (6 M urea, 0.1% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 10 mM phosphate at pH 8.2, 0.1% -ME, 1 mM imidazole) and tumbled for 2 minutes.  This wash was repeated three times.  During the final wash step, each sample was divided into two portions: one reserved for mass spectrometry, and one for gel electrophoresis and silver staining. Mass spectrometry.  After recovery, the proteins captured on the surface of the beads for each sample were solubilized in 8 M urea with 50mM Tris at pH 8, reduced by 5mM DTT for 1 hour, and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in darkness at room temperature. Proteins were digested at RT with Endoproteinase Lys-C (Roche) for 6 hours first, and then diluted 9 fold into ammonium bicarbonate buffer before adding sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight. After acidification to 1% formic acid (FA), mixtures were desalted using disposable Toptip C-18 columns (Glygen) and the eluted peptides lyophilized to dryness.   Peptides were loaded and separated on sequential reverse phase micro-capillary liquid trap and analytical columns using an EASY-nLC nanoflow pump system (Proxeon). The micro-capillary trap column was constructed in a 25mm x 75 silica capillary packed with 5μm Luna C18 stationary phase (Phenomenex). The analytical column was constructed in a 100mm × 75μm silica capillary, with a fine tip pulled with a column puller (Sutter Instruments), packed with 3μm Luna C18 stationary phase.  Separation was performed in 105 minutes using an organic gradient w consisting of buffer A (5% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA) to buffer B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nL/min starting with a gradient of 2% to 6% buffer B in 1 minute, followed by 6% to 24% in 74 minutes, 24% to 90% in 16 minutes, then 90% buffer B for 5 minutes and 90% to 0% in 1 minutes and finally 0% buffer B in 8 minutes.   Eluted peptides were electrosprayed from a nanospray ion source (Proxeon) directly into a high-performance Orbitrap Velos hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). 10 data-dependent collision-induced dissociation (CID) ion trap scans (centroid mode) were automatically acquired simultaneously with one high resolution (60,000 FWHM resolution) full scan (profile mode) mass spectra.  A dynamic exclusion list was enabled to exclude a maximum of 500 ion targets for 22.5s.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were extracted with the ReAdW program and submitted to database search using SEQUEST (v2.7) against UniProt/SwissProt protein sequence FASTA file containing 22,491 human proteins as well as an equivalent number of reversed decoy proteins (to estimate the empirical false discovery rate). Search parameters were set to allow for one missed cleavage site and one fixed modification (+57 on cysteine) using a precursor tolerance of 3 m/z. Matched peptides were further filtered at the precursor ion mass accuracy level using a 20 ppm cutoff, while protein hits were compiled and filtered using the StatQuest program with a minimum confidence threshold of 99%.

### Publication Abstract
Spatially targeted optical microproteomics (STOMP) is a novel proteomics technique for interrogating micron-scale regions of interest (ROIs) in mammalian tissue, with no requirement for genetic manipulation. Methanol or formalin-fixed specimens are stained with fluorescent dyes or antibodies to visualize ROIs, then soaked in solutions containing the photo-tag: 4-benzoylbenzyl-glycyl-hexahistidine. Confocal imaging along with two photon excitation are used to covalently couple photo-tags to all proteins within each ROI, to a resolution of 0.67 &#xb5;m in the xy-plane and 1.48 &#xb5;m axially. After tissue solubilization, photo-tagged proteins are isolated and identified by mass spectrometry. As a test case, we examined amyloid plaques in an Alzheimer's disease (AD) mouse model and a post-mortem AD case, confirming known plaque constituents and discovering new ones. STOMP can be applied to various biological samples including cell lines, primary cell cultures, ex vivo specimens, biopsy samples, and fixed post-mortem tissue.

### Keywords
Neurodegenerative disease

### Affiliations
Professor
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Hongbo Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Avijit Chakrabartty
Professor


