### Accession
PXD027795

### Title
Essential role of Cp190 in physical and regulatory boundary formation in Drosophila

### Description
Animal genomes fold into contact domains defined by enhanced internal contact frequencies with debated functions in establishing independent gene regulatory domains. A large fraction of contact domains in mammals are formed by stalling of chromosomal loop-extruding cohesin by CTCF at domain boundaries. 90% of domain boundaries in Drosophila form CTCF-independently, and other proteins were proposed to form chromosomal loops with dual functions of segregating promoters from inappropriate regulatory elements and connecting distal regulatory elements to their correct targets. Here, we genetically ablate the ubiquitous boundary-associated factor Cp190 and assess impacts on genome folding and transcriptional regulation in embryos. Our results reveal that Cp190 is a major factor required for contact domain boundary formation and gene insulation in Drosophila.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble nuclear protein extracts were prepared from wildtype (OregonR) 0-14 hr embryos. 30 grams of embryos were dechorionated, taken up in 30 ml of NU1 buffer, and dounce-homogenized. The lysate was filtered through a double layer of miracloth, then centrifuged 15 minutes at 9000 rpm at 4°C. The nuclei pellet was resuspended and lysed in 30 ml of high-salt buffer rotating for 20 minutes at 4°C, and ultracentrifuged 1 hour with a SW40 rotor at 38000 rpm at 4°C. The lipid layer was removed by suction and the soluble nuclear extract was dialyzed with a 6-8 kDa molecular weight cut-off membrane. Baits with an N-terminal GFP-3C tag and a 3C-His6 C-terminal tag were purified from bacterial lysates by Ni-NTA affinity. Baits were full-length when soluble, or spanned soluble portions of baits when the full-length protein was not soluble. The following baits were used: Su(Hw)[1-219] (N-terminus), CTCF[1-293] (N-terminus), Cp190[1-1096] (full-length), Chro[613-926] (C-terminus), BEAF-32[1-282] (full-length), or Xenopus NseI (full-length) as an unrelated bait for negative control. Purified GFP-3C-bait-3C-His6 was immobilized on GFP binder beads, of which 30 µl bead volume were then incubated with 6 mg of Drosophila embryo nuclear extract in a total volume of 10 ml of IP buffer rotating for 3 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed 3 times with IP buffer, rotating for 10 minutes at 4°C for each wash and roteins were eluted with 3C protease. For CTCF, Cp190, Chro, and their respective NseI negative control pull-downs, protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie. Gel lanes between 10-300 kDa were excised into 5-10 pieces and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin. Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high-resolution mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) or TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase custom-packed column (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. In the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument, the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected with a full MS survey scan  in the Orbitrap (resolution 60’000 at m/z 400) were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID, normalized collision energy NCE=35 %) and analysis in the ion trap. The window for precursor isolation was of 4.0 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis. In the TIMS-TOF instrument, data-dependent acquisition was carried out using a standard TIMS PASEF method with ion accumulation for 100 ms for both the survey MS1 scan and the TIMS-coupled MS2 scans. Duty cycle was kept at 100%. Up to 10 precursors were targeted per TIMS scan. Precursor isolation was done with 2 or 3 m/z windows below or above m/z 800, respectively. The minimum threshold intensity for precursor selection was 2500. If the inclusion list allowed it, precursors were targeted more than once to reach a minimum target total intensity of 20’000. Collision energy was ramped linearly based uniquely on the 1/k0 values from 20 (at 1/k0=0.6) to 59 eV (at 1/k0=1.6). Total duration of a scan cycle including one survey and 10 MS2 TIMS scans was 1.16 s. Precursors could be targeted again in subsequent cycles if their signal increased by a factor 4.0 or more. After selection in one cycle, precursors were excluded from further selection for 60s. Mass resolution in all MS measurements was approximately 35’000. For Su(Hw), BEAF-32, and their respective NseI negative control pull-downs, samples were digested following a modified version of the iST method. After dilution 1:1 (v:v) with 1% sodium deoxycholate, 100mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT buffer, reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding ¼ vol of 160 mM chloroacetamide (final 32 mM) and incubating at 25°C for 45 min in the dark. Samples were adjusted to 3 mM EDTA and digested with 1 ug Trypsin/LysC mix under gentle shaking for 1h at 37°C, followed by a second 1h digestion with a second, identical aliquot of proteases. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and the samples were desalted on a cation exchange plate (Oasis MCX microelution plate) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 250ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia. Eluates after SCX desalting were dried, and resuspended in 2% MeCN, 0.1% TFA, before injection on TIMS-TOF mass spectrometer using a 110  min gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 incorporating the Andromeda search engine for protein identification and quantification based on IBAQ intensities. The following variable modifications were specified: cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation (variable). The sequence databases used for searching were Drosophila melanogaster and Escherichia coli (strain K12) reference proteomes based on the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, versions of August 24th, 2020, containing 22’039 and 4’391 sequences respectively), and a contaminant database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and the enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. The MaxQuant output table proteinGroups.txt was processed with Perseus software to remove proteins matched to the contaminants database as well as proteins identified only by modified peptides or reverse database hits. Next, the table was filtered to retain only proteins identified by a minimum of two peptides, the IBAQ quantitative values were log-2 transformed, and E. coli proteins were removed. Missing values were imputed with the lowest value measured.

### Publication Abstract
Boundaries in animal genomes delimit contact domains with enhanced internal contact frequencies and have debated functions in limiting regulatory cross-talk between domains and guiding enhancers to target promoters. Most mammalian boundaries form by stalling of chromosomal loop-extruding cohesin by CTCF, but most <i>Drosophila</i> boundaries form CTCF independently. However, how CTCF-independent boundaries form and function remains largely unexplored. Here, we assess genome folding and developmental gene expression in fly embryos lacking the ubiquitous boundary-associated factor Cp190. We find that sequence-specific DNA binding proteins such as CTCF and Su(Hw) directly interact with and recruit Cp190 to form most promoter-distal boundaries. Cp190 is essential for early development and prevents regulatory cross-talk between specific gene loci that pattern the embryo. Cp190 was, in contrast, dispensable for long-range enhancer-promoter communication at tested loci. Cp190 is thus currently the major player in fly boundary formation and function, revealing that diverse mechanisms evolved to partition genomes into independent regulatory domains.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Development, Genome architecture

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Cristina Gambetta
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


