### Accession
PXD036222

### Title
Understanding the role of TGFbeta signaling on aortic aneurysm and rupture using Marfan syndrome mouse models

### Description
Although abnormal TGFbeta signaling is observed in several heritable forms of thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections including Marfan syndrome, the precise role of TGFbeta signaling in aortic disease progression is still disputed. Using a mouse genetic approach and quantitative isobaric labeling proteomics, we sought to investigate the role of TGFbeta signaling in molecular pathways of pathogenesis associated with development of aortic aneurysm and aortic rupture. This study reports an isoform-specific effect of TGFbeta in MFS aortic disease and the effects of deleting the first hybrid domain of fibrillin-1 on TGFbeta signaling. Distinct molecular differences in mouse models of aneurysm (Fbn_GT-8_plus), of aneurysm and rupture (Fbn1_GT-8_H1delta), and of microdissection (Fbn1_H1delta_plus) were identified, which associated with TGFbeta signaling and extracellular matrix composition, possibly contributing to the development of dissection and rupture. These findings offer new insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms that potentially drive initiation of aortic dissection and could pave the way for development of new treatment targets of aortic disease.

### Sample Protocol
All mouse experiments in this study were performed in accordance with OHSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.   Double heterozygous mutant mice were generated by crossing Fbn1_GT-8_plus mice with heterozygous TGFbeta1_plus_minus knock-out mice (JAX stock #002220; mixed 129/Sv - C57Bl/6J background), heterozygous TGFbeta2_plus_minus knock-out mice (JAX stock #003102; 129P2/OlaHas background), or homozygous Fbn1_H1delta_H1delta mice. Polymerase chain reaction-based genotyping was performed for the Fbn1_GT-8_plus and Fbn1_H1delta_H1delta mice. TGFbeta1_plus_minus and TGFbeta2_plus_minus knock-out mice were genotyped according to JAX guidelines. Wild-type littermates were used as controls unless otherwise specified.  Dissected mouse ascending aorta tissues, from root to arch, were suspended in 200 microliters of 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 8 and homogenized using a Model 60 ultrasonic dismembrator (Fisher Scientific). Samples were centrifuged at 5,000 xg for five minutes and the filtrate was transferred to a 1.5 mL of LoBind centrifuge tube (Eppendorf) and a Pierce BCA protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) was performed. 30 microgram of protein per sample was transferred to 1.5 ml Lobind centrifuge tubes and SDS protein extraction buffer (5% SDS, 100 mM HEPES) was added. Samples were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were acidified by the addition of 8.5 microliters of 12% phosphoric acid, and 562 microliters of SDS protein extraction buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8) was added. Samples were transferred 165 µl at a time to S-trap micro columns (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY). Proteins were digested overnight at 37C with 40 microliters of 80 ng/microliter sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM TEAB. Seven microliter aliquots were pooled together from 7 male samples and 7 female samples with the highest recovery (Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay, ThermoFisher Scientific) after digestion to form internal reference standards (IRS).  Two tandem mass tag (TMTpro) 16-plex kits (ThermoFisher Scientific) were used to label the mouse aorta peptide samples and pooled standards. 12 microliter of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to 100 micrograms of TMTpro 16-plex reagents. The peptide samples in 20 microliter 100mM TEAB were immediately added, and labeling performed with shaking at RT for 1 h. Two microliters of each labeled sample were combined and analyzed for total reporter ion intensity per channel normalization. Calculated volumes of each labeled sample were mixed to produce 45 µg of total peptides with equal total intensities from all 16 samples in each plex. The labeling reaction was quench with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. The multiplexed samples and common pools were dissolved in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH = 9 buffer and injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters Corporation) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides from mouse aortas were eluted by sequential injection of 20 µl volumes of 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 50, 90% ACN (16 fractions).   Eluted peptides were diluted at a 3-way union with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Labeled peptides were then separated at low pH using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 100 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nL/min flow rate.   Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Scientific) configured with an EasySpray NanoSource. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at resolution = 120,000, with internal mass calibration enabled, and data-dependent MS2 scans using dynamic exclusion performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.

### Data Protocol
Proteome UP000000589 (mouse, taxon ID 10090) canonical FASTA sequences (20,002 proteins) were downloaded September 2021 from www.UniProt.org. Common contaminants (174 sequences) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 44,352 sequences.   The 32 binary instrument files (16 fractions per plex) were processed with the PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMTpro reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra in MS2 format. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine and proline residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMTpro labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues).   Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using interactive delta-mass and conditional Peptide-prophet-like linear discriminant function scores. Incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups, and protein families were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides for each protein.   The quantitative data for each plex was put on a common intensity scale using the internal reference scaling method. The intensities of the duplicate pooled standard channels in each plex were used to compute scaling factors to correct for the pseudo-random MS2/MS3 scan selection process and make the pooled standard channel averages in each plex identical. Those scaling factors were applied to all channels containing the biological samples in each plex. The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein levels using the Bioconductor package edgeR in Jupyter notebooks. Result tables (proteomics summaries, reporter ion intensities, and statistical testing results) were generated for male mouse samples, female mouse samples, and for the IRS-combined data. Additional annotations from www.UniProt.org were added (https://github.com/pwilmart/annotations).

### Publication Abstract
Although abnormal TGF&#x3b2; signaling is observed in several heritable forms of thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections including Marfan syndrome, its precise role in aortic disease progression is still disputed. Using a mouse genetic approach and quantitative isobaric labeling proteomics, we sought to elucidate the role of TGF&#x3b2; signaling in three Fbn1 mutant mouse models representing a range of aortic disease from microdissection (without aneurysm) to aneurysm (without rupture) to aneurysm and rupture. Results indicated that reduced TGF&#x3b2; signaling and increased mast cell proteases were associated with microdissection. In contrast, increased abundance of extracellular matrix proteins, which could be reporters for positive TGF&#x3b2; signaling, were associated with aneurysm. Marked reductions in collagens and fibrillins, and increased TGF&#x3b2; signaling, were associated with aortic rupture. Our data indicate that TGF&#x3b2; signaling performs context-dependent roles in the pathogenesis of thoracic aortic disease.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mouse models, Psr-ohsu, Aortic aneurysm and dissection, Tandem mass tags, Fibrillin, Tgfbeta signaling, Marfan syndrome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd. Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Lynn Y. Sakai, Ph.D.
Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd. Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


