### Accession
PXD043826

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine Acetylation in The Plant PathogenFusarium oxysporum

### Description
Lysine acetylation (Kac), a recently discovered post-translational modification, plays a key role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes.Fusarium oxysporum is a destructive necrotrophic fungal pathogen distributed worldwide with broad ranging hosts. However, the functions of Kac are unknown in FO. or any other plant fungal pathogens. Here, we comprehensively evaluated the acetylation proteome of FO. Our results show that although the acetylation were largely conserved, different organisms contained distinct crotonylated proteins with unique functions. Bioinformatic analysis demonstrated that the majority of crotonylated proteins were distributed in cytoplasm, mitochondria and nucleus). The identified proteins were found to be involved in various metabolic and cellular processes, such as cytoplasmic translation and structural constituent of ribosome. Protein interaction network analysis demonstrated that a mass of protein interactions are regulated by acetylation. These data represent the ﬁrst report of the crotonylome of FO. and provide a good foundation for further explorations of the role of Kac in plant fungal pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
The FO. strain B05.10 was cultured on PDA plates (2% dextrose, 20% potato, and 1.5% agar) at 25℃ for 10 days, and then the conidia was collected and transferred into YEPD medium (2% glucose, 1% yeast extract, and 2% peptone) with shaking at 180 rpm for 14 h. The protein extraction was performed as previously described (Zhou et al., 2016). Briefly, the harvested mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the powder sample was suspended by lysis buffer (50 mM nicotinamide, 8 M urea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM EDTA, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated. After centrifugation at 15,000 x g in 4℃ for 15 min, 15% cold TCA was used to precipitate the proteins at -20℃ for 2 h. The precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone after centrifugation at 4℃for 15 min. Finally, the target protein was redissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM NH4CO3 (PH 8.0) and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was used to determine protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Gene ontology (GO) of acetylation proteome was performed from the UniProt-GOA database based on three categories: cellular component, molecular function, and biological process. The soft WoLF PSORT was used to predicate the subcellular localization of the crotonylated protein (Horton et al., 2007). Proteins secondary structures (β-strand, α-helix, coil) were analyzed by the online tool NetSurfP (Chou and Schwartz, 2011). Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analysis the sequences model of crotonylated proteins composed of amino acids in distinct positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids up- and downstream of the Kac site) in all protein sequences. To define the conservation of acetylation, the BLASTP was used to compare the crotonylated protein sequences of FO. with Carica papaya (Liu et al., 2018b), Nicotiana tabacum (Sun et al., 2017), Oryza sativa (Liu et al., 2018c), Danio rerio (Kwon et al., 2018), and four human cell lines (Wei et al., 2017b;Wu et al., 2017;Xu et al., 2017;Huang et al., 2018). InterProScan was used to perform the protein domain functional annotation based on protein alignment method and the InterPro domain database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was employed to annotate protein pathway description (Kanehisa et al., 2004). Cytoscape software was used to analyze the protein-protein interactions whcih was obtained from the STRING database (Shannon et al., 2003;Szklarczyk et al., 2015). A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to verify the enrichment of lysine crotonylated proteins against all database proteins. All projects with a corrected p-valve <0.05 is considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusarium oxysporum, Lysine acetylation, Pathogen

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China


