### Accession
PXD005981

### Title
Tailoring protein nanomechanics with chemical reactivity

### Description
The nanomechanical properties of elastomeric proteins determine the elasticity of a variety of tissues where modifications present at the covalent disulfide bonds can enhance protein stiffness. We propose an alternative chemical route to promote non-enzymatic oxidative protein folding via disulfide isomerization. Mass spectrometery has been used to determine the dynamics of S-thiolation and its role in modulating protein nanomechanics.

### Sample Protocol
A single Ig domain of the cardiac protein titin was used to study the cysteine residue modifications. Monomeric protein samples were diluted in PBS pH 7.4 containing L-cysteine, homocysteine and N-acetyl cysteine. Trypsin digestion of the protein was performed at a ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4; ThermoFisher). Processed raw data was searched using the Mascot algorithm (v2.2; matrix science) against an in-house database containing the protein sequence of interest. Mascot .dat output files were uploaded into Scaffold 4 software (v4.6.1 20160606) for manual verification of mass spectra.

### Publication Abstract
The nanomechanical properties of elastomeric proteins determine the elasticity of a variety of tissues. A widespread natural tactic to regulate protein extensibility lies in the presence of covalent disulfide bonds, which significantly enhance protein stiffness. The prevalent in vivo strategy to form disulfide bonds requires the presence of dedicated enzymes. Here we propose an alternative chemical route to promote non-enzymatic oxidative protein folding via disulfide isomerization based on naturally occurring small molecules. Using single-molecule force-clamp spectroscopy, supported by DFT calculations and mass spectrometry measurements, we demonstrate that subtle changes in the chemical structure of a transient mixed-disulfide intermediate adduct between a protein cysteine and an attacking low molecular-weight thiol have a dramatic effect on the protein's mechanical stability. This approach provides a general tool to rationalize the dynamics of S-thiolation and its role in modulating protein nanomechanics, offering molecular insights on how chemical reactivity regulates protein elasticity.

### Keywords
Cysteine modifications, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
King's College London
Professor of Biophysics, Department of Physics & Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Sergi Garcia-Manyes
Professor of Biophysics, Department of Physics & Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London


