### Accession
PXD026852

### Title
Targeting conserved N-glycosylation eradicates SARS-CoV-2 variants infection

### Description
Despite the clinical success of anti-spike vaccines, the effectiveness of neutralizing antibodies and vaccines by rapidly spreading SARS-CoV-2 variants has been compromised. Viruses can hijack the glycosylation machinery of host cells to shield themselves from the host’s immune response and attenuate antibody efficiency. However, it still remains unclear whether targeting glycosylation on spike can impair SARS-CoV-2 and its variants infectivity. Methods: To assess the binding ability of glycosylated or deglycosylated spike with ACE2, we performed flow cytometry, ELISA, and BioLayer Interferometry methods. Viral entry ability was determined by luciferase intensity, immunoblotting, and immunofluorescence assay. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed to identify the relationship of STT3A and COVID-19 severity. N-glycosylation regulated by NF-kB/STT3A axis was investigated by knockdown approach, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and promoter assay. To specifically target SARS-CoV-2 infected cells, we developed an antibody-drug conjugate coupling non-neutralization anti-spike antibody with NGI-1 (4G10-ADC) on inhibitory effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Results: We found receptor binding domain and three SARS-CoV-2 distinct surface Nglycosylation sites in 57,311 spikes retrieved from NCBI-Virus-database are highly evolutionarily conserved (99.67%) and involved in ACE2 interaction. We further identified STT3A as a key glycosyltransferase that catalyzed spike glycosylation and positively correlated with COVID-19 severity. Inhibition of STT3A by N-linked glycosylation inhibitor-1 (NGI-1) impaired SARS-CoV-2 and its variants (B.1.1.7, and B.1.351) infectivity. Most importantly, 4G10-ADC internalized SARS-CoV-2 infected cells and subsequently released NGI-1 to deglycosylate spike protein. Thereby, it reinforces the neutralizing abilities in antibodies, vaccines, or convalescent sera, inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 and its variants’ infectivity. Our results suggest targeting STT3A-mediated evolution conserved glycosylation via ADC can provide a widespread impact on SARS-CoV-2 variants infection. Together, we identified a novel deglycosylation method to eradicate SARS-CoV-2 variants infection.

### Sample Protocol
Purified proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 1 h, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 45 minutes in the dark at room temperature, and then treated overnight with sequencing grade trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C.The digested products were then diluted with formic acid to a final concentration with 0.1% and further cleaned up by ZipTip C18 (Millipore) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was analyzed by nanospray LC-MS/MS on a Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 25 cm × 75 m i.d. column (Dionex) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 6% to 50% solvent B (100% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) in 90 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. An HCD-pd-EThcD workflow was employed to additionally trigger EThcD events upon detecting the HCD productions at m/z 204.0867, 138.0545, and 366.1396. The parameters used for spectra acquisition were: top speed mode with 3s cycle time; FTMS: scan range (m/z) = 400-1800; resolution = 120K; HCD collision energy (%) = 28; resolution = 30 K. For EThcD, the calibrated chargedependent ETD parameter was used and supplemental activation was allowed with a 15% SA collision energy.

### Data Protocol
For glycopeptide identification, the MS raw data were searched using Byonic algorithm (v2.16.11) with the following search parameters: peptide tolerance = 20 ppm; fragment tolerance = 0.05 Da; missed cleavages = 2; modifications: carbamidomethyl cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation (common 2), deamidation at NQ (common 1). In addition, the MS data were further searched using pGlyco algorithm (v2.2) to retrieve glycopeptides information using the parameters the same as Byonic search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deglycosylation, Adc, Sars-cov-2 variant, Stt3a, Ngi-1

### Affiliations
 Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica
Institute of Biomedical Science,  Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Hsiang-Chi Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Wei Li
Institute of Biomedical Science,  Academia Sinica, Taiwan


