### Accession
PXD040453

### Title
Interactome of NDUFAF5-HA overexpressing cell line compared to mock

### Description
Proteomic analysis to assess the interactome of NDUFAF5-HA.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed by the CECAD Proteomics Facility on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm length, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 40.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 8.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical human reference FASTA (Uniprot UP5640, downloaded at: 26.08.2020) database and against NDUFAF5-HA, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ndufaf5

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry, University of Cologne
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Riemer
Institute for Biochemistry, University of Cologne


