### Accession
PXD034873

### Title
Characterization of the diphthamide modification of eEF2 in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Diphthamide, a post-translationally modified histidine residue of eukaryotic TRANSLATION ELONGATION FACTOR2 (eEF2), is the human host cell-sensitizing target of diphtheria toxin. Diphthamide biosynthesis depends on the 4Fe-4S-cluster protein Dph1 catalyzing the first committed step, as well as Dph2 to Dph7, in yeast and mammals. Here we show that diphthamide modification of eEF2 is conserved in Arabidopsis thaliana and requires AtDPH1. Ribosomal -1 frameshifting-error rates are increased in Arabidopsis dph1 mutants, similar to yeast and mice. Compared to the wild type, shorter roots and smaller rosettes of dph1 mutants result from fewer formed cells. TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (TOR) kinase activity is attenuated, and autophagy is activated, in dph1 mutants. Under abiotic stress diphthamide-unmodified eEF2 accumulates in wild-type seedlings, most strongly upon heavy metal excess, which is conserved in human cells. In summary, our results suggest that diphthamide contributes to the functionality of the translational machinery monitored by plants to regulate growth.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from shoot tissues and separated by SDS-PAGE (7.5% w/v polyacrylamide) as described above, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, and a gel band corresponding to the size of eEF2 (90 to 105 kDa) was excised from the gel. Disulphides were reduced with dithionite and cysteine residues were alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by trypsin digestion of proteins overnight, all within the gel piece as described1.Trypsin-digested fragments were eluted from the gel pieces and desalted using ZipTips2 before analysis by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) with injection via an electrospray ion source (TriVersa NanoMate, Advion). In the Orbitrap detector, MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, with a scan range from m/z 350 to 2000, maximum injection time of 50 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 x 105 ions, dynamic exclusion of 30 s and a minimum intensity 5 x 104 ions for precursor picking. MS2 (fragment) scans were recorded in the Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 60,000, isolating precursors in a 1.6-Da window, fragmentation at 30% energy High Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) and 5% stepped collision energy, with 120 ms injection time maximum and an AGC target of 5 x 104 ions. 1. Kublik, A. et al. Identification of a multi‐protein reductive dehalogenase complex in Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain CBDB1 suggests a protein‐dependent respiratory electron transport chain obviating quinone involvement. Environ Microbiol 18, 3044‐3056, doi:10.1111/1462‐2920.13200 (2016). 2. Seidel, K., Kuhnert, J. & Adrian, L. The Complexome of Dehalococcoides mccartyi Reveals Its Organohalide Respiration‐Complex Is Modular. Front Microbiol 9, 1130, doi:10.3389/fmicb.2018.01130 (2018).

### Data Protocol
Diphthamide-modified and diphthamide-unmodified precursor masses of 2269.122 and 2127.011, respectively, of the target peptide 684-GICFEVCDVVLHSDAIHR-701 were identified with ProteomeDiscoverer Version 2.4 (ThermoFisher) using SequestHT as the search engine and the sequence of eEF2 (At1g56070) of Arabidopsis thaliana as database. Parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed and the diphthamide modification of histidine (+ C7H14N2O, m = 142.11 g) as a variable modification. We allowed no missed cleavage, precursor charge state of +2 to +7, a precursor m/z tolerance of ±3 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide identification level using the Target Decoy PSM Validator node. Precursor abundance was estimated with the Minora node in ProteomeExplorer.

### Publication Abstract
Diphthamide, a post-translationally modified histidine residue of eukaryotic TRANSLATION ELONGATION FACTOR2 (eEF2), is the human host cell-sensitizing target of diphtheria toxin. Diphthamide biosynthesis depends on the 4Fe-4S-cluster protein Dph1 catalyzing the first committed step, as well as Dph2 to Dph7, in yeast and mammals. Here we show that diphthamide modification of eEF2 is conserved in Arabidopsis thaliana and requires AtDPH1. Ribosomal -1 frameshifting-error rates are increased in Arabidopsis dph1 mutants, similar to yeast and mice. Compared to the wild type, shorter roots and smaller rosettes of dph1 mutants result from fewer formed cells. TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (TOR) kinase activity is attenuated, and autophagy is activated, in dph1 mutants. Under abiotic stress diphthamide-unmodified eEF2 accumulates in wild-type seedlings, most strongly upon heavy metal excess, which is conserved in human cells. In summary, our results suggest that diphthamide contributes to the functionality of the translational machinery monitored by plants to regulate growth.

### Keywords
Diphthamide   translation elongation factor 2 (eef2)   arabidopsis thaliana  growth   development

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics and Physiology of Plants, Ruhr University Bochum, Germanz
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Lorenz Adrian

### Lab Head
Dr Ute Kraemer
Molecular Genetics and Physiology of Plants, Ruhr University Bochum, Germanz


