### Accession
PXD012575

### Title
Endothelial EphB4 maintains vascular integrity and transport function in adult heart

### Description
Dilated cardiomyopathy is a frequently occurring human disease compromising heart function and a major cause of cardiac death. The causes of cardiomyopathies are often unknown. There is increasing evidence indicating that endothelial cells lining blood vessels control the homeostasis of various organs, but the special properties and functional roles of the vasculature in the adult heart maintain remain little understood.  Here, we have used mouse genetics, imaging and cell biology approaches to investigate how vascular homeostasis in the adult heart is controlled by EphB4 and its ligand ephrin-B2, which are known regulators of sprouting angiogenesis, vascular morphogenesis and arteriovenous differentiation during development. We show that inducible and endothelial cell-specific inactivation of the Ephb4 gene in adult mice is compatible with survival, but leads to rupturing of cardiac capillaries, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, and pathological cardiac remodelling. In contrast, EphB4 is not required for the integrity and homeostatic function of capillaries in skeletal muscle. Our analysis of mutant mice and cultured endothelial cells shows that EphB4 controls the function of caveolae, cell-cell adhesion under mechanical stress and lipid transport.  Together, our findings establish that EphB4 maintains critical functional properties of the adult cardiac vasculature and thereby prevents dilated cardiomyopathy-like defects.

### Sample Protocol
Shock frozen whole mouse ventricles were homogenized in lysis buffer, containing 6M guanidinium hydrochloride, 5 mM TCEP and 10mM chloroacetamide using a Cryolys Evolution tissue homogenizer. After centrifugation, protein concentrations were determined by a Bradford assay and 2 mg of total protein per heart were subjected to a lysyl endopeptidase predigest, followed by dilution and trypsin digest overnight at 37°C. Samples were then desalted using reversed-phase C18 Sep-Pak classic cartridges (Water) and lyophilized.  Peptides were dissolved in 1ml Buffer A (10mM NH4OH, pH10.2) and subjected to offline high-pH reversed-phase prefractionation using a YMC-Triart C18 column (250 x 4.6mm) on a Platin Blue high-pressure liquid chromatography system (Knauer) using a gradient from 0 – 5% B (90% acetonitril, 10mM NH4OH) in 1min, from 5 – 39% B in 66 min, and from 39 – 67% in 5min followed by a washout at 78% B and reequilibration at starting conditions. The instrument was operated at a flow rate of 1ml/min. 47 fractions were collected, lyophilized and subjected to LC-MSMS analysis essentially as described by (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform (version 1.6.2.6; Cox and Mann, 2008). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse mouse Uniprot database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; version from 12/2015) including common lab contaminants. The allowed initial mass deviation was set to 7ppm and 20ppm in the search for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids was selected. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed; the ‘match between runs’ option was turned on. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met) and N - acetylation were defined as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required.  Relative label free quantification was based on the measurements of 3 independent biological replicates for control as well as heart specifci EphB4 KO-mice.  Data processing was performed using the Perseus (version 1.6.2.1).  First, we eliminated from the MaxQuant output files the reverse and contaminant hits as well as hits that were identified by a modified site only. Proteins included in the analysis had to be identified with at least 2 peptides, one of which had to be unique for the protein group. Intensity values were logarithmized and missing values (NaN) were replaced by imputation, simulating signals of low abundant proteins within the distribution of measured values. A width of 0.3 SD and a downshift of 1.8 SD were used for this purpose. To identify in a supervised manner the sets of proteins that significantly distinguish the control group and the EphB4; Cdh5-CreERT2 proteomes, two-sample t-tests were performed using a p-value of 0.05. Principal component analysis was performed to project the proteome measurements into a two-dimensional data space. For this purpose, PCA was applied to all proteins that remained in the data set after filtering, transformation and imputation (6271 protein groups).

### Publication Abstract
The homeostasis of heart and other organs relies on the appropriate provision of nutrients and functional specialization of the local vasculature. Here, we have used mouse genetics, imaging and cell biology approaches to investigate how homeostasis in the adult heart is controlled by endothelial EphB4 and its ligand ephrin-B2, which are known regulators of vascular morphogenesis and arteriovenous differentiation during development. We show that inducible and endothelial cell-specific inactivation of <i>Ephb4</i> in adult mice is compatible with survival, but leads to rupturing of cardiac capillaries, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, and pathological cardiac remodeling. In contrast, EphB4 is not required for integrity and homeostasis of capillaries in skeletal muscle. Our analysis of mutant mice and cultured endothelial cells shows that EphB4 controls the function of caveolae, cell-cell adhesion under mechanical stress and lipid transport. We propose that EphB4 maintains critical functional properties of the adult cardiac vasculature and thereby prevents dilated cardiomyopathy-like defects.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Lc-msms, Metabolism, Gene expression, Ephb4, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institut for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectromentry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster, Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institut for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectromentry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster, Germany


