### Accession
PXD001334

### Title
Comprehensive temporal protein dynamics during the diauxic shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, part 1

### Description
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisea) has served as a key model system in biology and as a benchmark for “omics” technology. Although near-complete proteomes of log phase yeast have been measured, protein abundance in yeast is dynamic, particularly during the transition from log to stationary phase. Defining the dynamics of proteomic changes during this transition, termed the diauxic shift, is important to understand the basic biology of proliferative versus quiescent cells. Here, we perform temporal quantitative proteomics to fully capture protein induction and repression during the diauxic shift. Accurate and sensitive quantitation at a high temporal resolution and depth of proteome coverage was achieved using TMT10 reagents and LC-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer deploying synchronous precursor selection (SPS). We devised a simple template matching strategy to reveal temporal patterns of protein induction and repression. Within these groups are functionally distinct groups of proteins such as those of glyoxylate metabolism, as well as many proteins of unknown function not previously associated with the diauxic shift (e.g. YNR034W-A and FMP16). We also perform a dual time-course to determine Hap2-dependent proteins during the diauxic shift. These data serve as an important basic model for fermentative versus respiratory growth of yeast and other eukaryotes and are a benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics.st (Saccharomyces cerevisea) has served as a key model system in biology and as a benchmark for “omics” technology. Although near-complete proteomes of log phase yeast have been measured, protein abundance in yeast is dynamic, particularly during the transition from log to stationary phase. Defining the dynamics of proteomic changes during this transition, termed the diauxic shift, is important to understand the basic biology of proliferative versus quiescent cells. Here, we perform temporal quantitative proteomics to fully capture protein induction and repression during the diauxic shift. Accurate and sensitive quantitation at a high temporal resolution and depth of proteome coverage was achieved using TMT10 reagents and LC-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer deploying synchronous precursor selection (SPS). We devised a simple template matching strategy to reveal temporal patterns of protein induction and repression. Within these groups are functionally distinct groups of proteins such as those of glyoxylate metabolism, as well as many proteins of unknown function not previously associated with the diauxic shift (e.g. YNR034W-A and FMP16). We also perform a dual time-course to determine Hap2-dependent proteins during the diauxic shift. These data serve as an important basic model for fermentative versus respiratory growth of yeast and other eukaryotes and are a benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from cultured yeast were harvested over 33h of culture and labelled using TMT10 reagents. Samples were digested, separated into 12 fractions and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Instrument data files (.raw) were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReadW.exe and MS2 spectra were searched against a database of translated sequences (concatenated in forward and reverse orientation) for all predicted ORFs for Saccaromyces cerevisiae (http://www.yeastgenome.org/download-data; downloaded February 16, 2010) using the Sequest (Ver28) algorithm(14). The added mass of the TMT reagent (229.162932) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation (57.02146) on cysteine were set as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation (15.99492) was set as a variable modification. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 1 Da product ion mass tolerance were used. False positive rates were controlled using the target-decoy approach(15) using the concatenated reversed database. A linear discriminant analysis (LDA) model was employed to distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications based on XCorr, ΔCn, peptide length, and charge state. Peptide hits less than 7 amino acids in length were excluded. After peptides were grouped into proteins, multiplied LDA probabilities were used to score proteins, which were then sorted and filtered to a maximum of 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) has served as a key model system in biology and as a benchmark for "omics" technology. Although near-complete proteomes of log phase yeast have been measured, protein abundance in yeast is dynamic, particularly during the transition from log to stationary phase. Defining the dynamics of proteomic changes during this transition, termed the diauxic shift, is important to understand the basic biology of proliferative versus quiescent cells. Here, we perform temporal quantitative proteomics to fully capture protein induction and repression during the diauxic shift. Accurate and sensitive quantitation at a high temporal resolution and depth of proteome coverage was achieved using TMT10 reagents and LC-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer deploying synchronous precursor selection. Triplicate experiments were analyzed using the time-course R package and a simple template matching strategy was used to reveal groups of proteins with similar temporal patterns of protein induction and repression. Within these groups are functionally distinct types of proteins such as those of glyoxylate metabolism and many proteins of unknown function not previously associated with the diauxic shift (e.g. YNR034W-A and FMP16). We also perform a dual time-course experiment to determine Hap2-dependent proteins during the diauxic shift. These data serve as an important basic model for fermentative versus respiratory growth of yeast and other eukaryotes and are a benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics.

### Keywords
Diauxic shift, Yeast, Temporal

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School
Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Gygi
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School


