### Accession
PXD043986

### Title
Identify SUMO-modified proteins and determine the potential SUMO-specific protease target

### Description
Because SUMO modifications can change the molecular weight and/or the isoelectric point of target proteins, or cause degradation of target protein as well, we then compared the proteome of V592 and VdT-DNA using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to separate proteins on the basis of their size and of their charge.

### Sample Protocol
To identify whether VdEno was SUMOylated, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry was performed. SUMOylated proteins were immunoprecipitated with anti-Strep agarose beads from VdΔulpb/Strep-SUMO strain. The excised gels and protein spots from 2D gel were digested by trypsin at 37ºC overnight, and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. The dried peptides were dissolved in alpha-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid (CHCA) MALDI matrix solution and analyzed by a MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (4700 Proteomics Analyzer, Applied Biosystems).

### Data Protocol
The combined mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem MS (MS/MS) peak lists were analyzed using Protein Pilot software (Applied Biosystems) with a Mascot search engine (MASCOT v. 2.2) and searched against the V. dahliae VdLs.17 protein sequence database. (https://www.broadinstitute.org/scientific-community/science/projects/fungalgenome-initiative/verticillium-comparative-genomics-pro) to identify Verticillium proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The soil-borne fungus Verticillium dahliae, the most notorious plant pathogen of the Verticillium genus, causes vascular wilts in a wide variety of economically important crops. The molecular mechanism of V. dahliae pathogenesis remains largely elusive. Here, we identify a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-specific protease (VdUlpB) from V. dahliae, and find that VdUlpB facilitates V. dahliae virulence by deconjugating SUMO from V. dahliae enolase (VdEno). We identify five lysine residues (K96, K254, K259, K313 and K434) that mediate VdEno SUMOylation, and SUMOylated VdEno preferentially localized in nucleus where it functions as a transcription repressor to inhibit the expression of an effector VdSCP8. Importantly, VdUlpB mediates deSUMOylation of VdEno facilitates its cytoplasmic distribution, which allows it to function as a glycolytic enzyme. Our study reveals a sophisticated pathogenic mechanism of VdUlpB-mediated enolase deSUMOylation, which fortifies glycolytic pathway for growth and contributes to V. dahliae virulence through derepressing the expression of an effector.

### Keywords
Verticillium dahliae, Sumoylation, Enolase, Effector, Vdulpb

### Affiliations
CAS
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
bosen zhang

### Lab Head
Dr huishan guo
CAS


