### Accession
PXD028977

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human SKBR3/HER2+ breast cancer cell-surface proteins by using amine group biotinylation

### Description
The plasma membrane proteome resides at the interface between the extra- and intra-cellular environment and through its various roles in signal transduction, immune recognition, nutrient transport, and cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions plays a critical role in determining the fate of a cell. The objective of this study was to characterize the cell-membrane proteome of SKBR3/HER2+ breast cancer cells by using mass spectrometry detection, to advance the understanding of biological triggers that sustain aberrant cell survival, proliferation, and development of resistance to therapeutic drugs.

### Sample Protocol
SKBR3 cells were cultured in McCoy 5A supplemented with FBS (10 %) and PenStrep (0.5 %), in an incubator maintained at 37 C and 5 % CO2. The cells were starved for 48 h in McCoy 5A alone (SF cells); or, starved for 48 h and then incubated for 24 h in McCoy 5A supplemented with FBS (10 %) (ST cells). To isolate the cell-surface proteins, the cells were labeled at the Lys residues and protein N-termini with a biotin reagent (EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin, 0.5 mg/mL) at 4 °C for 30 min, in the dark. The cells were lysed with Pierce lysis buffer supplemented with HALT protease inhibitor cocktail, incubated with NeutrAvidin beads, and the cell-surface proteins were recovered by on-bead proteolytic digestion with trypsin/LysC. The beads were further treated with DTT to recover the di-thiol, covalently bound remaining protein fragments. The proteins recovered by direct on-bead digestion and DTT release were subjected to a 2nd round of tryptic digestion. In preparation for MS analysis, the recovered cell-surface protein digest samples were cleaned with C18/SCX cartridges. LC separations were performed with an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system by using an EASY-Spray column ES800 (150 mm long, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm C18 particles, ThermoFisher Scientific) operated at 250 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.01 % TFA in H2O:CH3CN (96:4, v/v), and mobile phase B of 0.01 % TFA in H2O:CH3CN (10:90, v/v). The eluent B gradient (85 min) consisted of: 3 % to 30 % (5-65 min), 45 % (65-72 min), 60 % (72-73 min), and 90 % (73-74 min), where it was kept for 5 min, and then decreased to a final concentration of 3 %. MS/MS analysis was performed with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full mass spectra were acquired over a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, with acquisition parameters set to resolution 70,000, AGC target 3E6, and maximum IT 100 ms. The quadrupole isolation width was 2.4 m/z, and HCD was performed at a normalized collision energy of 30 %. Data dependent MS2 acquisition was completed with a resolution setting of 17,500, AGC target 1E5, maximum IT 50 ms, and loop count of 20. Other data dependent settings included minimum AGC target 2E3, apex trigger 1 to 2 s, charge exclusion enabled for unassigned and +1 charges, isotope exclusion on, preferred peptide match on, and dynamic exclusion of 10 s for chromatographic peak widths of 8 s. Three biological replicates and three LC-MS/MS technical replicates were generated for each cell state.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed with the Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4) software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Homo sapiens database (UniProtKB, March 2019 download, 20,404 reviewed/non-redundant entries), and a target/decoy-based processing workflow with the peptide precursor mass range set to 400-5,000 Da. The workflow parameters included: only fully tryptic peptides with a min of 6 and max of 144 amino acids, max 2 missed cleavages, precursor ion tolerance of 15 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, and dynamic modifications on Lys (87.998 Da label), Met (oxidation) and the protein N-terminal amino acid (acetylation). All PSM, peptide, and protein confidence thresholds were set at FDRs of 0.01 (strict) and 0.03 (relaxed). Peptides were counted only for the top scoring proteins.

### Publication Abstract
To estimate the number of objects in an image, each element needs to be segregated as a single unit. Several principles guide the process of element identification, one of the strongest being symmetry. In the current study, we investigated how symmetry affects the ability to rapidly estimate the number of objects (numerosity). Participants judged the numerosity of asymmetric or symmetric arrays of various numerosities. The results show that the numerosity of symmetrical arrays was significantly underestimated at low numerosities, but the effect was greatly reduced at higher numerosities. Adding an additional axis of symmetry (double symmetry) further reduced perceived numerosity. The magnitude of the symmetry-driven underestimation was inversely correlated with autistic personality traits, consistent with previous work associating autistic traits with perceptual grouping. Overall, these results support the idea that perceived numerosity relies on object segmentation and grouping cues, with symmetry playing a key role.

### Keywords
Skbr3 cells, Cell-surface proteins, Cancer

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech
Virginia Tech, Biological Sciences

### Submitter
Arba Karcini

### Lab Head
Dr Iulia M. Lazar
Virginia Tech, Biological Sciences


