### Accession
PXD009136

### Title
Morphological and proteomic analyses in petioles rigidity: evidence towards phenotypic plasticity in sacred lotus for aquatic environment

### Description
Very little is known about the mechanism controlling petiole rigidity in sacred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.). To investigate the mechanism controlling the lotus petiole rigidity, morphological and proteomic analyses were performed. Anatomically, there is a great variation between the petioles of floating and vertical leaves. The number of vascular bundles, ligneous cells and thickness of cell wall were higher in the initial vertical leaf petiole (IVP) compared to the initial floating leaf petiole (IFP). A total of 4855 proteins were quantified through comparative proteomic analysis, among which 421 proteins expressed 1.5 folds higher in IFP and 483 proteins expressed 1.5 folds higher in IVP. Protein function categories indicated hundreds of proteins involved in cell wall organization and biosynthesis, and cell wall assembly. Functional enrichment analysis for the differentially abundant proteins indicated the enrichment of 105 proteins in 6 different pathways, while 43 out the total proteins were enriched in lignin biosynthesis pathway. In consistent with genes and proteins expressions in lignin biosynthesis, the contents of lignin monomers precursors were significantly different in IFP and IVP. These findings support the involvement of lignin in lotus petioles rigidity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The sample was first ground using liquid nitrogen, and then the cell powder was transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 10 mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000× g at 4 °C for 10 minutes. Finally, the protein was precipitated using cold 15% TCA for 2 hours at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 minutes, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed three times using cold acetone. The protein was re-dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Guerreiro et al., 2014). Trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 45 minutes at room temperature in darkness. After reduction and alkylation, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first overnight digestion and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 hours-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested using trypsin for the following experiments (Guerreiro et al., 2014). TMT labeling  After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted using Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 hours at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation(Guerreiro et al., 2014).  HPLC fractionation The sample was then fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 minutes into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation (Guerreiro et al., 2014). Quantitative proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 22 minutes, 22% to 36% in 10 minutes escalating to 85% in 5 minutes and infinite held at 85% for the last 3 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/minutes on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by a tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 seconds dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z (Guerreiro et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81) with mascot search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against 4432_OT_Nelumbo database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys, TMT-6-plex on Lys and N-term was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected. All the other parameters in Thermo Proteome Discoverer were set to default values(Du et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Sacred lotus (<i>Nelumbo nucifera</i> Gaertn.) is a relic aquatic plant with two types of leaves, which have distinct rigidity of petioles. Here we assess the difference from anatomic structure to the expression of genes and proteins in two petioles types, and identify key pathways involved in petiole rigidity formation in sacred lotus. Anatomically, great variation between the petioles of floating and vertical leaves were observed. The number of collenchyma cells and thickness of xylem vessel cell wall was higher in the initial vertical leaves' petiole (IVP) compared to the initial floating leaves' petiole (IFP). Among quantified transcripts and proteins, 1021 and 401 transcripts presented 2-fold expression increment (named DEGs, genes differentially expressed between IFP and IVP) in IFP and IVP, 421 and 483 proteins exhibited 1.5-fold expression increment (named DEPs, proteins differentially expressed between IFP and IVP) in IFP and IVP, respectively. Gene function and pathway enrichment analysis displayed that DEGs and DEPs were significantly enriched in cell wall biosynthesis and lignin biosynthesis. In consistent with genes and proteins expressions in lignin biosynthesis, the contents of lignin monomers precursors were significantly different in IFP and IVP. These results enable us to understand lotus petioles rigidity formation better and provide valuable candidate genes information on further investigation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lignin biosynthesis, Sacred lotus, Petiole rigidity, Cell wall

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China


