### Accession
PXD027294

### Title
Identification of novel salivary candidate protein biomarkers for tuberculosis diagnosis: a preliminary biomarker discovery study.

### Description
Abstract Background There is an urgent need for new, accurate, rapid, and affordable tuberculosis (TB) diagnostic tests. The aim of the present study was to use mass spectrometry to identify new preliminary candidate TB diagnostic protein biomarkers in saliva obtained from individuals with TB, and patients with other respiratory diseases (ORD).  Methods Saliva samples were collected from 22 individuals who self-presented with symptoms suggestive of TB as part of a larger TB biomarker project. Purified salivary proteins were subjected to tryptic digestion peptides were analysed using a QExactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. Identified proteins were subjected to gene ontology and ingenuity pathway analysis for functional enrichment analysis.  Results 26 of the 652 identified proteins significantly discriminated individuals with TB from those with ORD after Benjamini Hochberg correction (5% FDR), with five of these proteins diagnosing TB with an AUC ≥ 0.80. A 5-protein biosignature comprising of P01011, Q8NCW5, P28072, A0A2Q2TTZ9, and Q99574 diagnosed TB with an AUC of 1.00 (95% CI, 1.00-1.00), sensitivity of 100% (95% CI, 76.2-100%) and specificity of 90.9% (95% CI, 58.7-99.8%) after leave-one-out cross validation.  Conclusions We identified novel candidate salivary protein biomarkers and biosignatures with strong potential as TB diagnostic candidates. Our results are preliminary and require validation in larger studies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis For this biomarker discovery study, 11 participants with confirmed TB were randomly selected then age-matched with 11 ORD participants that were recruited as part of the 156 participants from main study (South African site, AE-TBC study). A summary of the sample preparation protocol is shown in Fig 1. Briefly, proteins from saliva samples were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation, as previously described [20], resuspended in denaturation buffer [6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM tris buffer pH 8.0], and quantified using a modified Bradford assay as previously described [21].  Quantified samples were digested with trypsin using the standard FASP protocol [22]. Briefly, 100 µg aliquots of each sample were transferred into clean Eppendorf tubes. The protein disulphide bonds were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to each sample at a final concentration of 0.1 M, and incubating in a water bath at 95°C for 3 minutes. Thirty kDa nominal molecular weight limit (NMWL) FASP filters were conditioned by adding 500 µL of urea (UA) buffer [24 g urea in 50 mL of 0.1  M tris pH 8.0] and centrifuging at 14000 x g for 10 minutes. Each sample was added to a FASP filter unit. Samples were washed twice with 200 µL UA by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 15 minutes. The flow-through was discarded from the collection tubes, and the FASP filter units were placed into empty collection tubes. Cysteine residues were blocked by adding 100 µL of 0.5 M iodoacetamide (IAA) solution to each filter unit, vortex mixed for 1 minute, and incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. FASP filter units were then centrifuged at 14000 x g for 10 minutes. The IAA was removed by washing with 100 µL UA by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 15 minutes twice. Buffer exchange into 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonate was performed by centrifuging at 14000 x g for 10 minutes twice. The pH of each sample was approximately 9 prior to tryptic digest, according to a pH indicator strip (Merck Millipore, Massachusetts, United States). For a final enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100, 40 µL of 2x trypsin buffer was added to each filter unit along with 1 µg of enzyme and mixed by vortexing. Filter units were placed in a wet chamber and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Tryptic peptides were washed out of the filter units into clean collection tubes using 40 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuging at 14000 x g for 10 minutes. The flow-through, containing tryptic peptides, was transferred into clean Eppendorf tubes. Tryptic peptides were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% prior to desalting with C18 spin columns (Thermo Fischer, Massachusetts, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After desalting, peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (FA) immediately prior to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. Samples were analyzed individually.  Identification of potential candidate protein biomarkers using LC–MS/MS Tryptic peptides were separated using a Dionex 3000 Ultimate Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) system running a gradient of solvent A [Water, 0.1% Formic Acid] and solvent B [Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid] from 6 to 40% solution B for 60 minutes at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/minute, with a column oven temperature of 40°C. The peptides were first bound to a trap column (packed in-house, Luna 5 µm C18 beads; Phenomenex, California, USA, 2 cm) and washed in 2% solution B for 10 minutes at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (packed in house, Aeris peptide 3.6 µm C18 beads; Phenomenex, California, USA, 30cm), for the duration of the gradient. Spectra were acquired in top 10 mode using a QExactive hybrid Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fischer, Massachusetts, USA) with MS1 scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 106 or an injection time of 250 milliseconds. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 1x 105. A dynamic exclusion window of 30 seconds was applied.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.3.5.12. The default settings for label free quantitation (LFQ) were applied, and the database used was acquired from Uniprot in 2019 for Homo sapiens (Proteome ID UP000005640). A PSM and protein-level FDR of 1% was applied.  Pathway analysis To better understand the pathways in which the identified proteins are involved, a list (UniProt accession number) of differentially expressed proteins (P-value < 0.05) was compiled. The final list was analyzed using the String 11.0 online database (https://string-db.org)  for the determination of pathways and biological processes modulated in each group of participants. The canonical pathways and protein-protein interactions were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) Software (IPA trial version, Ingenuity Systems, http://www.ingenuity.com) (Qiagen). The predicted protein-protein interaction networks and canonical pathways were generated using inputs of gene identifiers, log10 ratios, and p-values between TB and ORD groups.  Statistical analysis Diﬀerences in the label free quantitative (LFQ) intensities of the identified protein groups between TB patients and individuals with ORD were analyzed using a t-test. The diagnostic abilities of the significantly different majority protein groups were assessed by receiver operator characteristics (ROC) curve analysis. Optimal cut oﬀ values and associated sensitivity and specificity were determined based on the Youden’s Index [23]. The predictive abilities of combinations of protein groups were investigated by general discriminant analysis (GDA), with leave-one-out cross validation. A P-value of < 0.05 was set as the significance threshold following Benjamini Hochberg multiple testing correction with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. The data was analyzed using Statistica (TIBCO Software Inc., CA, USA) and GraphPad Prism version 8 (GraphPad Software Inc., CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Diagnosis., Proteomics, Biomarkers, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of Cape Town, Faculty of Health Sciences, Department Integrative Biomedical Sciences, South Africa
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Hygon Mutavhatsindi

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Jonathan Blackburn
University of Cape Town, Faculty of Health Sciences, Department Integrative Biomedical Sciences, South Africa


