### Accession
PXD006035

### Title
On-line desalting of sodium dodecyl sulfate in mass spectrometry

### Description
We tested here the ability of weak cation exchange (WCX) stationary phase to retain positively charged proteinaceous whilst negatively charged SDS molecules can be washed out from the capillary during on-line desalting.  This novel chromatographic method named as online desalting of sodium dodecyl sulfate  (online deSDS) satisfactorily allows for the first time the unforeseen straightforward LC-MS/MS analysis of SDS-containing samples without the requirement of any additional pre-processing step.

### Sample Protocol
The protein mixture (Promix)  was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) in 8M urea. Subsequently, proteins were digested overnight with trypsin. The capacity of the method to remove on-line SDS was tested spiking SDS into the digested protein mixture. The application of the method was performed analyzing the HEK 293F cell proteome. That sample was lysed with 1% SDS. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA in 8M urea. Overnight digestion was performed at 0.01% SDS with sequencing grade trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data was converted into Mascot Generic Format (mgf) files with Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). An in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) was used to perform database search with MS of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 0.8 Da for the analysis of data obtained using the LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer and 0.05 Da for the analysis of data obtained using the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Carbamidomethylation at Cys was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation at Met and deamidation at Asn and Glu were considered as variable modifications. For the analysis of the data obtained from the protein mixture a small tailored database was constructed. The UniProt human database downloaded on July 25, 2016, with 70849 sequences and 23 964 784 residues, was used for the protein database search of the HEK 293F cell proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Biological research often requires the use of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to solubilize protein samples; however, this detergent is not compatible with direct mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Here, we report an online high-throughput proteomics method that permits standard in-solution digestion of SDS-containing samples followed by direct liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using weak cation-exchange chromatography (WCX). This approach, called the online removal of sodium dodecyl sulfate (Online reSDS), exploits the properties of WCX in a highly organic and mildly acidic medium to retain positively charged peptides by both hydrophilic interaction and electrostatic attraction while simultaneously repelling negative SDS molecules. This method was optimized to successfully analyze complex samples that contain up to 1% of SDS. Furthermore, online reSDS improves the identification of peptides with post-translational modifications (PTMs), such as deamidation and phosphorylation, without preliminary enrichment. In conclusion, we show that reSDS can facilitate research in proteomics by allowing the use of SDS in a wide range of LC-MS/MS applications with simplified sample-processing procedures.

### Keywords
Sodium dodecyl sulfate, Weak cation exchange, Sds, Lc-ms/ms, Wcx, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.
School of Biological Sciences. Nanyang Technological University. 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences. Nanyang Technological University. 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551


