### Accession
PXD004723

### Title
A systematic proteogenomic approach to deciphering of the missing proteins: the example of newly uncovered NHERF1 function associated with human reproductive disorder

### Description
We propose and demonstrate a systematic approach designed to combine stringent criteria for claims of missing protein (MP) identification with extensive annotation as critical components of the discovery and functional validation of MPs.

### Sample Protocol
Human placental tissues were obtained from pregnant women either with or without PE, after cesarean delivery, with informed consent from donors. The protocols for sample isolation and their subsequent uses for research purposes were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the CHA University College of Medicine, South Korea. PE was defined as blood pressure reaching 140/90 mmHg or greater for the first time following mid-pregnancy, associated with abnormal protein excretion or multiorgan involvement. The tissues obtained from placentas were treated by peeling off the chorioamniotic membrane and removing the decidual tissue. After these tissues were washed using PBS until the supernatant was nearly free of blood, they were stored at −80°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptide separation and identification were analyzed by LTQ-MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) coupled with an Easy n-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA). The detected peak generation and protein identification data were analyzed by the Xcalibur (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) and Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) software. The peptides were identified using UniProt (release date June 2012) with the following database search criteria: taxonomy, Homo sapiens (86,875 sequences); carboxyamidomethylated (+57) at cysteine residues for fixed modifications; oxidized at methionine (+16) residues for variable modifications; maximum two allowed missed cleavages; 10 ppm MS tolerance; a 0.8-Da CID. Reversed sequences were used for evaluation of the FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
One of the major goals of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is to fill the knowledge gaps between human genomic information and the corresponding proteomic information. These gaps are due to "missing" proteins (MPs)-predicted proteins with insufficient evidence from mass spectrometry (MS), biochemical, structural, or antibody analyses-that currently account for 2579 of the 19587 predicted human proteins (neXtProt, 2017-01). We address some of the lessons learned from the inconsistent annotations of missing proteins in databases (DB) and demonstrate a systematic proteogenomic approach designed to explore a potential new function of a known protein. To illustrate a cautious and strategic approach for characterization of novel function in vitro and in vivo, we present the case of Na(+)/H(+) exchange regulatory cofactor 1 (NHERF1/SLC9A3R1, located at chromosome 17q25.1; hereafter NHERF1), which was mistakenly labeled as an MP in one DB (Global Proteome Machine Database; GPMDB, 2011-09 release) but was well known in another public DB and in the literature. As a first step, NHERF1 was determined by MS and immunoblotting for its molecular identity. We next investigated the potential new function of NHERF1 by carrying out the quantitative MS profiling of placental trophoblasts (PXD004723) and functional study of cytotrophoblast JEG-3 cells. We found that NHERF1 was associated with trophoblast differentiation and motility. To validate this newly found cellular function of NHERF1, we used the Caenorhabditis elegans mutant of nrfl-1 (a nematode ortholog of NHERF1), which exhibits a protruding vulva (Pvl) and egg-laying-defective phenotype, and performed genetic complementation work. The nrfl-1 mutant was almost fully rescued by the transfection of the recombinant transgenic construct that contained human NHERF1. These results suggest that NHERF1 could have a previously unknown function in pregnancy and in the development of human embryos. Our study outlines a stepwise experimental platform to explore new functions of ambiguously denoted candidate proteins and scrutinizes the mandated DB search for the selection of MPs to study in the future.

### Keywords
Human, Placental tissues, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Yonsei Proteome Research Center

### Submitter
Jin-Young Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Ki Paik
Yonsei Proteome Research Center


