### Accession
PXD013356

### Title
Compositional evolution of centipede venom

### Description
This project provides the first insight and comparative data into the venoms of all five orders of centipede

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins and peptides present in the venom, venom obtained by electrostimulation was analysed by a bottom-up. For each sample, 5 µg crude venom was dried by vacuum-centrifugation and re-dissolved in 4 M urea 10% ACN 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Cystines were then reduced by incubating with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 70 °C for 5 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C for 90 min. The reduced and alkylated samples were then digested by incubating with 30 µg/µL trypsin overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea 10% ACN 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, at a final substrate to enzyme ratio of approximately 100:1. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 ZipTip (ThermoFisher, USA), dried using vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 0.5% formic acid (FA), and 2 µg analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF equipped with a Turbo-V source heated to 550 °C. The dissolved samples were fractionated on a Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) Nexera UHPLC with an Agilent Zorbax stable-bond C18 column (Agilent, USA) (2.1 x 100 mm, 1.8 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size), using a flow rate of 180 µL/min and a gradient of 1–40 % solvent B (90 % acetonitrile [ACN], 0.1 % FA) in 0.1% FA over 60 minutes. MS1 spectra were acquired at 300–1800 m/z with an accumulation time of 250 ms, and selecting the 20 most intense ions for MS2. Precursor ions with a charge of +2 to +5 and an intensity of at least 120 counts/s were selected, with a unit mass precursor ion inclusion window of ± 0.7 Da, and isotopes within ± 2 Da were excluded. MS2 scans were acquired at 80–1400 m/z, with an accumulation time of 100 ms, and optimized for high resolution.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were then searched against the respective species’ assembled transcriptomes translated to all possible open reading frames longer than 40 amino acids using the Galaxy tool ‘Get open reading frames (ORFs) or coding sequences (CDSs)’ (Cock et al. 2013) using Protein Pilot v4.5 (AB SCIEX, USA). While biological modifications were allowed, we did not allow for amino acid substitutions in an attempt to reduce the number of false positive identifications of any similar non-toxin homologues. False positives were identified using decoy-based false discovery rates (FDR) as estimated by Protein Pilot, and only protein identifications with a corresponding local FDR of < 0.5 % were considered significant. Identified contigs were filtered using CD-HIT v4.6 (Li and Godzik 2006) to remove identical contigs.

### Publication Abstract
Centipedes are among the most ancient groups of venomous predatory arthropods. Extant species belong to five orders, but our understanding of the composition and evolution of centipede venoms is based almost exclusively on one order, Scolopendromorpha. To gain a broader and less biased understanding we performed a comparative proteotranscriptomic analysis of centipede venoms from all five orders, including the first venom profiles for the orders Lithobiomorpha, Craterostigmomorpha, and Geophilomorpha. Our results reveal an astonishing structural diversity of venom components, with 93 phylogenetically distinct protein and peptide families. Proteomically-annotated gene trees of these putative toxin families show that centipede venom composition is highly dynamic across macroevolutionary timescales, with numerous gene duplications as well as functional recruitments and losses of toxin gene families. Strikingly, not a single family is found in the venoms of representatives of all five orders, with 67 families being unique for single orders. Ancestral state reconstructions reveal that centipede venom originated as a simple cocktail comprising just four toxin families, with very little compositional evolution happening during the approximately 50&#x2009;My before the living orders had diverged. Venom complexity then increased in parallel within the orders, with scolopendromorphs evolving particularly complex venoms. Our results show that even venoms composed of toxins evolving under the strong constraint of negative selection can have striking evolutionary plasticity on the compositional level. We show that the functional recruitments and losses of toxin families that shape centipede venom arsenals are not concentrated early in their evolutionary history, but happen frequently throughout.

### Keywords
Toxin, Venom, Venom gland, Centipede

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Centre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland

### Submitter
Eivind Undheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind Andreas Baste Undheim
Centre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland


