### Accession
PXD000561

### Title
A draft map of the human proteome

### Description
The availability of human genome sequence has transformed biomedical research over the past decade. However, an equivalent map for the human proteome with direct measurements of proteins and peptides does not exist yet. Here, we report a draft map of the human proteome based on high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry-based proteomics technology. In-depth proteomic profiling of 30 histologically normal human samples including 17 adult tissues, 7 fetal tissues and 6 purified primary hematopoietic cells resulted in identification of proteins encoded by greater than 17,000 genes accounting for ~84% of the total annotated protein-coding genes in humans. This large human proteome catalog (available as an interactive web-based resource at http://www.humanproteomemap.org) will complement available human genome and transcriptome data to accelerate biomedical research in health and disease. The authors request that those considering use of this dataset for commercial purposes contact pandey@jhmi.edu.

### Sample Protocol
17 adult tissues, 7 fetal tissues, and 6 hematopoietic cell types were lysed in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100mM DTT and 100 mM Tris pH7.5, homogenized, sonicated, heated for 10-15 min at 750C cooled and centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay and equal amounts from three donors were pooled for further fractionation. Proteins from SDS lysates were separated on SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion was carried out using trypsin. The peptides were extracted, vacuum dried and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. 400 µg proteins were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion following reduction and alkylation with DTT and IAA respectively. The peptide digest were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), lyophilized and fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography using XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated to 24 fractions, vacuum dried and stored at -80 until further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq50 database (containing 33,833 entries along with common contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage allowed. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine were included as variable modifications. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of < 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis. To enable identification of novel peptides and correction of existing gene annotations in the human genome, six alternative databases namely- 1) six frame translated genome database 2) three frame translated RefSeq mRNA sequences from NCBI 3) three frame translated pseudogene database with sequences derived from sequences from NCBI and Gerstein’s pseudogenes 4) three frame translated non coding RNAs from NONCODE and 5) N-terminal UTR database of RefSeq mRNA sequences from NCBI were used. Unmatched MS/MS spectra peaklist files were extracted from the protein database search result and searched against these databases using X!Tandem search engine A decoy database was created for each database by reversing the sequences from a target database. Following parameters were common to all searches - 1) Precursor mass error set at 10 ppm, 2) Fragment mass error set at 0.05 Da, 3) carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modification, 4) Oxidation of methionine was defined as variable modification. 5) Only tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were considered. The sequences of common contaminants including trypsin used as protease were appended to the database engine installed locally.

### Publication Abstract
As part of the chromosome-centric human proteome project (C-HPP) initiative, we report our progress on the annotation of chromosome 22. Chromosome 22, spanning 51 million base pairs, was the first chromosome to be sequenced. Gene dosage alterations on this chromosome have been shown to be associated with a number of congenital anomalies. In addition, several rare but aggressive tumors have been associated with this chromosome. A number of important gene families including immunoglobulin lambda locus, Crystallin beta family, and APOBEC gene family are located on this chromosome. On the basis of proteomic profiling of 30 histologically normal tissues and cells using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we show protein evidence of 367 genes on chromosome 22. Importantly, this includes 47 proteins, which are currently annotated as "missing" proteins. We also confirmed the translation start sites of 120 chromosome 22-encoded proteins. Employing a comprehensive proteogenomics analysis pipeline, we provide evidence of novel coding regions on this chromosome which include upstream ORFs and novel exons in addition to correcting existing gene structures. We describe tissue-wise expression of the proteins and the distribution of gene families on this chromosome. These data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000561.

### Keywords
Human proteome map, Proteogenomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: adrenal gland, esophagus, retina, heart, kidney, liver, lung, placenta, brain, gut, ovary, testis, cd4 tcells, monocytes, nk cells, platelets, frontal cortex, urinary bladder, b cells, cd8  tcells, colon, gallbladder, pancreas, prostate, rectum, spinal cord, cd8 tcells
- disease: not available
- cell type: not applicable
- fractionation method: NT=high pH RPLC;AC=PRIDE:0000564, NT=SDS-PAGE;AC=PRIDE:0000568
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1001742;NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos, AC=MS:1001910;NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Variable
- factor value[organism part: Adrenal gland, Esophagus, Retina, Heart, Kidney, Liver, Lung, Placenta, Brain, Gut, Ovary, Testis, CD4 Tcells, Monocytes, NK cells, Platelets, Frontal cortex, Urinary bladder, B cells, CD8  Tcells, Colon, Gallbladder, Pancreas, Prostate, Rectum, Spinal cord, CD8 Tcells

