### Accession
PXD020744

### Title
Cell-autonomous hepatocyte-specific GP130 signalling alone is sufficient to trigger robust innate immune response in mice

### Description
Members of the IL-6 cytokine family contribute to inflammatory and regenerative processes. Engagement of the signalling receptor subunit gp130 is common to almost all members of the family. In the liver, all major cell types respond to IL-6, making it difficult to delineate cell type-specific effects of IL-6 type cytokines. We therefore generated mouse models for liver cell type-specific analysis of IL-6 signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue proteins were retrieved by PIRL laser ablation [11]. In brief, the mouse liver was placed in the ablation chamber and irradiated with a pico-second infrared Laser. The tissue plume was vacuum-assisted transferred to a collection filler were the biomolecules in the plume were condensed. The filter was placed in a tube and covered with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer. After boiling at 98 °C for 10 min, the sample was cooled down and the protein concentration estimated with a BCA Protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peripheral blood plasma was diluted (1:10) in 0.1 M TEAB and 1% (w/v) SDC buffer and boiled at 98 °C for 5 min, followed by protein concentration estimation with the BCA assay. 20 µg of protein per sample of the liver tissue lysate and the plasma were diluted in 100mM TEAB and 1% (w/v) SDC buffer to a total volume of 100µL. Subsequently, samples were incubated for 30 min at 60 °C in the presence of 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) to reduce disulphate bonds and 20 mM iodoacetamide was added to alkylate cysteine residues. Proteins were subjected to tryptic digestion (1:50 protein to enzyme ratio) over night at 37 °C. SDC was precipitated by the addition of 1% formic acid, removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
The obtained DDA based peptide spectra were searched with the search engine Sequest (integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.0, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using the human Uniprot protein database (release August 2017), with carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as fixed modification and the oxidation of methionine as well as the protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Precursor tolerances were set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. The peptide FDR was set to < 1% using the percolator node.  Obtained DIA data were imported into Skyline software (MacCoss Lab Washington University, Seattle, WA, USA) and data extraction was done using the DDA based peptide spectra library either from the liver tissue lysates or plasma protein digests. All peptides with a dot product (dotP) greater than 0.85 were exported and the peptide areas summed to protein areas.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acute-phase response, Innate immunity, Gp130, Il-6

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Institute of Biochemistry, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Schmidt-Arras
Institute of Biochemistry, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany


