### Accession
PXD012314

### Title
Reduced proteasome activity in the aging brainresults in ribosome stoichiometry loss and aggregation

### Description
A progressive loss of protein homeostasis is characteristic of aging and a driver of neurodegeneration. To investigate this process quantitatively, we characterized proteome dynamics during brain aging in the short-lived vertebrate Nothobranchius furzeri combining transcriptomics and proteomics. We detected a progressive reduction in the correlation between protein and mRNA, mainly due to post-transcriptional mechanisms that account for over 40% of the age-regulated proteins. These changes cause a progressive loss of stoichiometry in several protein complexes, including ribosomes, which show impaired assembly / dis-assembly and are enriched in protein aggregates in old brains. Mechanistically, we show that reduction of proteasome activity is an early event during brain aging and is sufficient to induce proteomic signatures of aging and loss of stoichiometry in vivo. Using longitudinal transcriptomic data, we show that the magnitude of early life decline in proteasome levels is a major risk factor for mortality. Our work defines causative events in the aging process that can be targeted to prevent loss of protein homeostasis and delay the onset of age-related neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Brains from fish were collected and snap frozen, then lysed in 4% SDS, 100mM HEPES, pH8, 1mM EDTA, 100mM DTT. Samples were vortexed (5x) and sonicated (Bioruptor Plus) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF),high setting,4°C. Samples were centrifuged (3000xg,5 min,RT), and transferred to new tubes. Reduction (15min,45°C) was followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA(30min,RT,dark). 2-300 µg of each sample was precipitated overnight at 20°C with addition of 4x vol of ice-cold acetone. Samples were centrifuged (20800xg,30min,4°C) and supernatant removed. Pellets were washed twice with ice-cold 80% acetone,then centrifuged (20800x g,4°C). Pellets were air-dried and digestion buffer added (3M Urea,100mM HEPES,pH8). LysC added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein and digested for 4h (37°C,shaking 1000rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with water and trypsin added at the same enzyme to protein ratio. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with shaking (650 rpm). Digests were acidified with TFA and desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) under slow vacuum according to manufacturer's instructions. The eluates were dried down. TMT labelling was carried out in HEPES, pH 8.5. TMT-10plex reagents were reconstituted in anhydrous DMSO. TMT labeling was performed in 2 steps by addition of 2x of the TMT reagent per µg of peptide.  Labelled samples were pooled per experiment and fractionated by high pH RP chromatography using an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC System connected with a Waters XBridge C18 column (3.5 µm, 100 x 1.0 mm. The solvent system consisted of 20mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) as mobile phase (A) and 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase (B). The separation was accomplished at a mobile phase flow rate of 0.1mL/min using a non-linear gradient from 95% A to 40% B in 91 min. Fractions were collected along with the LC separation that were subsequently pooled into 16 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a Speed-Vac prior to MS. Fractions were resuspended in 10 µL reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) and 3 µL were injected. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/ min, onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 µL/ min, at 40 °C. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 5% to 7% in 10 min, then from 7 % B to 30 % B in a further 105 min and to 45 % B by 130 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000 FWHM using the quadrupole isolation. RF on the ion funnel was set to 40 %. Fill time was set at maximum of 100 ms with an AGC target of 4e5 ions and 1 microscan. The peptide monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled along with relaxed restrictions.  The most intense ions (instrument operated for a 3 second cycle time) from the full scan MS were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation and a window of 1 Da. HCD was performed with collision energy of 35%. A maximum fill time of 50 ms for each precursor ion was set. MS2 data were acquired with fixed first mass of 120 m/z in the ion trap. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 60 sec and relative mass window of 10 ppm. The instrument was not set to inject ions for all available parallelizable time. For the MS3, the precursor selection window was set to the range 400-2000 m/z, with an exclude width of 18 m/z (high) and 5 m/z (low). The most intense fragments from the MS2 experiment were co-isolated (using Synchronus Precursor Selection = 8) and fragmented using HCD (65%). MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over the mass range 100-1000 m/z and resolution set to 30000 FWHM. The maximum injection time was set to 105 ms and the instrument was set not to inject ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
MT-10plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the relevant species-specific fasta database (in-house N. furzeri or  Uniprot database, Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01 for mouse) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable. Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modifications from the quantification method used. The quantification method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm). The false discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator (Brosch et al., 2009). Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed with procedures written in R (version 3.5.0) using R-studio (version 1.0.153), as described in (Heinze et al., 2018). Briefly, PSMs mapping to reverse or contaminant hits, or having a Mascot score below 15, or having reporter ion intensities below 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were discarded. TMT channels intensities from the retained PSMs were then log2 transformed, normalised and summarised into protein group quantities by taking the median value. At least two unique peptides per protein were required for the identification and only those peptides with no missing values across all 10 channels were considered for quantification. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t test moderated by the empirical Bayes method. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR, denoted as “adj. p”) (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). The results are reported in Table S3. To obtain iBAQ values (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) from TMT data, all samples were re-analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.3.28. The parameters were set identically to the analyses above. For each identified peptide in each separate LC-MS analysis file, we extracted both precursor intensities as well as corresponding PSMs from the evidence files. For further analysis, we only considered PSMs that were common to both the TMT quantification approach as described above and the MaxQuant analysis, and were filtered as before. For each resulting peptide per LC-MS analysis, we calculated a peptide ratio corresponding to the median of the ratios derived from its PSMs. Given that the total area (MS1/precursor intensity) of a peptide species represents the sum of the 10 TMT channels, splitting the total area into individual channels using the TMT ratios gives the intensity portions for each channel. After splitting, we corrected for potential sampling aberrations by multiplying the area intensities per channel with the median ratio determined from the TMT ratios. For each channel and peptide, we calculated label-free scores by dividing through the number of potentially observable unique tryptic peptides per protein (criteria: peptide length 8-25 amino acids, no missed cleavage allowed). The resulting iBAQ scores of unique peptides were summed up per protein, and protein scores were normalized across samples using median normalization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregation, Brain, Aging, Ribosome stoichiometry, Proteasome activity

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany


