### Accession
PXD016845

### Title
MS-based quantitative proteomic analysis of total proteomes from T. gondii strains upon MORC’s depletion and TgHDAC3 inhibition.

### Description
T. gondii has a complex life cycle typified by an asexual development taking place in vertebrate, and a sexual reproduction which occurs exclusively in felids and thereby is less studied. The developmental transitions rely on changes in gene expression patterns, and recent studies have assigned roles for chromatin shapers, including histone modifications, in establishing specific epigenetic programs for each given stage. Here, we identified T. gondii microrchidia (MORC) protein as an upstream transcriptional repressor of sexual commitment. To explore the molecular role of MORC, we conducted mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analyses to monitor the proteome changes upon MORC’s depletion and TgHDAC3 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
HFF cells were grown to confluence and infected with type I (RHΔku80 or RHΔku80 MORC KD) or type II (PruΔku80 or PruΔku80 MORC KD) strains, treated or not with FR235222 drug, before lysis in 8M urea and 50mM HEPES. Extracted proteins were reduced using 20mM of dithiothreitol for 1h at 37°C before alkylation with 55mM of iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted using ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a urea concentration of 4M. Proteins were digested with LysC (Promega) at a ratio of 1:200 during 4h at 37°C. The samples were diluted again using ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a urea concentration of 1M. Proteins were then digested with Trypsin (Promega) at 536 a ratio of 1:200 overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptides were purified by C18 reverse phase chromatography (Sep-Pak C18, Waters) before drying down before fractionation by tip-based strong cation exchange (3M Empore). For this, peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 1% TFA and eluted in 4 fractions (F1: 100 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F2: 175 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F3: 375 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, 0.5 % formic acid; F4: 80% acetonitrile, 5% ammonium hydroxide) before desalting using C18 reverse phase chromatography (Ultra-Micro SpinColumns, Harvard Apparatus). Technical triplicates were performed. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 μm × 250 mm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). RAW files were processed using MaxQuant48 version 1.6.2.10. Spectra were searched against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, version 30 downloaded from ToxoDB47, the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, April 2019 version), the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant, and the corresponding reverse databases. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at their default values. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). Minimum number of peptides and razor + unique peptides were set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at PSM and protein levels. The match between runs option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii has a complex life cycle that is typified by asexual development that takes place in vertebrates, and sexual reproduction, which occurs exclusively in felids and is therefore less studied. The developmental transitions rely on changes in the patterns of gene expression, and recent studies have assigned roles for chromatin shapers, including histone modifications, in establishing specific epigenetic programs for each given stage. Here, we identified the T. gondii microrchidia (MORC) protein as an upstream transcriptional repressor of sexual commitment. MORC, in a complex with Apetala 2 (AP2) transcription factors, was shown to recruit the histone deacetylase HDAC3, thereby impeding the accessibility of chromatin at the genes that are exclusively expressed during sexual stages. We found that MORC-depleted cells underwent marked transcriptional changes, resulting in the expression of a specific repertoire of genes, and revealing a shift from asexual proliferation to sexual differentiation. MORC acts as a master regulator that directs the hierarchical expression of secondary AP2 transcription factors, and these transcription factors potentially contribute to the unidirectionality of the life cycle. Thus, MORC plays a cardinal role in the T. gondii life cycle, and its conditional depletion offers a method to study the sexual development of the parasite in vitro, and is proposed as an alternative to the requirement of T. gondii infections in cats.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Nanolc-ms/ms, Tghdac3, Tgme49_305340

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


