### Accession
PXD008221

### Title
Preclinical targeted therapy for retinoblastoma using EpCAM Aptamer siRNA chimeras

### Description
siRNAs have played a major role in cancer drug discovery, but their potential is hampered due to off-target effects. Thus, delivery systems like RNA aptamers have been used to enhance the specific delivery of these siRNAs to cancer stem cells. We report the efficacy of three different EpCAM aptamer siRNA chimeras, which were investigated both in vitro and in vivo for their ability to reduce cancer cell progression. Using these chimeras, we demonstrated specific gene knockdown in EpCAM positive cells which ultimately led to the apoptosis. To study the efficacy of these aptamer chimeras in vivo, retinoblastoma xenografts bearing NCC Rb C 51 cells were created for the first time. Systemic administration of these aptamer chimeras reduced tumour growth to about 50%. We further investigated the central Role of PLK1 in Cancer Progression and demonstrated the anti-cancer effects of targeted EpCAM siPLK1 approach. Using SILAC-Mass spectrometry analysis, we showed that silencing PLK 1 gene can lead to p53 mediated cell cycle arrest. Thus, we establish EpCAM-siRNA chimeras as potential markers for targeted anti-cancer applications, which paves a platform for efficient second line of therapies in addition to existing chemotherapy options.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were grown in the heavy (13C6-Lysine, 13C6-Arginine)/light media for about 6 passages, till the labelling was incorporated. The Light labelled cells were treated with EpCAM-siPLK1 and incubated for 48 h. After treatment the cells were lysed with 2% SDS. Equal amount of heavy and light labelled lysates were mixed together and mixed protein lysate was reduced with 5mM DTT at 60o C for 30 minutes and alkylated using IAA at room temperature for 10 minutes. Protein precipitation was done using 6 volume of ice cold acetone and digested overnight at 37 oC using modified trypsin (Promega). Then peptides were fractionated by bRPLC and 8 fractions were collected. TiO2- based phosphopeptide enrichment method was used to enrich the phosphopeptides from each fraction. Then enriched peptides were dried and desalted using C18 stage tips. The desalted peptides were analysed on a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was searched through the Proteome Discoverer platform (v2.1, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using Mascot and SEQUEST search algorithms against Human RefSeq75 protein database supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cystein as static modifications, SILAC K6 + R6 multiplex, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine  as dynamic modifications were set for both search algorithms. The precursor ion mass error tolerance was set at 20ppm and fragment ion mass error tolerance was set at 0.1 Da. The data was then searched against a decoy database and the q values estimated using Percolator algorithm. The peptides were considered as identified at a q value of < 0.01. The probability of phosphorylation at S/T/Y site on each peptide was calculated using PhosphoRS node and peptides with more than 75% phosphoRS probability were considered to fetch the phospho site on protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epcam, Targeted delivery, Retinoblastoma, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Sankara Nethralaya
Dr. Sailaja Elchuri Associate Professor  Department of Nanotechnology Vision Research Foundation Sankara Nethralaya Chennai 600006

### Submitter
Sailaja Elchuri

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sailaja Elchuri
Dr. Sailaja Elchuri Associate Professor  Department of Nanotechnology Vision Research Foundation Sankara Nethralaya Chennai 600006


