### Accession
PXD033170

### Title
Immunogenicity of mycobacterial extracellular vesicles isolated from host-related conditions informs about tuberculosis disease status

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) still represents a major global health problem affecting over 10 million people worldwide. At present, there is an urgent need for defining prognostic parameters, differential diagnostic, and correlates of protection from the disease. The gold standard test for TB diagnosis is still smear microscopy, but insufficiently detects pulmonary disease, besides the necessity of having laboratory infrastructures and be time-consuming. Both LAM urine test and Xpert MTB/RIF have been major game changers in this context. However, the low sensitivity of the former and the considerable delay of sample delivery of the latter, make the improvement of the TB diagnostic landscape a priority. The development of rapid point-of-care (POC)-based testing approaches would represent an important breakthrough in TB diagnostics in view of these short-comings. Most forms of life produce extracellular vesicles (EVs) and since the first detection of bacterial EVs more than 60 years, subsequent studies have demonstrated their functional commonality despite differences in bacterial cell envelope architecture. We demonstrated that Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of TB, produces EVs in vitro and in vivo as part of a sophisticated mechanism to manipulate host cellular physiology and to evade the host immune system. In a previous serology study, Mtb EVs (MEVs) were used to investigate their potential role as biomarkers to discern between different forms of disease status. It was shown that the recognition of several MEV associated proteins could have diagnostic properties. In this study, we pursued to expand the capabilities of MEVs in the context of TB diagnostics by analyzing the composition of MEVs isolated from Mtb cultures submitted to iron starvation and, testing their immunogenicity against a new cohort of serum samples including TB+, LTBI and healthy donors. We found that MEVs differ in protein composition when Mtb is under host-related stress yet MEVs seem to carry antigens that could serve as bonafide markers for direct detection. In addition, TB serology revealed three new MEV antigens with great biomarker capacity. These results encourage investigating the feasibility of the development of a POC device based on selected MEV-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
MEV-associated proteins were procesed following the FASP protocol and submitted to LC-MS label-free analysis using a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry–quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker. Sample (200 ng) was directly loaded in a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nL/min with a 30 min gradient. Column was heated to 50 °C using an oven.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using PEAKS software using default settings (Bionformatics Solutions)  . Searches were carried out against a database consisting of Mtb H37Rv protein entries (NCBI), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR < 1% were considered for further analysis. Data (Area) were loaded onto Perseus platform  and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation) before statistical analysis (Student’s t-test). Quantification of protein abundance was performed by calculating the Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) . The NSAF is the number of spectral counts (SpC, the total number of MS/MS spectra) detected for a specific protein, k, divided by the protein’s length (L), divided by the sum of SpC/L for all N proteins in the experiment . NSAF values were calculated from three biological replicates of the indicated conditions. Alternatively, identified proteins were classified by functional category according to Mycobrowser database.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis (TB) still represents a major global health problem affecting over 10 million people worldwide. The gold-standard procedures for TB diagnosis are culture and nucleic acid amplification techniques. In this context, both lipoarabinomannan (LAM) urine test and rapid molecular tests have been major game changers. However, the low sensitivity of the former and the cost and the prohibitive infrastructure requirements to scale-up in endemic regions of the latter, make the improvement of the TB diagnostic landscape a priority. Most forms of life produce extracellular vesicles (EVs), including bacteria despite differences in bacterial cell envelope architecture. We demonstrated that <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (<i>Mtb</i>), the causative agent of TB, produces EVs <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> as part of a sophisticated mechanism to manipulate host cellular physiology and to evade the host immune system. In a previous serology study, we showed that the recognition of several mycobacterial extracellular vesicles (MEV) associated proteins could have diagnostic properties. In this study, we pursued to expand the capabilities of MEVs in the context of TB diagnostics by analyzing the composition of MEVs isolated from <i>Mtb</i> cultures submitted to iron starvation and, testing their immunogenicity against a new cohort of serum samples derived from TB+ patients, latent TB-infected (LTBI) patients and healthy donors. We found that despite the stringent condition imposed by iron starvation, <i>Mtb</i> reduces the number of MEV associated proteins relative to iron sufficient conditions. In addition, TB serology revealed three new MEV antigens with specific biomarker capacity. These results suggest the feasibility of developing a point-of-care (POC) device based on selected MEV-associated proteins.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Immunogenicity, Diagnostic biomarkers, Serology., Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Build. 800 Bizkaia Tech. Park 48160 Derio (Spain)
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Build. 800 Bizkaia Tech. Park 48160 Derio (Spain)


