### Accession
PXD037524

### Title
Myeloperoxidase is a Critical Mediator of Anthracycline-induced Cardiomyopathy

### Description
The anthracycline doxorubicin is a commonly used chemotherapeutic drug that induces cardiomyopathy in almost 10% of patients. The aim of this study was to examine the role of the leukocyte-derived enzyme Myeloperoxidase (MPO) in pathogenesis of anthracycline-induced Cardiomyopathy (AICM). We performed proteomics on whole heart tissue of MPO-deficient mice on C57BL/6J background and wildtype (WT) littermates seven days after intravenous injection of the anthracycline Doxorubicin (20 mg/kg bodyweight, dissolved in saline) or saline (NaCl).

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cardiac tissue samples were homogenized in Precellys ceramic kit tubes (1.4 mm, 2.0 ml) containing 200 µl ice-cold Urea lysis buffer (8M Urea in 50mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonate [TEAB]) supplemented with 50x Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) using Precellys 24 tissue homogenizer (Bertin Instruments, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France). Supernatants were collected after repetitive vortexing and centrifugation, incubated with 25 Units Benzonase HC for 30 minutes at 37°C to degrade nucleic acids and centrifuged again. Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to determine protein concentrations. 50 µg of protein per sample were transferred to a 1.5 ml tube and incubated with Dithiothreitol (final concentration of 5 mM) for 1 hour at RT. Next, samples were incubated with Chloroacetamide at a final concentration of 40 mM for 30 minutes at RT in the dark and, subsequently, with Lys-C protease at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 for 4 hours at RT. Samples were diluted with 50 mM TEAB to achieve a final concentration of Urea ≤ 2 M and incubated with Trypsin at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 overnight at RT. The next day, formic acid at a final concentration of 1% was added to stop enzymatic digestion and peptides were purified with SDB-RPS (styrenedivinylbenzene reverse phase sulfonate) polymer sorbent StageTips (CDS Analytical, Oxford, PA, USA). Aliquots from each sample were pooled and the pool was used for spectrum library generation by narrow window DIA of six 100 m/z gas phase fractions (GPF) covering the range from 400 m/z to 1000 m/z (Searle 2020). The Orbitrap was operated in DIA mode. MS1 scans of the respective 100 m/z gas phase fraction were acquired at 60k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 60 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans of the corresponding 100 m/z region were acquired in 24 x 4 m/z staggered windows resulting in 48 nominal 2 m/z windows after demultiplexing. MS2 settings were 30 k resolution, 60 ms maximum injection time and an AGC target of 100%. All scans were stored as centroid. MS1 scans were acquired from 390 m/z to 1010 m/z at 15k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 22 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans ranged from 400 m/z to 1000 m/z and were acquired at 15 k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 100%. DIA scans covering the precursor range from 400 - 1000 m/z and were acquired in 75 x 8 m/z staggered windows, resulting in effective 4 m/z windows after deconvolution. All scans were stored as centroid.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were demultiplexed and transformed to mzML files using the msconvert module in Proteowizard. MzML files were converted to dia file format in DIA-NN 1.8. A Mouse canonical Swissprot fasta file was converted to a Prosit upload file with the convert tool in encyclopedia 0.9.0 (Searle 2018) using default settings: Trypsin, up to 1 missed cleavage, range 396 m/z – 1004 m/z, charge states 2+ and 3+, default charge state 3 and NCE 33. The csv file was uploaded to the Prosit webserver and converted to a spectrum library in generic text format (Gessulat 2019). The resulting library (16998 protein isoforms, 21698 protein groups and 1404872 precursors) was searched in DIA-NN 1.8 (Demichev 2020) with the 6 GPF runs to generate a project specific library (7177 protein isoforms, 7546 protein groups and 45716 precursors). The applied settings were: Output will be filtered at 0.01 FDR, N-terminal methionine excision enabled, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1, min peptide length set to 7, max peptide length set to 30, min precursor m/z set to 400, Max precursor m/z set to 1000, cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification. 10 sample files were searched with DIA-NN 1.8 and the project library. In addition to the settings used for library generation, Rt dependend normalization and relaxed protein inference was used. Results were filtered on library q-value, protein group q-value, and global q-value of 0.01 or lower prior to MaxLFQ calculations using the DIA-NN R-package. Further data processing was performed in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiotoxicity, Aicm, Mpo, Doxorubicin, Polymorphonuclear neutrophils

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Mollenhauer
Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


