### Accession
PXD019633

### Title
Serum Proteomic Profiling of Myasthenia gravis

### Description
The project was focused on the serum proteomic profiling of the neuromuscular autoimmune disease, Myasthenia gravis (MG). The project aimed to identify candidate serum proteins to understand the disease better. To eliminate any typical autoimmune response Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was included as a reference disease to the sample group.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomasie staining. Each lane was excised into 26 bands, then each band was subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as previously described (Khan et al., 2015). The resulting digested peptides were vacuum dried and re-suspended in solvent A (5% Acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% formic acid) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Thermo Scientific EASY-nL 1000 system inline Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer using identical parameters as previously described (Piragasam, R.S 2020) with the alteration of running a 75 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files corresponding to samples comprising an entire gel lane were grouped together and searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14’s SEQUEST search algorithm using the reviewed, nonredundant H. sapiens complete proteome retrieved from UniprotKB. Search parameters were as follows: event detector mass precision= 2ppm; spectrum selector minimum precursor mass = 350Da, maximum precursor mass = 5000Da; maximum collision energy = 1000; input data digestion enzyme = trypsin (full) with maximum missed cleavage sites = 2; precursor mass tolerance =10ppm with fragment mass tolerance =0.01Da; dynamic modifications to peptides = oxidation of methionine(+15.995Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984Da); static modifications to peptides = carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da). During data processing, the “Precursor Ion Area Detector” node of Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14’s SEQUEST workflow editor was implemented to quantify the extracted ion chromatogram for each protein identified from the raw data. Searched results were filtered using a minimum of two medium confidence peptides per protein. (Piragasam et al., 2020)

### Publication Abstract
Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disease associated with severe neuromuscular weakness. Diagnostic confirmation of MG is typically delayed and secured in about 85% and 50% of patients with generalized and ocular MG, respectively with serum antibodies. We have identified a sensitive and specific diagnostic biomarker for various MG serotypes with quantitative proteomics. Serum proteomes of 18 individuals (MG patients, healthy controls (HC), Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) were quantified in a pilot study and occurrence of high residual fibrinogen was validated by immunoblotting and further investigated by targeted mass spectrometry on the sera of 79 individuals (31 MG of various serotypes, 30 HC, 18 RA). Initial proteomic analysis identified high residual fibrinogen in MG patient sera which was then validated by antibody-based testing. Subsequently, a blinded study of independent samples showed 100% differentiation of MG patients from controls. A final serological quantification of 14 surrogate peptides derived from &#x3b1;-, &#x3b2;-, and &#x3b3;-subunits of fibrinogen in 79 individuals revealed fibrinogen to be highly specific and 100% sensitive for MG (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.00001), with a remarkable average higher abundance of&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1000-fold over control groups. Our unanticipated discovery of high levels of residual serum fibrinogen in all MG patients can secure rapid bedside diagnosis of MG.

### Keywords
Human, Myasthenia gravis, Lcmsms, Rheumatoid arthritis, Serum, Mg, Ra

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine &amp; Dentistry, University of Alberta, Canada; Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine &amp; Dentistry, University of Alberta, Canada
Department of Medicine, University of Alberta

### Submitter
Faraz Hussain

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Fahlman
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine &amp; Dentistry, University of Alberta, Canada; Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine &amp; Dentistry, University of Alberta, Canada


