### Accession
PXD013327

### Title
Quantitative proteomic alterations of human iPSC-based neuronal development indicate early onset of Rett syndrome.

### Description
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurodevelopmental disease often caused by mutations in the X-linked gene encoding methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2). The mechanisms by which impaired MeCP2 induces the pathological abnormalities in the brain is not understood. To understand the molecular mechanisms involved in disease onset, we used an RTT patient induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based model and applied an in-depth high-resolution quantitative mass spectrometry-based analysis during early stages of neuronal development. Our data provided evidence of proteomic alteration at developmental stages long before the phase that symptoms of RTT syndrome become apparent. Differential expression increased from early to late neural stem cell phases, although proteins involved in immunity, metabolic processes and calcium signaling were already affected at initial stages. This data can help development of new biomarkers and therapeutic approaches in RTT syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed, reduced and alkylated in lysis buffer (1 % sodiumdeoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and 100 mM TRIS, pH 8.0 supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) and protease inhibitor (Complete mini EDTA-free, Roche). After sonication, samples were centifugated at 20,000 x g for 20 min. Protein concentration was estimated by a BCA protein assay. Reduction was done with 5 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55°C for 30 min followed by alkylation with 10 mM Iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark. Proteins were then digested into peptides by LysC (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50) at 37°C for 4 h and trypsin (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50) at 37°C for 16 h. Peptides were then desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters). Aliquots of ~ 100 µg of each sample were chemically labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher).In total three TMT mixtures were created for each biological replicate. Peptides were resuspended in 80 µl resuspension buffer containing 50 mM HEPES buffer and 12.5 % acetonitrile (ACN, pH 8.5). TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 80 µl anhydrous ACN of which 20 µl was added to the peptides. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was then quenched using 5% hydroxylamine in HEPES buffer for 15 min at room temperature. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at 1:1 ratios followed by vacuum centrifuge to near dryness and desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using Proteome Discover (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Peak list was searched using Swissprot database (version 2014_08) with the search engine Sequest HT. The following parameters were used. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed.  Taxonomy was set for Homo sapiens and precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 p.p.m. with 0.05 Da fragment ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini and oxidation of methionine residues were set as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as static modification. For the reporter ion quantification, integration tolerance was set to 20 ppm with the most confident centroid method. Results were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%. Finally, peptides lower than 6 amino-acid residues were discarded. Within each TMT experiment, reporter intensity values were normalized by summing the values across all peptides in each channel and then corrected for each channel by having the same summed value. After that the normalized S/N values were summed for all peptides. Finally proteins were Log2 transformed and normalized by median subtraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rett syndrome; ipsc; neuron differentiation; quantitative mass spectrometry; tmt-10plex

### Affiliations
S
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.

### Submitter
Suzy Varderidou

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.


