### Accession
PXD025375

### Title
CHN-1 and CHN-1 L141R interacting proteins

### Description
Proteostasis is achieved by quality control pathways that support the generation of correctly folded proteins, prevent protein misfolding and remove toxic proteins. The quality control E3 ligase CHIP ubiquitylates damaged proteins consigned by chaperone partners for disposal through the endo-lysosomal pathway, proteasomal degradation, or autophagy. Additionally, CHIP has been reported to modulate essential signaling pathways by precisely delivering a myriad of native proteins to destined fates. We aimed at understanding the substrate specificity and processivity through a “structure to function” approach, by examining the modeled 3D structure of the C. elegans ortholog of CHIP, CHN-1, based on the reported structure of murine CHIP. Using different model organisms and various genetic and biochemical analyses, we demonstrate that monomeric CHN-1/CHIP has preserved ubiquitylation activity and promotes longevity via the IIS pathway. The lack of monomer results in premature aging and neurodegenerative disorder. Our data reveal that autoubiquitylation plays an important role in the alteration between monomer and dimer. Together, the conserved dimer-monomer transition provides a molecular switch regulating CHIP activity in response to proteotoxic stress and aging.

### Sample Protocol
Worm lysate preparation For worm lysate preparation, 10 L (90mm) plates fully populated with non-starved N2 worms that were grown until adulthood (day 1) at 20°C were washed off with M9 buffer. These worms were collected in a falcon (15 mL) and washed thrice with M9 to remove the residual OP50 bacteria. After a short spin down to pellet the worms followed by complete removal of M9 buffer, the worm pellet was suspended in equal volume (mL/g) of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol and 0.1% (v/v) NP-40) added with PIC. Subsequently the mix was immediately flash frozen in liquid N2, thawed back 50% in RT, sonicated (15 cycles, 30 sec On/Off, Bioruptor® Pico, diagenode) at 4°C, centrifuged (15 min, 21,000 rcf, 4°C) and the supernatant were transferred to a new tube. Then the protein concentration was measure using PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit.   Co-immunoprecipitation of interactors Purified recombinant MYCCHN-1 and MYCCHN-1 L141R proteins were each incubated with the worm lysate with end to end rotation at RT for 30 min. Now the MYC tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated with their interactors using MYC-trap _MA (Chromotek) according to manufacturer’s instructions stringently. The co-immunoprecipitation was performed along with a MYC-trap_MA bead only negative control.  The samples eluted in 2x SDS sample buffer were run in SDS PAGE. From the protein gel, the samples for MS were prepared by In-gel digestion of proteins, followed by StageTip purification of peptides in the Proteomics facility at CECAD, Cologne, adhering to the facility protocol.   LC-MS All samples were measured by the Proteomics Facility at CECAD. The samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer attached with an EASY nLC 1200 (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) were injected into an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm lenght, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were eluted using solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) following isocratic gradient of 4-31% within 41 min, 31-58% within 9.0 min and 58-95% within 2 min. Followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 350-1650 m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The top 15 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.3 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. The AGC target was set to 1e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS raw data were processed using Maxquant (v1.5.3.8) with default parameters. The MS2 spectra were briefly searched against the Uniprot C. elegans (downloaded at 16.06.2018) database along with a list of common contaminants. Using target-decoy estimation method, the protein false discovery rates (Protein FDR) and PSM level (PSM FDR) were set to 1%. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while, oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. LFQ quantification was enabled with default settings and match-between runs option was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The high substrate selectivity of the ubiquitin/proteasome system is mediated by a large group of E3 ubiquitin ligases. The ubiquitin ligase CHIP regulates the degradation of chaperone-controlled and chaperone-independent proteins. To understand how CHIP mediates substrate selection and processing, we performed a structure-function analysis of CHIP and addressed its physiological role in Caenorhabditis elegans and human cells. The conserved function of CHIP in chaperone-assisted degradation requires dimer formation to mediate proteotoxic stress resistance and to prevent protein aggregation. The CHIP monomer, however, promotes the turnover of the membrane-bound insulin receptor and longevity. The dimer-monomer transition is regulated by CHIP autoubiquitylation and chaperone binding, which provides a feedback loop that controls CHIP activity in response to cellular stress. Because CHIP also binds other E3 ligases, such as Parkin, the molecular switch mechanism described here could be a general concept for the regulation of substrate selectivity and ubiquitylation by combining different E3s.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, C.elegans

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne
Institute for Genetics, CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne 

### Submitter
Thorsten Hoppe

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Hoppe
Institute for Genetics, CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne


