### Accession
PXD022500

### Title
293T cell mitotic AP-MS anti-SIRT6-FLAG 201113

### Description
The study found reciprocal regulation between SIRT6 and APC/C. While SIRT6 is ubiquitinated by APC/C and degraded, CDH1, a co-activator of APC/C, is also deacetylated by SIRT6 and degraded.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells stably expressing SIRT6-FLAG and empty vehicle were synchronized to mitosis with paclitaxel treatment. The cells were lysed and subjected to anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation. IP samples were separated with SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested and submitted to LC-MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the digestion product was separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.250 μL/min with an EASY-nLCII integrated nano-HPLC system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark), which was directly interfaced to a Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μH ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA, USA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The QE HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 3.0 software, and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (400-1800 m/z, 30 000 resolution) followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans in the ion trap at 35% normalized collision energy (CID).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the UniProt human database (version 16 June 2017, 89,105 sequences) using an in-house Sequest HT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; one missed cleavage was allowed; oxidation (M), carbamidomethylation (C) was set as dynamic modifications; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an Orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired in the linear ion trap. The searched data were further processed with the percolator function in Proteome Discoverer to filter with a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). The SAINT algorithm (http://sourceforge.net/projects/saint-apms) was used to evaluate the MS data (Choi et al, 2011). Proteins with SEQUEST score ≥ 40 in the overexpression sample and SAINT score ≥ 0.85 were considered as candidate interaction proteins. Candidate interactions were visualized using the STRING database (https:// string-db.org/) (Szklarczyk et al., 2019) with a threshold of 0.7.

### Publication Abstract
SIRT6 is an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent deacetylase that plays an important role in mitosis fidelity and genome stability. In the present study, we found that SIRT6 overexpression leads to mitosis defects and aneuploidy. We identified SIRT6 as a novel substrate of anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), which is a master regulator of mitosis. Both CDH1 and CDC20, co-activators of APC/C, mediated SIRT6 degradation via the ubiquitination-proteasome pathway. Reciprocally, SIRT6 also deacetylated CDH1 at lysine K135 and promoted its degradation, resulting in an increase in APC/C-CDH1-targeted substrates, dysfunction in centrosome amplification, and chromosome instability. Our findings demonstrate the importance of SIRT6 for genome integrity during mitotic progression and reveal how SIRT6 and APC/C cooperate to drive mitosis.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mitosis, 293t

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
School of Life Science, Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Helin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
School of Life Science, Tsinghua University


