### Accession
PXD009805

### Title
Membrane Proteomics Reveal Contrasting Adaptation Strategies For Marine Cyanobacteria

### Description
Shotgun proteomics focusing on the membrane proteomes, of four Synechococcus spp. strains namely CC9311 (clade I), CC9605 (Clade II), WH8102 (clade III) and CC9902 (clade IV)  were conducted to gain insight into the amount of resources these unicellular organisms invest into adaptation strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Synechococcus cell membranes were sedimented by differential centrifugation (150,000g, 45 minutes, 4 degree celcius). Whole membrane protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay with Bovine Serum Albumin as standard. Membrane proteins were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoressis(4-15%). Sixty micrograms of membrane proteins were loaded on the gel with three replicates for each species. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with coomassie fixing solution and agitated for 60 minutes. Subsequently, the gel was stained with colloidal coomassie concentrate and coomassie diluent solution with the ratio 4:1 for 3 hours follows by destaining solution overnight. Each gel lane was cut into 10 pieces and each pieces was further chopped and placed into a well of a 96-well plate. In order to destain, the gel pieces were briefly washed with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, then twice with acetonitrile (50%)/100mM ammonium bicarbonate (50%) for 10 minutes, and finally dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. The samples were air-dried and reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37degree celcius for 1 hour before alkylating in the dark with 50mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 1 hour. Then, the samples were briefly washed with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, acetonitrile (50%) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 minutes, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and then air-dried. Finally, samples, were digested with 12.5ng/mL in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for an hour on ice and then overnight at 37 degree celcius. Peptides resulting from trypsin digestion of proteins were extracted twice with Acetonitrile (50%)/formic acid (2%), dried, vacuum centrifuge, and reconstituted with 2% formic acid. The tryptic digest peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive Obitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000. A linear gradient of 1-50% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) was run over 50 minutes and increased to 85% in 2 minutes and maintained for 8 minutes at 85%. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and ion MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired over the m/z range 350-2000 at a resolution of 35,000 and an AGC (Automatic Gain Control) target value of 1x1,000,000 ions. For identification of peptides, the ten most abundant ions were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at isolation width of 3.0m/z. HCD normalized collision energy was set to 30% target ions that had been selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20sec.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Q-exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides spectra were searched against Synechococcus Cyanorak protein sequence database (extracted from http://application.sb-roscoff.fr/cyanorak/) using Byonic v2.6 (Protein Metrics Inc.) software. The search criteria were set as following: carbamidomethylation was set as fix modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. The maximum tolerances were set as 10 and 20ppm for the precursor and product ions, respectively and up to two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed and 1% protein false discovery rate cut off was set up in the search of protein identification. Proteins found were only counted if they were found with at least two unique peptides and presented in at least 2 of the 3 technical replicates. Proteins expression were quantified based on the label-free normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) method.

### Publication Abstract
Marine cyanobacteria genus Synechococcus are among the most abundant and widespread primary producers in the open ocean. Synechococcus strains belonging to different clades have adapted distinct strategies for growth and survival across a range of marine conditions. Clades I and IV are prevalent in colder, mesotrophic, coastal waters, while clades II and III prefer warm, oligotrophic open oceans. To gain insight into the cellular resources these unicellular organisms invest in adaptation strategies we performed shotgun membrane proteomics of four Synechococcus spp. strains namely CC9311 (clade I), CC9605 (clade II), WH8102 (clade III) and CC9902 (clade IV). Comparative membrane proteomes analysis demonstrated that CC9902 and WH8102 showed high resource allocation for phosphate uptake, accounting for 44% and 38% of overall transporter protein expression of the species. WH8102 showed high expression of the iron uptake ATP-binding cassette binding protein FutA, suggesting that a high binding affinity for iron is possibly a key adaptation strategy for some strains in oligotrophic ocean environments. One protein annotated as a phosphatase 2c (Sync_2505 and Syncc9902_0387) was highly expressed in the coastal mesotrophic strains CC9311 and CC9902, constituting 14%-16% of total membrane protein, indicating a vital, but undefined function, for strains living in temperate mesotrophic environments.

### Keywords
Cyanobacteria, Membrane, Transporter

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Fallen Teoh

### Lab Head
Dr Ian T. Paulsen
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia


