### Accession
PXD021858

### Title
ApoC-III is a novel inducer of human valvular calcification

### Description
Pharmacological interventions to treat valvular calcification are not currently part of clinical guidelines. Low-density lipoprotein lowering therapies to treat calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) failed in clinical trials. However, apolipoproteins are known promotors of atherosclerosis and may play a role in CAVD pathogenesis beyond their lipid-binding capabilities. Lipoprotein particles carry oxidized lipids that promote valvular disease, but whether apolipoproteins themselves possess pathogenic properties in CAVD is less clear. We assessed 12 apolipoproteins in non-fibrotic/non-calcific (NF/NC), fibrotic (F) and calcific (C) aortic valve tissues by proteomics and immunohistochemistry and evaluated effects of enriched apolipoproteins on calcification. Eight apolipoproteins (apoA-I, apoA-II, apoA-IV, apoB, apoC-III, apoD, apoL-I and apoM) were enriched in the C vs. NF/NC tissues. Apo(a), apoB, apoC-III, apoE and apoJ colocalized with the disease-prone fibrosa and calcific regions on histological sections. Circulating apoC-III on lipoprotein(a) was identified as a potential biomarker of aortic stenosis incidence and progression, but whether apoC-III also contributes to CAVD is unknown. ApoC-III was increased in F and C tissues and observed within the calcification-prone fibrosa layer as well as around calcification and induced calcification in primary human valvular cell cultures via a mitochondrial dysfunction/inflammation-mediated calcification pathway. This study provides the first assessment of a broad array of apolipoproteins in CAVD tissues, demonstrates that specific apolipoproteins associate with valvular calcification, and implicates apoC-III as an active, modifiable driver of CAVD beyond its potential role as a biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
AV dissection and proteolysis: AV leaflets were obtained from valve replacement surgeries for aortic valve stenosis performed at Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH). We segmented each AV leaflet into the three stages reflecting non-fibrotic/non-calcific (NF/NC), fibrotic (F) and calcific (C). Transition zones were excluded from all analyses. The tissue samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and pulverized with a hammer. The resulting tissue powder was re-suspended in 100 μl RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland). The samples were sonicated to shear the DNA and to homogenize the tissue (Branson Sonifier 450, USA). We performed protein precipitation by adding 1 ml of 2:1 chloroform:methanol to each 100 ul of sample. Protein content was quantified using BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). For proteolysis, we used the trypsin (Promega, USA) plus RapiGest (Waters, USA) strategy using 15 μg of protein per sample. The resulting tryptic peptide solutions were desalted by Oasis Hlb 1cc (10 mg) columns (Waters, USA), dried with a tabletop speed vacuum (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and resuspended in 40 μl of 5% acetonitrile (OptimaTM LC-MS grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and 5% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) prepared in OptimaTM LC-MS grade water (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for subsequent analysis by parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry.  In vitro VIC calcification and proteomics assays: VICs plated in 48-well plates (Corning, USA) were cultured in control normal medium (termed NM) containing DMEM with 5% FBS, or procalcifying medium (termed PM) containing, DMEM with 5% FBS, 2 mmol/L NaH2PO4 (Sigma-Aldrich) (pH 7.4) and 50 μg/mL L-ascorbic acid. VICs were treated with commercially available purified human apoC-III (ultra pure human apoCIII, Academy Biomedical Company Inc, USA) or apoA-I (ultra pure human apoAI, Academy Biomedical Company Inc, USA). For the calcification assay and VIC proteomics analyses, VICs were incubated for 7 and 14 days. For the proteomics analyses, VICs from duplicate wells of the calcification assay were lysed with RIPA buffer supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein content was quantified using the BCA kit. For proteolysis we used the iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics GmbH, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, using 7.5 μg of protein per sample. Eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 40 μl of 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid prepared in OptimaTM LC-MS grade water for subsequent analysis.  Mass spectrometry: Apolipoprotein peptide library and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Peptide samples were analyzed with the high resolution/accuracy Q Exactive mass spectrometer fronted with a Nanospray FLEX ion source, coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Scientific). We first analyzed the newly prepared AV peptide samples using unbiased peptide sampling (DDA), in order to confirm apolipoprotein peptides. The DDA analytical gradient was run at 300 nl/min from 5 to 18% Solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 120 minutes, followed by four minutes of 95% Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set to 140 K resolution, and the top 10 precursor ions (within a scan range of 380-2000 m/z) were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD, collision energy 25% (+/- 2.5%), isolation width 1.6 m/z, dynamic exclusion enabled (20 s), and resolution set to 17.5 K).   A peptide library for 14 apolipoproteins was generated using apolipoprotein peptides observed from DDA experiments above and plasma HDL samples analyzed in previous studies (25,26) (Supporting Information 2 and 3). VIC lysate mass spectrometry: VIC peptide samples were analyzed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer fronted with an EASY-Spray Source (heated at 45°C) and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump. Peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap analytical column, 75 μm × 20 mm (pre-column), and an EASY-Spray LC column, 75 μm × 250 mm. The analytical gradient was run at 300 nl/minute from 5 to 21% Solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid) for 75 minutes, 21 to 30 % Solvent B for 15 minutes, followed by 10 minutes of 95% Solvent B. Solvent A was water/0.1% formic acid. The acetonitrile and water were MS-grade. The Orbitrap analyzer was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time within a scan range of 375–1,500 m/z (60 s dynamic exclusion enabled) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID; collision energy, 30%; isolation window, 1.6 m/z; AGC target, 1.0 e4). The ion trap analyzer was set to a rapid scan rate for peptide sequencing (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis   Both human AV and VIC: MS/MS data were queried against the Human UniProt database (downloaded November, 2018) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm via Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (PD2.2). Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. In order to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample, we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were: RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of 5. Total peptide amount was used for normalization. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).  AV and VIC proteomics data analysis   For PCAs and heat maps, we filtered out genes or proteins by their q-value of multiple group comparisons. The q-value is the proportion of the rejected null hypotheses which are erroneously rejected and is a type of false discovery rate. The q-value was calculated using Qlucore.    AV proteomics: Proteins with ≥3 unique peptides were included in the analysis. The multi-group analysis compared proteins from the three CAVD tissues with a q-value ≤0.3. Variances due to sample processing batch effects were accounted for in the multi-group comparison (Qlucore Omics Explorer). To plot the relative abundances of individual proteins, the normalized PD2.2 protein abundances were used. Statistical analyses of these data were performed using GraphPad PRISM (GraphPad Software, USA) and SPSS (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.   VIC in vitro proteomics: Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides were included in the analysis. The normalized PD2.2 protein abundances were used. For the statistical analysis, we used in-house scripts of R v3.1 (http://www.R-project.org/) and Python v2.7.10 and v3.4 (http://www.python.org). Enriched proteins were defined by a q-value ≤0.1 between NM, PM and PM + ApoC-III. For the protein modules and pathway analyses (Fig. 6A/B, Supporting Information 4A/B) differentially enriched proteins with a q-value ≤0.1 were considered with a fold change >1 between apoC-III and NM or PM, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Calcific aortic valve disease; valvular interstitial cells; fibrosis; lipids; apoc-iii

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


