### Accession
PXD018367

### Title
Patient-derived scaffolds uncover breast cancer promoting properties of the microenvironment

### Description
Tumor cells interact with the microenvironment that specifically supports and promotes tumor development. Key components in the tumor environment have been linked to various aggressive cancer features and can further influence the presence of subpopulations of cancer cells with specific functions, including cancer stem cells and migratory cells. To model and further understand the influence of specific microenvironments we have developed an experimental platform using cell-free patient-derived scaffolds (PDSs) from primary breast cancers infiltrated with standardized breast cancer cell lines. This PDS culture system induced a series of orchestrated changes in differentiation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, stemness and proliferation of the cancer cell population, where an increased cancer stem cell pool was confirmed using functional assays. Furthermore, global gene expression profiling showed that PDS cultures were similar to xenograft cultures. Mass spectrometry analyses of cell-free PDSs identified subgroups based on their protein composition that were linked to clinical properties, including tumor grade. Finally, we observed that an induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related genes in cancer cells growing on the PDSs were significantly associated with clinical disease recurrences in breast cancer patients. Patient-derived scaffolds thus mimics in vivo-like growth conditions and uncovers unique information about the malignancy-inducing properties of tumor microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
decellurized tumor tissue using detergent washes, cut and homogenized, protein estimation by BSA assay, filter-aided sample preparation including reduction (DTT), alkylation (MMTS) and double-digestion by trypsin, TMT-10plex labeling, reverse-phase purification using C18, nLC-MS/MS on a Thermo Fusion

### Data Protocol
TMT channels not used: TMT set1 - 129N, TMT set2 - 127C, 131. database search using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with Mascot version 2.3.2, SwissProt database human (April 2015, 20205 sequences), 0 miscleavages by trypsin accepted, dynamic mod: oxidation(M), static mod: TMT-10plex, methylthio(C), precursor tol: 10ppm, fragment tol: 500mmu, quantification on unique peptides only, 2 peptides per protein required for quantification

### Publication Abstract
Tumor cells interact with the microenvironment that specifically supports and promotes tumor development. Key components in the tumor environment have been linked to various aggressive cancer features and can further influence the presence of subpopulations of cancer cells with specific functions, including cancer stem cells and migratory cells. To model and further understand the influence of specific microenvironments we have developed an experimental platform using cell-free patient-derived scaffolds (PDSs) from primary breast cancers infiltrated with standardized breast cancer cell lines. This PDS culture system induced a series of orchestrated changes in differentiation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, stemness and proliferation of the cancer cell population, where an increased cancer stem cell pool was confirmed using functional assays. Furthermore, global gene expression profiling showed that PDS cultures were similar to xenograft cultures. Mass spectrometry analyses of cell-free PDSs identified subgroups based on their protein composition that were linked to clinical properties, including tumor grade. Finally, we observed that an induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related genes in cancer cells growing on the PDSs were significantly associated with clinical disease recurrences in breast cancer patients. Patient-derived scaffolds thus mimics in vivo-like growth conditions and uncovers unique information about the malignancy-inducing properties of tumor microenvironment.

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Infiltration, Malignancy, Scaffold, Differentiation, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


