### Accession
PXD008909

### Title
Phoneutria nigriventer Proteome

### Description
We used a bottom up to obtain a proteomic overview of the venomous extract of the Phoneutria nigriventer venom.

### Sample Protocol
Venom sample was extracted by electrical stimulation of the chelicerae with modifications and submited to LC–MS MudPIT analyses. Briefly, 100 μg were solubilized in 100 μL of water, and precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (6.1 N TCA, Sigma) to a final concentration of 25% (p/v) and held overnight at 4 °C. After centrifugation (14.000 g for 30 min at 4 °C), the pellet was washed twice with 500 μL ice-cold acetone and then air dried. The pellet was solubilized in 100 μL of 8Murea in 100mMTris–HCl, pH 8.5. Disulfide-bridge cysteine residues were reduced by 1 M Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The thiol groups were alkylated by adding 500 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM, and the solution was incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin (Promega)was added to a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme to substrate wt/wt) and incubated at 37 °C overnight in the dark. The digestion was stopped by adding 90% formic acid to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) followed by centrifugation (14.000 g) for 30 min, at 4 °C. Supernatant protein digests were collected and stored at −20 °C prior to analysis. The digested peptide samples were loaded onto capillary columns (100 μm internal diameter) packed with two different matrixes: a strong cation exchange (Luna 5 μm, Phenomenex, Ca; 2.5 cm) followed by reversed phase (Aqua C18 5 μm, Phenomenex, Ca; 2.5 cm). Then, peptide desaltingwas performed using a 12 cm column (75 μminternal diameter) packed with the same reversed phase matrix. Mass spectrometry was performed using an automated 12-stepMudPIT separation method [26]. Eluent solutions were: A (water/acetonitrile/formic acid — 95:5:0.1 v/v/v); B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid — 20:80:0.1, v/v/v) and solution C (ammonium acetate 500 mM, containing 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). For details, see Supplementary material — Sm 1. The flow rate was 0.150 μL/min. Peptides eluted from the MudPIT column were directly electrosprayed into the LTQ-XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA). HCD fragmentation was employed and MS1 data were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. MudPIT analysis was controlled by the XCalibur software (Thermo, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The resulting fragment spectra were analyzed using MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, UK) against the generated database of predicted proteins from the NGS transcriptome of P.nigrivinter, performed in the present work, with a parent and fragment tolerances of 0.1 Da. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were specified in MASCOT, as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Only peptides with a minimum of five amino acid residues and which showed significant threshold (p < 0.05) in Mascot-based score were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Phoneutria nigriventer is one of the largest existing true spiders and one of the few considered medically relevant. Its venom contains several neurotoxic peptides that act on different ion channels and chemical receptors of vertebrates and invertebrates. Some of these venom toxins have been shown as promising models for pharmaceutical or biotechnological use. However, the large diversity and the predominance of low molecular weight toxins in this venom have hampered the identification and deep investigation of the less abundant toxins and the proteins with high molecular weight. Here, we combined conventional and next-generation cDNA sequencing with Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT), to obtain an in-depth panorama of the composition of P. nigriventer spider venom. The results from these three approaches showed that cysteine-rich peptide toxins are the most abundant components in this venom and most of them contain the Inhibitor Cysteine Knot (ICK) structural motif. Ninety-eight sequences corresponding to cysteine-rich peptide toxins were identified by the three methodologies and many of them were considered as putative novel toxins, due to the low similarity to previously described toxins. Furthermore, using next-generation sequencing we identified families of several other classes of toxins, including CAPs (Cysteine Rich Secretory Protein-CRiSP, antigen 5 and Pathogenesis-Related 1-PR-1), serine proteinases, TCTPs (translationally controlled tumor proteins), proteinase inhibitors, metalloproteinases and hyaluronidases, which have been poorly described for this venom. This study provides an overview of the molecular diversity of P. nigriventer venom, revealing several novel components and providing a better basis to understand its toxicity and pharmacological activities.

### Keywords
Venom, Spider, Proteome, Shot gun

### Affiliations
Laboratorio de Proteomica e Aracnídeos, Diretoria de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento, Fundação Ezequiel Dias - FUNED, Belo Horizonte, MG - Brazil
Ezequiel Dias Foundations

### Submitter
Marcia Borges

### Lab Head
Dr Márcia Helena Borges
Laboratorio de Proteomica e Aracnídeos, Diretoria de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento, Fundação Ezequiel Dias - FUNED, Belo Horizonte, MG - Brazil


