### Accession
PXD034543

### Title
Integrin beta4 positive versus integrin beta4 negative human keratinocytes

### Description
Proteomics analysis of sorted human basal and suprabasal keratinocytes to confirm the distinct protein expression in the sorted cell populations.

### Sample Protocol
100’000 freshly isolated and sorted keratinocytes (iβ4+ or iβ4—) were washed twice in PBS and stored at -80°C until further processing. Cells from 4 different donors were collected. Peptide samples were prepared according to established protocols {Wiśniewski, 2009 #7489}, with slight modifications. Briefly, proteins were extracted by incubating thawed cell pellets in 100 μl of 100 mM Tris/HCL (pH 8.2). Samples were incubated for 5min at 95°C on a thermoshaker (1000rpm), then vortexed and spun down. Protein concentration was determined using Qubit and 50 μg of protein was used for further processing using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). SDS lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT) was added at a 1:10 sample to buffer ratio, then vortexed and spun down. 30 μl of sample were mixed with 200 μl of UA (8M urea in 100mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.2) and loaded onto the filter unit. Filters were centrifuged at 14’000g for 20min at RT. Filter were washed with 200 μl of UA. 100 μl of IAA solution (0.05M iodoacetamide in UA) were added to the filter, mixed at 600rpm in thermomixer for 1min, and then left to incubate for 5min at RT. After centrifugation, filters were washed twice with 100 μl UA and 100 μl of 0.5M NaCl. This was followed by tryptic digestion (120 μl of 0.05M triethylammoniumbicarbonate in water, containing trypsin in 1:50 ratio of trypsin to protein) of present proteins on the filter. Samples were mixed at 600rpm in thermo-mixer for 1min and then incubated overnight in a humidified chamber. After tryptic digest, filters were centrifuged (14’000g, 20min, RT) and the filtrate was collected. The filtrate was then acidified with 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. After clean-up, samples were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and cleaned up using C18 stage tips (Pierce), following manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). The device was run in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode using XCalibur control software (ThermoFisher). Automated quality control was conducted every 3 samples. Data and sample annotation was done using b-fabric (https://fgcz-bfabric.uzh.ch/bfabric/). Identification was carried out using MASCOT (Matrix Science), emplying decoys. Protein quantification of the DIA data sets was carried out using Spectronaut (Biognosys).Filters for the generation of volcano plots are set to >= 1.5 absolute fold change. All p-values are corrected for multiple testing (Benjamini & Hochberg, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
The basal layer of human interfollicular epidermis has been described to harbour both quiescent keratinocyte stem cells and a transit amplifying cell population that maintains the suprabasal epidermal layers. We performed immunofluorescence analyses and revealed that the main proliferative keratinocyte pool in vivo resides suprabasally. We isolated from the human epidermis two distinct cell populations, the basal and the suprabasal keratinocytes, according to the expression of integrin &#x3b2;4 (i&#x3b2;4). We compared basal i&#x3b2;4<sup>+</sup> or suprabasal i&#x3b2;4<sup>-</sup> keratinocytes with respect to their proliferation and colony-forming ability and their Raman spectral properties. In addition, we generated dermo-epidermal substitutes using freshly isolated and sorted basal i&#x3b2;4<sup>+</sup> or suprabasal i&#x3b2;4<sup>-</sup> keratinocytes and transplanted them on immuno-compromised rats. We show that suprabasal i&#x3b2;4<sup>-</sup> keratinocytes acquire a similar proliferative capacity as basal i&#x3b2;4<sup>+</sup> keratinocytes after two weeks of culture in vitro, with expression of high levels of i&#x3b2;4 and downregulation of K10 expression. In addition, both basal i&#x3b2;4<sup>+</sup> and suprabasal i&#x3b2;4<sup>-</sup> keratinocytes acquire authentic self-renewing properties during the in vitro 3D-culture phase and are able to generate and maintain a fully stratified epidermis for 16 weeks in vivo. Therefore, against the leading dogma, we propose that human suprabasal keratinocytes can retro-differentiate into true basal stem cells in a wound situation and/or when in contact with the basement membrane.

### Keywords
Stem cells, Integrin beta4, Human epidermis

### Affiliations
University Children's Hospital - Tissue Biology Research Unit
University Children's Hospital, Tissue Biology Research Unit, Switzerland

### Submitter
Luca Pontiggia

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Biedermann
University Children's Hospital, Tissue Biology Research Unit, Switzerland


