### Accession
PXD007569

### Title
Human islet of Langerhans grown on nanosubstrates LC-MSMS

### Description
Intensive efforts are focused on identifying regulators of human pancreatic islet cell growth and maturation to accelerate development of therapies for diabetes. In the present study we evaluate the contribution of the physical properties of the extracellular matrix in supporting long term culture of human islets in vitro. We used metal oxide layers with tailored nanoscale roughness to fabricate scaffolds. Their suitability to support long term culture of human islets was investigated through assessment of β-cell survival, differentiation and function by using a proteomic approach to evaluate the molecular mechanisms involved. Proteomic analysis confirmed that ns-ZrOx promoted the activation of a transcriptional and translational program leading to activation of pro-survival and pro-differentiation signalling pathways. The process was driven by a mechanotransductive pathway driven by nanostructured topology, via remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton nuclear architecture and increase of oxygen sensor PDH2 Our data suggest that β-cells relay on nanotopography features to regulate their differentiation and survival. Tailored nanostructured substrates may provide a unique strategy to identify novel hints for tissue engineering and molecular /pharmacological targets of intervention to treat diabetes mellitus.

### Sample Protocol
Human and Islet Isolation and Cell Culture Ten preparations (3 women and 3 men, donor age 51 ± 4 years, BMI 23.8 ± 2.1 kg/m2) were used. The islets were cultured in RPMI culture medium containing 5.5 mmol/L glucose, 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 0.7 mM Glutamine, 50 units/mL penicillin, 50 μg/mL streptomycin and plated within 1-5 days of isolation. Islet β-cell purity was evaluated in dispersed islet cells by insulin immunocytochemistry and averaged 80% ± 10%.   Islet and cell culture on nanostructured substrates 2000 pancreatic islets were dispersed by a brief digestion (22°C for 2 min) in non-enzymatic cell dissociation solution (Sigma) supplemented with 1mg/ml trypsin and 0.25 mg/ml DNAse in PBS. At the end of the incubation, trypsin was diluted with PBS, islets were collected by centrifugation and the resulting pellet was resuspended in 500 µl of complete medium. 100 µl aliquots of islet suspension were transferred onto glass coverslips coated with gelatin (50 mg/ml), nanostructured (15 and 20 nm) and flat (10 nm) zirconia. After 6 hours, medium was added and islets were maintained in culture for up to 35 days under standard conditions. Once a week, half of the total medium was substitute with fresh new medium.  Shotgun mass spectrometry and label free quantification The cells were washed with PBS containing 1 tablet Complete mini protease inhibitor (Roche),      10 nM Calyculin A, 10 nM Microcystin-LR, 1X Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail and scratched from the substrates with a cell scraper, pelletted by centrifugation and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry. After reduction and derivatisation, the proteins were digested with trypsin sequence grade trypsin (Roche) for 16 h at 37 °C using a protein:trypsin ratio of 1:50. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). Gradient: 1% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 1-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Five technical replicate analyses of each sample were performed. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human Uniprot sequence database (release 04.07.2014) and the mouse Uniprot sequence database (release 29.06.2015). The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built-in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using fast LFQ. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide and 1% at the protein level against a concatenated target decoy database, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.4.0.6, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/). Only proteins present and quantified in at least 3 out of 4 technical repeats were considered as positively identified in a sample and used for statistical analyses. An ANOVA test (false discovery rate 0.05) was carried out to identify proteins differentially expressed among the three conditions. Common proteins were considered differentially expressed if they were present only in one of the growing condition or showed significant t-test difference (cut-off at 5% permutation-based False Discovery Rate). These proteins were filtered for further analyses. We filtered out proteins known to be pancreas contaminants by comparing the proteins identified with the high quality islets proteome described in literature. Proteins differently expressed were clustered according to their functions using the Panther platform and DAVID software  to cluster enriched annotation groups of Molecular Function, Biological Processes, Biological Cellular Component, KEGG pathway, molecular complexes (CORUM) and keywords within the set of identified proteins. Proteins-proteins interactions were analyzed by Reactome  and String. Functional grouping was based on p-value (≤0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Ex vivo expansion and differentiation of human pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell are enabling steps of paramount importance for accelerating the development of therapies for diabetes. The success of regenerative strategies depends on their ability to reproduce the chemical and biophysical properties of the microenvironment in which &#x3b2;-cells develop, proliferate and function. In this paper we focus on the biophysical properties of the extracellular environment and exploit the cluster-assembled zirconia substrates with tailored roughness to mimic the nanotopography of the extracellular matrix. We demonstrate that &#x3b2;-cells can perceive nanoscale features of the substrate and can convert these stimuli into mechanotransductive processes which promote long-term in vitro human islet culture, thus preserving &#x3b2;-cell differentiation and function. Proteomic and quantitative immunofluorescence analyses demonstrate that the process is driven by nanoscale topography, via remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton and nuclear architecture. These modifications activate a transcriptional program which stimulates an adaptive metabolic glucose response. Engineered cluster-assembled substrates coupled with proteomic approaches may provide a useful strategy for identifying novel molecular targets for treating diabetes mellitus and for enhancing tissue engineering in order to improve the efficacy of islet cell transplantation therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Nanosubstrates, Islet of langerhans

### Affiliations
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
University of Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy


