### Accession
PXD038366

### Title
Spatial proteome map of Cryptosporidium parvum sporozoite

### Description
Cryptosporidium is a leading cause of diarrheal disease in children and an important contributor to early childhood mortality. The parasite invades intestinal epithelial cells and remodels them extensively including building an elaborate interface structure. How this occurs at the molecular level is largely unknown. Here, we generated a whole-cell spatial proteome of the Cryptosporidium sporozoite using the spatial proteomics technology hyperLOPIT. These data in combination with genetic and cell-biological experimentation enabled the discovery of the Cryptosporidium secreted effector proteome, including a new secretory organelle.

### Sample Protocol
Sporozoites of Cryptosporidium parvum were obtained from purified oocysts, mechanically lysed by nitrogen cavitation, and fractionated by density-gradient centrifugation according to the hyperLOPIT method as previously described (see Barylyuk et al., 2020, Cell Host & Microbe 28, 752-766). Proteins extracted from 10 gradient fractions were reduced and alkylated, digested with trypsin, and the peptides were labelled with TMT10plex tags according to the manufacturer's procedure. The TMT10plex-tagged peptide samples were mixed and fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase (RP) UPLC, yielding 15-18 fractions that were then analysed in a 2-hour run by nanoflow low-pH RP-LC hyphenated online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with an SPS-MS3 method for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spectra were searched against the annotated protein sequences of Cryptosporidium parvum isolate Iowa II (3,944 entries retrieved from CryptoDB.org release 52 on 27.05.2021) and two proteins of Cryptosporidium parvum virus 1, an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) and a capsid protein (CP). Common contaminant proteins – e.g., human keratins, bovine serum albumin, porcine trypsin – from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, 115 entries, adapted from https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) were added to the database. The Sequest HT search engine was used. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The enzyme was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed. The static modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT6plex at the peptide N-terminus and lysine side chain. The dynamic modifications were TMT6plex at the side chains of serine, and threonine, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. In addition, the considered dynamic modifications of the protein N-terminus were acetylation, the loss of methionine, and the combination of the two. The false discovery rate of peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) was validated by Percolator v3.05.0 and only high-confidence peptides (FDR threshold 1%) of a minimum length of 6 amino acid residues were used for protein identification. The unmatched spectra were further searched against the same database with MS Amanda 2.0 using the same search parameters, except for not considering the protein N-terminal dynamic modifications. The PSM FDR was validated by Percolator as above. Strict parsimony was applied for protein grouping. The search results were merged globally by the search engine, and the protein FDR was controlled at 5% cut-off.  TMT reporter ion abundances were obtained in the Proteome Discoverer Reporter Ions Quantifier node using the most confident centroid method for peak integration with a 20 p.p.m. tolerance window. The isotopic impurity correction as per the manufacturer’s specification (TMT10plex Lot No. RJ239873) was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Cryptosporidium is a leading cause of diarrheal disease in children and an important contributor to early childhood mortality. The parasite invades and extensively remodels intestinal epithelial cells, building an elaborate interface structure. How this occurs at the molecular level and the contributing parasite factors are largely unknown. Here, we generated a whole-cell spatial proteome of the Cryptosporidium sporozoite and used genetic and cell biological experimentation to discover the Cryptosporidium-secreted effector proteome. These findings reveal multiple organelles, including an original secretory organelle, and generate numerous compartment markers by tagging native gene loci. We show that secreted proteins are delivered to the parasite-host interface, where they assemble into different structures including a ring that anchors the parasite into its unique epicellular niche. Cryptosporidium thus uses a complex set of secretion systems during and following invasion that act in concert to subjugate its host cell.

### Keywords
Dense granules, Cryptosporidium, Apicomplexa, Microneme, Rhoptry, Spatial proteome, Secretion, Small granules, Hyperlopit, Effectors, Sps-ms3, Organelle, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Konstantin Barylyuk

### Lab Head
Dr Ross F. Waller
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


