### Accession
PXD033006

### Title
Placental macrophage (Hofbauer cell) response to viral and bacterial ligands is influenced by fetal sex

### Description
Bacterial and viral infections of the placenta are associated with inflammation and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Hofbauer cells (HBCs) are specialised fetal-origin macrophages in the placental villi and are proposed to protect the fetus from vertical transmission of pathogens; however, they are poorly understood. Here, we have performed quantitative proteomics on term HBCs under resting conditions and following exposure to bacterial and viral pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), and investigated the contribution of fetal sex to these responses. Resting HBCs expressed a plethora of proteins pertinent to macrophage function, including chemokines, cytokines, Toll-like receptors, and classical and non-classical major histocompatibility complex class I and II molecules. HBCs mounted divergent responses to bacterial versus viral PAMPs but exhibited protein expression changes suggestive of a switch towards a more pro-inflammatory phenotype. A comparison between male and female HBCs, showed that the latter mounted a much stronger and wider response. Sexual dimorphism in HBCs was primarily associated with lipid metabolism in males and cytoskeleton organisation in females. We provide a novel and comprehensive understanding regarding the phenotype of term placental macrophages and their sex-dependent responses to infectious triggers.

### Sample Protocol
TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography. Aliquots of 50µg of each sample were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. An aliquot of 100ug of the pooled sample was desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry. High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded August 2020: 167789 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nano lc-msms, Human, Placental macrophages, Hofbauer cells

### Affiliations
Dept of Metabolism Digestion and Reproduction, Imperial College London, London, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Paschalia Pantazi

### Lab Head
Dr Beth Holder
Dept of Metabolism Digestion and Reproduction, Imperial College London, London, UK


