### Accession
PXD030266

### Title
Depletion of the RNA-binding protein PURA triggers changes in posttranscriptional gene regulation and loss of P-bodies

### Description
The RNA-binding protein PURA has been implicated in the rare, monogenetic, neurodevelopmental disorder PURA Syndrome. PURA binds both DNA and RNA and has been associated with various cellular functions. Only little is known about its main cellular functions and the molecular pathways affected upon PURA depletion. Here, we show that PURA is predominantly located in the cytoplasm, where it binds to thousands of mRNAs. Many of these transcripts change abundance in response to PURA depletion. The encoded proteins suggest a role for PURA in immune responses, mitochondrial function, autophagy and processing (P)-body activity. Intriguingly, reduced PURA levels decrease the expression of the integral P-body components LSM14A and DDX6, and strongly affect P-body formation in human cells. Furthermore, PURA knockdown results in stabilization of P-body-enriched transcripts, whereas other mRNAs decrease. Hence, reduced PURA levels, as reported in patients with PURA Syndrome, influence the formation and composition of this phase-separated RNA processing machinery. Our study on PURA provides a blueprint for the comprehensive understanding of the tight connection between P-body-associated RNA regulation and neurodevelopmental disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of protein lysates: Four independent biological replicates of PURA KD and CTRL HeLa cells were prepared as described above. Cell samples were collected by scraping them in PBS and subsequent centrifugation at 500 x g for 3 min. Cell pellets were lysed in 100 µl RIPA buffer and subsequently centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the amount of protein in the lysate was determined by Bradford assay (ROTI®Quant, Carl Roth).  Sample preparation for mass spectrometric analysis: 10 µg per sample were digested with Lys-C and trypsin using a modified FASP procedure {Wisniewski, 2009 #2499;Grosche, 2016 #2500}. Briefly, after reduction and alkylation using DTT and IAA, the proteins were centrifuged on a 30 kDa cutoff filter device (Sartorius) and washed each thrice with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were digested for 2 h at RT using 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and for 16 h at 37 °C using 1 µg trypsin (Promega). After centrifugation (10 min at 14 000 g), the eluted peptides were acidified with 0.5% TFA and stored at -20 °C. LC-MS/MS measurements: Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on a QExactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap cartridge and after 5 min eluted and separated on the C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters) by a 90 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC target of 3 x 10e6 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms from 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of 28, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with a AGC target of 10e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Unassigned charges, and charges of +1 and >8 were excluded from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative MS analysis:  Acquired raw data was analyzed in the MaxQuant software (MPI Biochemistry, Martinsried; version 1.6.7.0, (cite Tyanova et al., Nat. Protoc. 11, 2301–2319, 2016) for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Andromeda search engine, (cite Cox et al., Proteome Res. 10, 1794–1805, 2011) against the SwissProt Human database (Release 2020_02, 20435 sequences; 11,490,581 residues), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine. Identifications were filtered for a PSM false discovery rate < 1% and protein false discovery rate of 5%. Label-free quantifications were based on unique peptides applying the LFQ algorithm (cite Cox et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics MCP 13, 2513–2526, 2014) with LFQ min, count of 1 in combination with the default match-between runs settings, allowing for matching of identifications between the individual runs resulting in quantifications of MS features throughout the dataset. Differential protein expression was analyzed based on MaxQuant LFQ values using DEqMS (1.12.1) {Zhu, 2020 #2572}. We treated missing values as follows: If protein abundance was not measured in any of the samples in one condition it was set to zero, which results in infinite values for the calculated ratios. Peptides with two or more missing values in one condition were treated as non-quantifiable and no ratios were calculated. When only one value was missing per condition, the ratios were calculated on the other three samples.  P values were adjusted for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg correction. An advantage of DEqMS is that it implements scaling of (adjusted) P values to the number of detected unique peptides. We deemed proteins with a scaled adjusted P value < 0.05 significant. In the heatmap protein abundance is shown after z-score normalization.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA-binding protein PURA has been implicated in the rare, monogenetic, neurodevelopmental disorder PURA Syndrome. PURA binds both DNA and RNA and has been associated with various cellular functions. Only little is known about its main cellular roles and the molecular pathways affected upon PURA depletion. Here, we show that PURA is predominantly located in the cytoplasm, where it binds to thousands of mRNAs. Many of these transcripts change abundance in response to PURA depletion. The encoded proteins suggest a role for PURA in immune responses, mitochondrial function, autophagy and processing (P)-body activity. Intriguingly, reduced PURA levels decrease the expression of the integral P-body components LSM14A and DDX6 and strongly affect P-body formation in human cells. Furthermore, PURA knockdown results in stabilization of P-body-enriched transcripts, whereas other mRNAs are not affected. Hence, reduced PURA levels, as reported in patients with PURA Syndrome, influence the formation and composition of this phase-separated RNA processing machinery. Our study proposes PURA Syndrome as a new model to study the tight connection between P-body-associated RNA regulation and neurodevelopmental disorders.

### Keywords
Pura

### Affiliations
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Munich
Institute of Structural Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, 85764, Neuherberg, Germany; Institute of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, 89081, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Dierk Niessing
Institute of Structural Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, 85764, Neuherberg, Germany; Institute of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, 89081, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.


