### Accession
PXD020857

### Title
Implementation of microfluidics for antimicrobial susceptibility assays: issues and optimization requirements

### Description
Despite the continuous emergence of multi-drug resistant pathogens, the number of new antimicrobials reaching the market is critically low. Natural product peptides are a rich source of bioactive compounds, and advances in mass spectrometry have achieved unprecedented capabilities for the discovery and characterization of novel molecular species. However, traditional bioactivity assay formats hinder the discovery and biochemical characterization of natural product antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), necessitating large sample quantities and significant optimization of experimental parameters to achieve accurate/consistent activity measurements. Microfluidic devices offer a promising alternative to bulk assay systems. Herein, a microfluidics-based bioassay was compared to the traditional 96-well plate format in respective commercially-available hardware. Bioactivity in each assay type was compared using a Viola inconspicua peptide library screened against E. coli ATCC 25922. Brightfield microcopy was used to determine bioactivity in microfluidic channels while both common optical and fluorescence-based measurements of cell viability were critically assessed in plate-based assays. Exhibiting some variation in optical density and fluorescence-based measurements, all plate-based assays conferred bioactivity in late eluting V. inconspicua library fractions. However, significant differences in the bioactivity profiles of plate-based and microfluidic assays were found, and may be derived from the materials comprising each assay device or the growth/assay conditions utilized in each format. While new technologies are necessary to overcome the limitations of traditional bioactivity assays, we demonstrate that off-the-shelf implementation of microfluidic devices is non-trivial and significant method development/optimization is required before conventional use can be realized for sensitive and rapid detection of AMPs in natural product matrices.

### Sample Protocol
Viola inconspicua leaf tissue was harvested and extracted into 10% acetic acid. Extract was sterile-filtered (0.22 μm, Corning), filtered to remove high molecular weight components (30 kDa MWCO, Millipore), and dialyzed into 5 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7 to remove molecules < 1 kDa (0.1-1 kDa MWCO, SpectrumLabs). Small molecule components were removed by injecting the extract onto strong cation exchange (PolySulfoethyl A column, 100 mm × 4.6 mm, 3 μm particles, PolyLC) using a linear salt gradient (5 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7 to 500 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 3.0) and a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. Peptide-containing fractions were collected and combined, desalted with a C18 solid-phase extraction (100 mg, Waters Sep-Pak), dried down in a vacuum concentrator, and resuspended in water. A V. inconspicua reversed-phase peptide library was prepared by injecting this sample onto a reversed-phase column (Phenomenex Jupiter C18 column, 300 Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm x 150 mm) where mobile phase A (MPA) consisted of 95/5 water/acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA; mobile phase B (MPB) consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA, using the following gradient: 0 % MPB from 0-10  m, 0-20 % MPB from 10–13 m, 20-40 % MPB from 13-33 m, 40-100 % from 33-43 m, and hold at 100 % B from 43-47 m, a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, and collecting 1 min fractions. V. inconspicua peptide reversed-phase library fractions were dried down via vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in acidified LC-MS grade water.  Viola inconspicua library fractions 34-39 (~ 1 μg) were injected onto a nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS consisting of a NanoAcquity LC (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a TripleTOF5600 MS (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). Front-end UPLC separation of peptides was accomplished via a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) and an HSS T3C18 column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters), with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and a 30 min linear ramp of 5%−50% B (mobile phase A, 1% formic acid in water; mobile phase B, 1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The TripleTOF5600 MS was operated in positive-ion, high-sensitivity mode, and an IDA method with a cycle time of 2 s, the MS survey spectrum using a mass range of 350−1600 Da in 250 ms, and the first 20 m/z from low to high m/z selected for MS/MS, acquiring each MS/MS over ~87 ms.

### Data Protocol
Deisotoped peak lists for each library fraction were generated using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0) with a retention time filter of 14−45 min and a maximum charge of +10. “Peptide ion data” was exported from Progenesis and used to inform the relative abundances of m/z across V. inconspicua library fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing, Viola, Microfluidics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry,  Univeristy of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry,  Univeristy of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


