### Accession
PXD044214

### Title
Direct binding of type III secretion effectors to cytosolic sorting platform complexes in live bacteria indicates an effector shuttling mechanism

### Description
The bacterial type III secretion system, also called injectisome, translocates effector proteins into eukaryotic target cells through a hollow needle that is anchored in the bacterial membranes. The recruitment of effector proteins to the machinery and the resulting export hierarchy involve the sorting platform, a conserved set of interacting proteins at the cytosolic interface of the injectisome. To gain insight into these processes, we localized and measured the movement of different functional fluorescently labeled sorting platform components in live Yersinia enterocolitica. The sorting platform proteins were part of ~5.1 and ~17.9 injectisomes per bacterium under non-secreting and secreting conditions, respectively. However, they also displayed a considerable mobile cytosolic pool. Using single particle tracking photoactivated localization microscopy, we were able to show the interaction of different components of the sorting platform with effector proteins in the cytosol of live bacteria. We found that effector proteins directly bind to the sorting platform proteins SctQ and SctL. In wild-type bacteria these proteins form larger cytosolic protein complexes involving the ATPase SctN and the membrane connector SctK. The mobility and composition of these complexes is modulated in presence of effector proteins and their chaperones, and upon initiation of secretion, which additionally leads to the emergence of large soluble complexes. Our quantitative data supports an effector shuttling mechanism, in which sorting platform protein bind to effectors in the cytosol and deliver the cargo to the export gate at the membrane-bound injectisome.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation using shotgun proteomics - The eluate was precipitated using 7 volumes of acetone for 2h at -20 °C. Following centrifugation, the protein pellet was washed twice with 300 µl ice cold methanol, dried, and then reconstituted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 1 mM Tris(2-caboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) with additional incubation at 90 °C for 10 min to reduce disulfide bonds. Alkylation of TCEP reduced disulfide bonds was performed with 5 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30 min in the dark. 1 µg trypsin was added for protein digestion carried out at 30°C overnight. The samples were then acidified using trifluoroacetic acid and peptides were purified using Chromabond C18 Microspin columns (Macherey-Nagel). Peptide mixtures were then analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on an Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 94% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 6% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 40 min. The data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following settings were used: 1 MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 with 25 ms max. ion injection fill time and 300 % AGC target settings, MS/MS resolution at 15,000 scans with 50 ms max. fill time and a cycle time of 1s. AGC target settings were 200 % and HCD collision energy set to 27 %. Proximity labeling using shotgun proteomics - The eluate was then aceton precipitated using 7x times volumes acetone for at least 2h at -20 °C. Following centrifugation the protein pellet was washed twice with 300 µl ice cold acetone. Protein pellet was then dried, and then reconstituted in 100 mM Ammoniumbicabonate containing 1mM TCEP with following incubation at 90 °C for 10min. Alkylation of reduced TCEP reduced disulfide bonds was performed with 5 mM iodoacetamide at 30min at 25°C in the dark. 1 µg trypsin was added for protein digestion carried out at 30°C overnight. Further sample preparation and analytical steps were carried out as described above with identical instrumentational and software settings. Total proteome analysis using shotgun proteomics - For total proteome analysis, cell pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 2 % sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated for 15 min at 90 °C. Proteins were then reduced by adding 5 mM Tris(2-caboxyethyl)phosphine at 95°C for 15 min, followed by alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at 25°C). 50 µg total protein was then digested with 1 µg trypsin (Serva) overnight at 30 °C. Following digestion, SLS was precipitated with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 1.5% final concentration) and peptides were purified using Chromabond C18 microspin columns (Macherey-Nagel).  For data presented in Table 1 and Suppl. Table A, purified peptides derived from total proteome analysis were analyzed using liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS) as reported previously 97.  In short, peptides were separated as described above, but with a 90 min separating at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS data was acquired in a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following settings: 1 MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 with 50 ms max. ion injection fill time, MS/MS at 17,500 scans of the 10 most intense ions with 50 ms maximum fill time. The data was further analyzed using MaxQuant and SafeQuant. Due to an instrumental upgrade total proteome samples presented in Suppl. Fig. K were analyzed on an Exploris 480 connected to an an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano.  The LC peptide separating gradient was reduced to 60 min (6-35% buffer B). The MS data was acquired in data independent acquisition mode (DIA) using 45 windows with an isolation window of 14 m/z with 1 m/z overlap (see also https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35972145/). MS scan resolution was set to 120,000 (MS1) and 15,000 (DIA) with a scan range of 350-1400 m/z (MS1) and 320-950 precursor mass range (DIA). AGC target settings were 300 % (MS1), and 3000 % (DIA) with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms (MS1) and 22 ms (DIA).

### Data Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation and proximity labeling using shotgun proteomics - For all label-free quantification, the MS raw data was then analyzed with MaxQuant in standard settings 98 using a Y. enterolitica protein database containing proteins of the closely related Y. enterocolitica strain W22703 and of the pYVe227 virulence plasmid (GenBank entry AF102990.1). The statistical analysis of the MaxQuant LFQ data was performed on an updated SafeQuant R-script to routinely process MaxQuant “protein groups” outputs. Total proteome analysis using shotgun proteomics - DIA data were analyzed using DIA-NN version 1.8 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6949130/) and a Y. enterolitica protein database containing proteins of the closely related Y. enterocolitica strain W22703 and of the pYVe227 virulence plasmid (GenBank entry AF102990.1). Full tryptic digest was allowed with two missed cleavage sites, and oxidized methionines and carbamidomethylated cysteins. Match between runs and remove likely interferences were enabled. The neural network classifier was set to the single-pass mode, and protein inference was based on genes. Quantification strategy was set to any LC (high accuracy). Cross-run normalization was set to RT-dependent. Library generation was set to smart profiling. DIA-NN outputs were further evaluated using R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 3 secretion

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology
Marburg
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch-Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch-Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


