### Accession
PXD012908

### Title
Agonist-selective NOP receptor phosphorylation correlates in vitro and in vivo and reveals differential post-activation signaling by chemically diverse agonists

### Description
Agonists for the nociceptin/orphanin FQ opioid peptide NOP receptor, a member of the opioid receptor family, are under active investigation as novel analgesics, but their modes of signaling are less well characterized than those for other members of the opioid receptor family. Therefore, we investigated whether different NOP receptor ligands show differential signaling or functional selectivity at the NOP receptor. Using newly developed phosphosite-specific antibodies to NOP receptor, we found that agonist-induced NOP receptor phosphorylation occurred primarily at four carboxyl-terminal serine (S) and threonine (T) residues, namely Ser346, Ser351, Thr362 and Ser363, and proceeded with a temporal hierarchy, with Ser346 as the first site of phosphorylation. G protein-coupled receptor kinases 2 and 3 (GRK2/3) cooperated during agonist-induced phosphorylation, which in turn facilitated NOP receptor desensitization and internalization. A comparison of structurally distinct NOP receptor agonists revealed dissociation in functional efficacies between G protein-dependent signaling and receptor phosphorylation. Furthermore, in vivo, in NOP-eGFP and NOP-eYFP mice, NOP receptor agonists induced multisite phosphorylation and internalization in a dose-dependent and agonist-selective manner that could be blocked by specific antagonists. Together, our study provides novel tools to study ligand-activated NOP receptor signaling in vitro and in vivo. Differential agonist-selective NOP receptor phosphorylation by chemically diverse NOP receptor agonists suggests that differential signaling by NOP receptor agonists may play a role in NOP receptor ligand pharmacology.

### Sample Protocol
NOP-eGFP mice (8-12 weeks old) were used to detect NOP receptor phosphorylation in vivo. After mice (n=3 per compound) i.p. administration of saline or AT-202 (30 mg/kg) and GFP immunoprecipitation from 3 brains per compound, immunoprecipitates were boiled in SDS sample buffer for 5 min at 100 °C. Subsequently, brain extracts were alkylated in 90 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, separated by SDS-PAGE on 10% polyacrylamide gels followed by gel staining with colloidal Coomassie blue. At the molecular weight of NOP receptor a band was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at 20 ng/µl. The dried peptides were extracted and analyzed by on-line nanoLC using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex) coupled to an ETD-enabled LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described (125, 130). The survey scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap on the 300-2000 m/z mass range with the resolution set to a value of 60.000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for subsequent CID/ETD fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). The settings for the data-dependent decision tree-based CID/ETD method were as follows: ETD was performed for all precursor ions with charge states > 5. The normalized collision energy was set to 35% for CID. The reaction time was set to 100 ms and supplemental activation was enabled for ETD. Triple technical replicates were performed in some conditions.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.5.1) for database search with the Andromeda search engine. Data were searched against SwissProt database with taxonomy Mus msuculus (16761 sequences) implemented with the mouse NOP receptor-eGFP sequence. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 0.8 Da. The required minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database and the false discovery rates (FDR) at the peptide-spectrum matches (PSM), protein and site levels were set to 1%. Phosphosite localization was evaluated based on the Phosphosite Localization Scoring and Localization Probability algorithm of the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Agonists of the nociceptin/orphanin FQ opioid peptide (NOP) receptor, a member of the opioid receptor family, are under active investigation as novel analgesics, but their modes of signaling are less well characterized than those of other members of the opioid receptor family. Therefore, we investigated whether different NOP receptor ligands showed differential signaling or functional selectivity at the NOP receptor. Using newly developed phosphosite-specific antibodies to the NOP receptor, we found that agonist-induced NOP receptor phosphorylation occurred primarily at four carboxyl-terminal serine (Ser) and threonine (Thr) residues, namely, Ser<sup>346</sup>, Ser<sup>351</sup>, Thr<sup>362</sup>, and Ser<sup>363</sup>, and proceeded with a temporal hierarchy, with Ser<sup>346</sup> as the first site of phosphorylation. G protein-coupled receptor kinases 2 and 3 (GRK2/3) cooperated during agonist-induced phosphorylation, which, in turn, facilitated NOP receptor desensitization and internalization. A comparison of structurally distinct NOP receptor agonists revealed dissociation in functional efficacies between G protein-dependent signaling and receptor phosphorylation. Furthermore, in NOP-eGFP and NOP-eYFP mice, NOP receptor agonists induced multisite phosphorylation and internalization in a dose-dependent and agonist-selective manner that could be blocked by specific antagonists. Our study provides new tools to study ligand-activated NOP receptor signaling in vitro and in vivo. Differential agonist-selective NOP receptor phosphorylation by chemically diverse NOP receptor agonists suggests that differential signaling by NOP receptor agonists may play a role in NOP receptor ligand pharmacology.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Brain, Phosphorylation, Mouse, Opioid receptor family, Pharmacology, Biological, Nanolc-ms/ms cid/etd

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Drackendorfer Str. 1, 07747, Jena, Germany
IPBS-CNRS

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Schulz
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Drackendorfer Str. 1, 07747, Jena, Germany


