### Accession
PXD008448

### Title
Proteomic profiling of human decidual immune proteins during Toxoplasma gondii infection

### Description
A Toxoplasma gondii infection during pregnancy can result in spontaneous abortion, preterm labor, or congenital fetal defects. The decidual immune system plays a critical role in regulating the immune micro-environment and in the induction of immune tolerance. To better understand the factors that mediate the decidual immune response associated with the T. gondii infection, a large-scale study employing TMT proteomics was conducted to characterize the differential decidual immune proteomes from infected and uninfected human decidual immune cells samples. The decidual immune cells from 105 human voluntary abortion tissues were purified, and of the 5510 unique proteins identified, 181 proteins were found to be differentially abundant (>1.2-fold cutoff, P＜0.05) in the T. gondii-infected decidual immune cells. 11 proteins of 181 differentially expressed proteins associated with trophoblast invasion, placental development, intrauterine fetal growth, and immune tolerance were verified using a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting. This systematic research identified a broad range of immune factors in human decidual immune cells, shedding a new insight into the decidual immune molecular mechanism for abnormal pregnancy outcomes associated with T. gondii infection.

### Sample Protocol
The T. gondii RH tachyzoites were maintained in HEp-2 cells in the  Minimum Essential Media (MEM) (Hyclone, USA), 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, USA), and 100 IU/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). After being cultured, the tachyzoites suspension was centrifuged at 1500 rpm (433 × g) for 10 min, after which the purified tachyzoites were resuspended in MEM and counted using a Neubauer chamber. Sample Collection and Preparation-Human decidual tissues from the first trimester [gestational age at sampling, 8-10weeks] were collected from 105 voluntary abortion cases, after informed consent was given. The sample collection for this study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Binzhou Medical University. All subjects had been visiting the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yantai Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University, had not used any abortifacients, and had not suffered from any pregnancy complications. The tissues were immediately washed 5-8 times with a sterile saline solution, and then were cultured in DMEM/high glucose medium (Hyclone, USA) which contained 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, USA), 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 IU/ml streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, USA).  The decidual tissues were washed thoroughly with a cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution, minced using sterile scissors into 1 to 3 mm pieces, and dissociated using the Gentle MACS tissue dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany), after which the suspension was filtered through 100µm nylon mesh filters. The decidual mononuclear cells were subsequently purified by using Ficoll–Hypaque gradient (SigmaAldrich, United States) at 2000 rpm for 20 min at 20°C and equally allocated to infected and uninfected groups; after 1 h, the T.gondii tachyzoites were added at the ratio of 2:1 (T. gondii : cells) to the infected group. The cells from two groups were all cultured in RPMI medium that was supplemented with 10% FBS (FBS; Gibco, USA), 100 IU/ml streptomycin, and 100 IU/ml streptomycin (Sigma, USA) for 24 h at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator. Protein Extraction-Three repeated samples were performed in this study, and there are at least 2×107 cells in every sample. The decidual immune cells were snap frozen on liquid nitrogen for 1-2 min, then moved quickly and stored at -80 °C until analysis. The sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined according to the manufacturer’s instructions for the BCA kit .

### Data Protocol
The data were expressed as the mean ±standard deviation, and the differences between the groups were analyzed using a Student's t-test, with a P value less than 0.05 or 0.01 considered to indicate a statistically difference or a statistically significant difference. To acquire the bioinformatics, the STRING 10.5 (www.string-db.org) and PANTHER (www.pantherdb.org) databases were used.

### Publication Abstract
A Toxoplasma gondii infection during pregnancy can result in spontaneous abortion, preterm labor, or congenital fetal defects. The decidual immune system plays a critical role in regulating the immune micro-environment and in the induction of immune tolerance. To better understand the factors that mediate the decidual immune response associated with the T. gondii infection, a large-scale study employing TMT proteomics was conducted to characterize the differential decidual immune proteomes from infected and uninfected human decidual immune cells samples. The decidual immune cells from 105 human voluntary abortion tissues were purified, and of the 5510 unique proteins identified, 181 proteins were found to be differentially abundant (&gt;1.2-fold cutoff, p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05) in the T. gondii-infected decidual immune cells. 11 proteins of 181 differentially expressed proteins associated with trophoblast invasion, placental development, intrauterine fetal growth, and immune tolerance were verified using a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting. This systematic analysis for the proteomics of decidual immune cells identified a broad range of immune factors in human decidual immune cells, shedding a new insight into the decidual immune molecular mechanism for abnormal pregnancy outcomes associated with T. gondii infection.

### Keywords
Decidual immune cells; infection; proteomics; tmt; toxoplasma gondii

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Department of Medicine & Pharmacy Research Center, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong, P. R. China, 264003

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Xuemei Hu
Department of Medicine & Pharmacy Research Center, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong, P. R. China, 264003


