### Accession
PXD006001

### Title
Proteome-wide characterization of human S-acylated proteins

### Description
Reversible protein S-acylation dynamically regulates the subcellular localization, activity, and stability of proteins, and plays a pivotal role in various diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. Nevertheless, a system-wide analysis of S-acylation in human pathophysiology is still elusive, largely due to the lack of a sensitive method for proteome-wide characterization of S-acylation. Via systematic optimization of our original Palmitoyl-protein Identification and Site Characterization (PalmPISC) method, we established the next-generation PalmPISC (ngPalmPISC). The application of ngPalmPISC to human LNCaP cells identified 1,682 known and 1,175 novel candidate S-acylated proteins as well as 1,648 candidate S-acylation sites—a coverage of an order of magnitude larger than any previous studies. Moreover, the large set of S-acylation sites allowed motif enrichment analysis, resulting in the identification of two novel S-acylation motifs CxL and FxC (p<0.01). The ngPalmPISC method and the comprehensive human S-acylproteome dataset are expected to facilitate our system-wide understanding of protein S-acylation in pathophysiology and the discovery of novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
The S-acylated proteins were enriched from human LNCaP cells by a low-background acyl-biotinyl exchange method that we developed, digested by three endoproteinases (trypsin, Asp-N, and Arg-C) using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. In addition, the LNCaP whole cell lysate was digested by trypsin using FASP, peptides were fractionated by strong anion exchange (SAX) into 6 fractions, and each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) was used for the identification of proteins and carbamidomethylated cysteine residues. Perseus (v1.5.5.3) was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>S</i>-acylation (also called palmitoylation) is a common post-translational modification whose deregulation plays a key role in the pathogenesis of many diseases. Acyl-biotinyl exchange (ABE), a widely used method for the enrichment of <i>S</i>-acylated proteins, has the potential of capturing the entire <i>S</i>-acylproteome in any type of biological sample. Here, we showed that current ABE methods suffer from a high background arising from the coisolation of non-<i>S</i>-acylated proteins. The background can be substantially reduced by an additional blockage of residual free cysteine residues with 2,2'-dithiodipyridine prior to the biotin-HPDP reaction. Coupling the low-background ABE (LB-ABE) method with label-free proteomics, 2&#x202f;895 high-confidence candidate <i>S</i>-acylated proteins (including 1&#x202f;591 known <i>S</i>-acylated proteins) were identified from human prostate cancer LNCaP cells, representing so-far the largest <i>S</i>-acylproteome data set identified in a single study. Immunoblotting analysis confirmed the <i>S</i>-acylation of five known and five novel prostate cancer-related <i>S</i>-acylated proteins in LNCaP cells and suggested that their <i>S</i>-acylation levels were about 0.6-1.8%. In summary, the LB-ABE method largely eliminates the coisolation of non-<i>S</i>-acylated proteins and enables deep <i>S</i>-acylproteomic analysis. It is expected to facilitate a much more comprehensive and accurate quantification of <i>S</i>-acylproteomes than previous ABE methods.

### Keywords
Human, Site, Proteome-wide, Palmitoylation, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, S-acylation, Motif

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA


