### Accession
PXD003753

### Title
Botrytis cinerea phosphoproteome.

### Description
The phytopathogen Botrytis cinerea is a ubiquitous fungus with a high capacity to adapt its metabolism to different hosts and environmental conditions in order to deploy a variety of virulence and pathogenicity factors and develop a successful plant infection. Here we report the first comparative phosphoproteomic study of B. cinerea, aimed to analyze the phosphoprotein composition of the fungus and its changes under different phenotypical conditions induced by two different carbon sources as plant based elicitors: glucose and deproteinized tomato cell wall (TCW). A total of 2854 and 2269 different phosphosites (2883 and 1137 phosphopeptides) were identified in glucose and TCW respectively, which map to 1338 phosphoproteins in glucose and 733 in TCW. Out of the identified phosphoproteins, 173 were exclusively found when glucose was the only carbon source and 11 when the carbon source was TCW. Differences in the pattern of phosphorylation-sites were also detected according to the carbon source. Gene ontology classification of the identified phosphoproteins showed that most of the characteristic proteins of the different carbon sources were related to signaling and transmembrane transport, thus highlighting the importance of these processes in the fungal adaptation to the surrounding conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were dissolved in 6 M urea, 0.2 M NH4HCO3 were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 25 ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted up to 2 M urea, digested overnight with Lys-C at 37 ºC, and then diluted again 2-fold prior being digested overnight with trypsin at 37 ºC. Crude peptide mixtures were desalted using a MacroSpin Column C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc, Southborough, MA). 250 g of each digested sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide. Briefly, TiO2 micro-columns were prepared in gel loading tips (0.5 mg) and were equilibrated with loading buffer (80 % ACN in water + 6 % TFA). Samples were loaded in loading buffer and the columns were washed with 80 % ACN in water + 0.1 % TFA. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted with 30 µL of elution buffer (5 % NH3 in water) into a 1.5-mL tube containing 30 µL of 20 % of formic acid in water. Crude phosphopeptide mixtures were desalted using a MacroSpin Column C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc, Southborough, MA). The enriched phosphopeptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography column (25 cm, inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles; Nikkyo Technos, Japan). A gradient of 3 to 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in 360 min at a flow of 250 µL/min was used. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. In all experiments, full MS scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution setting of 60,000. For each MS scan, the twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were fragmented using collision-induced dissociation with multistage activation (activation of neutral losses of 98, 65.4, 49, 32.7) at a normalized collision energy of 35% in the LTQ linear ion trap. All data were acquired with Xcalibur v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with the Proteome Discoverer software suite v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) using MASCOT v2.3 (Matrix Science, United Kingdom) as search engine. A B. cinerea NCBI database that included the most common contaminants was used, and carbamidomethylation for cysteines was set as fixed modification whereas acetylation in protein N-terminal, phosphorylation in Ser, Thr and Tyr and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was set at 7 ppm in MS and at 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 3, and peptides were filtered based on an false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant pathogenicity, Botrytis cinerea, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Laboratorio de Microbiología  Centro Andaluz de Investigaciones Vitivinícolas (CAIV)  Facultad de Ciencias del Mar y Ambientales (CASEM) Universidad de Cádiz
Center of genomic regulation

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández Acero
Laboratorio de Microbiología  Centro Andaluz de Investigaciones Vitivinícolas (CAIV)  Facultad de Ciencias del Mar y Ambientales (CASEM) Universidad de Cádiz


