### Accession
PXD010498

### Title
Metabolic reprogramming with the induction of toxin production of Clostridioides difficile during the stationary phase

### Description
The obligate anaerobe, spore forming bacterium Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) causes nosocomial and community acquired diarrhea often associated with antibiotic therapy. Major virulence factors of the bacterium are the two large clostridial toxins TcdA and TcdB. The production of both toxins was found strongly connected to the metabolism as well as the nutritional status in the environment. Here, we systematically investigated the changes of the gene regulatory, proteomic and metabolic networks of C. difficile 630Δerm underlying the adaptation to the non-growing state in the stationary phase. Integrated data from time-resolved transcriptome, proteome and metabolome investigations performed under defined growth conditions uncovered multiple adaptation strategies.  Overall changes in the cellular processes included the downregulation of ribosome production, lipid metabolism, cold shock proteins, spermine biosynthesis, and glycolysis and in the later stages of riboflavin and coenzyme A biosynthesis. In contrast, several fermentation pathways, different chaperones and the cysteine, serine and pantothenate biosynthesis were upregulated.  Focused on the Stickland amino acid fermentation and the central carbon metabolism, we demonstrated the ability of C. difficile to replenish its favored amino acid cysteine by a pathway from the glycolysis substrate 3-phosphoglycerate via L-serine. Following the growth course, the reductive equivalent pathways used were sequentially shifted from proline via leucine/phenylalanine to the central carbon metabolism first using butanoate fermentation and then to lactate.  The toxin production was found correlated mainly to fluxes of the central carbon metabolism. Toxin formation in the supernatant was detected when the flux changed from butanoate to lactate synthesis in the late stationary phase. The holistic view derived from the combination of transcriptome, proteome and metabolome data allowed us to uncover the major metabolic strategies that are used by the clostridial cells to maintain its cellular integrity and ensure survival under starvation conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Cytosolic and membrane samples for proteome analyses were treated according to (Otto et al., 2016). Briefly, cells were disrupted by sonication and after discarding of the cell debris, the membrane fraction was separated from the soluble cytosolic proteins by ultracentrifugation. For the extracellular protein fraction, affinity-bead based enrichment according to (Bonn et al., 2014) was used. Both, proteins from the extracellular and the membrane fraction were loaded on an SDS PAGE gel and separated according to molecular weight of the proteins.  LC-MS/MS- analysis of the proteome fractions  Each lane of the SDS PAGE gel containing proteins from the membrane fraction and extracellular fractions were cut into ten equidistant pieces and subjected to tryptic digestion as described in Bonn et al. 2014 (Bonn et al., 2014). The resulting tryptic peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a TripleTOF 5600 instrument (ABSciex, Concord, Canada) coupled with an Easy nLC-1000 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Sample desalting and elution by a binary gradient of water/ acetonitrile was performed on an in-house packed column. Overview scans with a resolution or R= 30000 in the range of 350- 1250 m/z with a scan time of 250 ms were followed by 20 MS/MS fragment scans in the range of 300- 1600 m/z with a maximum scan time of 50 ms after collisionally induced dissociation (CID).  For analysis of the cytosolic proteins, proteins were reduced/ alkylated and subjected to in solution tryptic digest (Junker et al., 2018). The resulting peptide mixture was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Velos Elite (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Easy nLC-1000 (Thermo Scientific) as described in Otto et al. (2016).

### Data Protocol
Proteome data analysis  Sequence database searching and quantification based on labelfree quantification (LFQ) was performed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Only fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Database searching was based on the fasta sequences for C. difficile 630Δerm (Dannheim et al., 2017a) and a set of common contaminant proteins.  For cytosolic samples, methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as variable modification, omitting the latter for the extracellular and the membrane fraction. Peptide and protein identifications were further processed with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less or equal 1 %. For protein identification, a minimum of at least two unique peptides was set as threshold.  Quantification was based on LFQ values obtained from the MaxQuant analysis. The data was processed within Perseus (1.5.3.3).

### Publication Abstract
The obligate anaerobe, spore forming bacterium <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> (formerly <i>Clostridium difficile</i>) causes nosocomial and community acquired diarrhea often associated with antibiotic therapy. Major virulence factors of the bacterium are the two large clostridial toxins TcdA and TcdB. The production of both toxins was found strongly connected to the metabolism and the nutritional status of the growth environment. Here, we systematically investigated the changes of the gene regulatory, proteomic and metabolic networks of <i>C. difficile</i> 630&#x394;<i>erm</i> underlying the adaptation to the non-growing state in the stationary phase. Integrated data from time-resolved transcriptome, proteome and metabolome investigations performed under defined growth conditions uncovered multiple adaptation strategies. Overall changes in the cellular processes included the downregulation of ribosome production, lipid metabolism, cold shock proteins, spermine biosynthesis, and glycolysis and in the later stages of riboflavin and coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis. In contrast, different chaperones, several fermentation pathways, and cysteine, serine, and pantothenate biosynthesis were found upregulated. Focusing on the Stickland amino acid fermentation and the central carbon metabolism, we discovered the ability of <i>C. difficile</i> to replenish its favored amino acid cysteine by a pathway starting from the glycolytic 3-phosphoglycerate via L-serine as intermediate. Following the growth course, the reductive equivalent pathways used were sequentially shifted from proline via leucine/phenylalanine to the central carbon metabolism first to butanoate fermentation and then further to lactate fermentation. The toxin production was found correlated mainly to fluxes of the central carbon metabolism. Toxin formation in the supernatant was detected when the flux changed from butanoate to lactate synthesis in the late stationary phase. The holistic view derived from the combination of transcriptome, proteome and metabolome data allowed us to uncover the major metabolic strategies that are used by the clostridial cells to maintain its cellular homeostasis and ensure survival under starvation conditions.

### Keywords
Starvation, Clostridium difficile, Stickland reactions, Clostridioides difficile, Metabolism, Toxin formation

### Affiliations
Institut für Mikrobiologie Dept. Mikrobielle Proteomik Universität Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dörte Becher
Institut für Mikrobiologie Dept. Mikrobielle Proteomik Universität Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald


