### Accession
PXD016005

### Title
U2OS LC MSMS upon siRNA-eIF4A3 or 5nM ActD treatment.

### Description
Proteome analysis in U2OS cells treated with siRNA against eIf4A3 or 5nM Actinomycin D.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 300 µl Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7,6, 1 mM DTT), heated to 95°C and sonicated. The total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Samples were then prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean-up and a digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018) (Hughes et al., 2014) , where proteins were digested by LycC and trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Pierce). In brief, 200 µg protein from each sample was alkylated with 4 mM Chloroacetamide. Sera‐Mag SP3 bead mix (20 µl) was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 18 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 100 µl LysC buffer (0.5 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (LysC) to protein ratio) and incubated overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 100 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated overnight. The peptides were eluted from the mixture after placing the mixture on a magnetic rack, followed by peptide concentration measurement (Bio-Rad DC Assay). The samples were then pH adjusted using TEAB pH 8.5 (100 mM final conc.), 100 µg of peptides from each sample were labelled with isobaric TMT-tags (TMT10plex reagent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific), and separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on 3–10 strips as described previously (Branca et al., 2014) .

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014) . Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v2.08) (Granholm et al., 2014) , where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015) . MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project&#39;s IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008) . PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities. Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015) .

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic initiation factor 4A-III (eIF4A3), a core helicase component of the exon junction complex, is essential for splicing, mRNA trafficking, and nonsense-mediated decay processes emerging as targets in cancer therapy. Here, we unravel eIF4A3's tumor-promoting function by demonstrating its role in ribosome biogenesis (RiBi) and p53 (de)regulation. Mechanistically, eIF4A3 resides in nucleoli within the small subunit processome and regulates rRNA processing via R-loop clearance. <i>EIF4A3</i> depletion induces cell cycle arrest through impaired RiBi checkpoint-mediated p53 induction and reprogrammed translation of cell cycle regulators. Multilevel omics analysis following <i>eIF4A3</i> depletion pinpoints pathways of cell death regulation and translation of alternative mouse double minute homolog 2 (<i>MDM2</i>) transcript isoforms that control p53. EIF4A3 expression and subnuclear localization among clinical cancer specimens correlate with the RiBi status rendering eIF4A3 an exploitable vulnerability in high-RiBi tumors. We propose a concept of eIF4A3's unexpected role in RiBi, with implications for cancer pathogenesis and treatment.

### Keywords
U2os lc msms upon sirna-eif4a3 or 5nm actd treatment.

### Affiliations
SciLifeLab & Karolinska Institutet
Danish Cancer Society Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Dimitrios Kanellis

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Bartek
Danish Cancer Society Karolinska Institute


