### Accession
PXD011492

### Title
In Silico Analysis Validates Proteomic Findings of Formalin-fixed Paraffin Embedded Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma Tissue

### Description
Background: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is a common type of skin cancer but there are no comprehensive proteomic studies on this entity. Materials and Methods: We employed liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cSCC material to study the tumor and normal skin tissue proteomes. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to interpret the role of altered proteins in cSCC pathophysiology. Results were validated using the Human Protein Atlas and Oncomine database in silico. Results: Of 1,310 unique proteins identified, expression of an average of 144 and 88 proteins were significantly (p<0.05) increased and decreased, respectively, in the tumor samples compared to their normal counterparts. IPA analysis revealed disruptions in proteins associated with cell proliferation, apoptosis, and migration. In silico analysis confirmed that proteins corresponding to 12 antibodies, and genes corresponding to 18 proteins were differentially expressed between the two categories, validating our proteomic measurements. Conclusion: Label-free MS-based proteomics is useful for analyzing FFPE cSCC tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and sample preparation. Microdissected tissues were washed from the adhesive caps with 300 μl 0.1% w/v RapiGest™ SF Surfactant (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) in a 1.5 ml boil-proof microcentrifuge tube (Axygen Scientific, Union City, CA, USA). Following a vigorous vortex, the homogenate was sonicated continuously for 1 min with a step tip probe (15% intensity; Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT, USA) and incubated at 95˚C for 30 min. Following centrifugation at 16,000 × g at 4˚C for 20 min, the protein yield was quantified using Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Protein extracts were then reduced in 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 60˚C followed by alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteolytic digestion was performed following the addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:40 trypsin:protein ratio; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) followed by overnight incubation at 37˚C. Rapigest™ (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) detergent was cleaved by acidification to pH<2, 37˚C incubation for 30 min and removed from the samples by centrifugation (13,000 × g, 20 min, 4˚C). Peptide mixtures were desalted using 1cc Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters Corporation); final yields were determined by Qubit quantitation and 10 μg aliquots vacuum were concentrated using Savant Speedvac Plus sample concentrator (Thermo Savant, Holbrook, NY, USA) and stored at −20˚C.

### Data Protocol
Reverse-phase liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) analysis. Peptide mixtures (10 μg) were prepared in 20 μl of 1% formic acid (FA) and 0.05% heptafluorobutyric acid for RP-LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were separated by a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex Corp, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a nanospray ionization ion source. Peptides (2 μg) were loaded in triplicate at a flow rate of 200 nl/min onto a C18-reversed phase column with mobile phase buffers A (2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.1% FA), over a 2- h linear gradient (2-45% B for 118 min; 45-80% B for 1 min, 80% B for 1 min). Duplicate blank runs (30 min, 2-80% buffer B) were performed between each sample type, with 10 min washes with 2% buffer B prior to each sample. Data acquisition was achieved in a positive polarity mode using a data-dependent top-10 method where the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (350-1,750 m/z) were dynamically chosen for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 while for HCD spectra this was set to 17,500. In order to increase the likely coverage of lower abundant precursor ions, a 30 s dynamic exclusion list was employed. Automatic gain control was used to ensure that the Orbitrap mass analyzer always filled with the optimum number of ions, i.e. 1×106, for generation of MS/MS spectra. Normalized collision energy was set to 30 eV to achieve optimum fragmentation efficiency, and the intensity threshold, which defines the minimum precursor intensity to trigger an MS2 scan, was set to 5×104. A list of around 500 ion masses corresponding to the most common and prominent peptide contaminants were added as an exclusion list. PeptideMass function of the ExPASy (http://web.expasy.org/peptide_mass) was used to calculate theoretical monoisotopic ion masses of potentially important proteins such as mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 and 2 (MEK1/2), mitogen-activated protein kinase 1, 2 and 5 (ERK1/2/5), serine/threonine-protein kinase B-Raf (B-RAF), Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (K-RAS) and P53, the generated ion masses of which were added to an inclusion list in the MS method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma; formalin-fixed paraffin embedded; label-free mass spectrometry; laser capture microdissection; proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Head | Department of Dermatology - Westmead Hospital Academic Leader (HDR PGC) | Sydney Medical School Director | Centre for Translational Skin Research

### Submitter
Ali Azimi

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pablo Fernandez-Penas
Head | Department of Dermatology - Westmead Hospital Academic Leader (HDR PGC) | Sydney Medical School Director | Centre for Translational Skin Research


