### Accession
PXD038655

### Title
K6-Linked Ubiquitylation Marks Formaldehyde-Induced RNA–Protein Crosslinks for Resolution

### Description
Reactive aldehydes are produced by normal cellular metabolism or after alcohol consumption, and accumulate in human tissues if aldehyde clearance mechanisms are impaired. Their toxicity has been attributed to the damage they cause to genomic DNA and the subsequent inhibition of transcription and replication. However, whether interference with other cellular processes contributes to aldehyde toxicity has not been investigated. We demonstrate that formaldehyde induces RNA–protein crosslinks (RPCs) that stall the ribosome and inhibit translation in human cells. RPCs in the messenger RNA are recognized by the translating ribosomes, marked by atypical K6-linked ubiquitylation catalyzed by the RING-in-Between-RING E3 ligase RNF14, and subsequently resolved by the ubiquitin- and ATP-dependent unfoldase VCP. Our findings uncover an evolutionary conserved formaldehyde-induced stress response pathway that protects cells against RPC accumulation in the cytoplasm, and suggest that RPCs contribute to the cellular and tissue toxicity of reactive aldehydes.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS and HEK293T cells were obtained from ATCC and cultured in D-MEM medium (U2OS and HEK293T) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, L-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin. Cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma infection with a PCR-based method. For SILAC labeling, cells were cultured in media containing either L-arginine and L-lysine, L-arginine [13C6] and L-lysine [2H4] or L-arginine [13C615N4] and L-lysine [13C6-15N2] (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) as described previously. All cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2. For the ubiquitin-modified and phospho-proteome, protein samples were collected in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (all from Sigma) from cells seeded in 150-mm cell culture dishes. Chromatin-bound proteins were extracted with addition of NaCl to a final concentration of 500 mM, and pulse sonication at 4 oC for 10 minutes. Total protein concentrations were estimated using QuickStart Bradford Protein assay (Bio-Rad) from the pre-cleared lysates and protein amount from each SILAC labeled protein lysate was calculated and combined at a 1:1:1 ratio. Combined protein lysates were precipitated in 4-fold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-solubilized in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea buffered in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide prior to digestion with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Trypsin digestion was performed at a 1:150 ratio at room temperature for 18 hours and terminated by acidification using trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5%. Digested peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For ubiquitin remnant peptide enrichment, modified peptides were enriched using 80 μl of di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology) for 4 h at 4°C on a rotation wheel. The beads were washed three times in ice-cold acetone followed by three washes in water. The enriched peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O, fractionated in six fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX), and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips.  For phospho-proteome analysis, phosphorylated peptides were enriched using TiO2 sphere beads from a minimum of 5 mg trypsin-digested peptide. Briefly, peptides were incubated with TiO2 sphere at a 1:2 ratio of 50% acetonitrile, and 6% trifluoroacetic acid for 1 hour. Following the incubation, non-binding peptides were washed off the beads and the enriched phospho-peptides were eluted using 10% NH4OH / 25% acetonitrile. NH4OH was subsequently evaporated prior to SCX fractionation and C18 desalting of the eluted phospho-peptides.    For proteome analysis, 50 μg of the trypsin-digested peptides were fractionated using SCX-based microcolumn into 8 fractions and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips prior MS analysis. The exact set-ups for the analysis of each sample type can be found in the following table.  Phospho-proteome Ubiquitin-modified proteome OOPS (QEP) OOPS (Exploris) polyA-IP Quantification method SILAC SILAC SILAC SILAC TMT16 MS instrument Exploris 480 Exploris480 Q Exactive Plus Exploris 480 Exploris 480 Mass analyzer Orbitrap Orbitrap Orbitrap Orbitrap Orbitrap LC instrument Easy-nLC 1200 Easy-nLC 1200 Easy-nLC 1000 Easy-nLC 1200 Easy-nLC 1200 Column (cm) 25 25 25 25 25 inner diameter (µm) 75 75 75 75 75 bead size (µm) 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 Elution gradient gradient 3%B* to 95%B* in 85min gradient 3%B* to 95%B* in 85min gradient 3%B* to 95%B* in 100min gradient 3%B* to 95%B* in 115min gradient 3%B* to 95%B* in 115min Elution time 90 90 105 120 120 Acquisition mode Data-dependent Data-dependent Data-dependent Data-dependent Data-dependent MS spectra window (m/z) 300-1650 300-1650 300-1650 300-1650 300-1650 Fragmentation method HCD HCD HCD HCD HCD Included charge states 2-6 2-8 2-6 2-6 2-6 Fragmentation exclusion criteria unassigned charge state,charge states <2 unassigned charge state,charge states <2 unassigned charge state,charge states <2 unassigned charge state,charge states <2 unassigned charge state,charge states <2 MS resolution 60,000 60,000 70,000 60,000 60,000 topN Top15 Top15 Top10 Top20 Top15 HCD collision energies (%) 30 30 25 30 33 MS2 resolution 15,000 15,000 35,000 15,000 15,000 MS2 max. injection time (ms) 40 40 120 28 40 MS2 isolation window (m/z) 1.4 1.4 2.6 1.4 0.8 *Buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 98,566 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in 04/2018 using Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Processed data were analyzed using the R (4.1.1) software environment. Identified ubiquitin-modified peptides were filtered for potential contaminants, reverse identified peptides, and localization probability (>75%). P-values were calculated by a moderated t-test using the limma package. The resulting P-values were corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using Benjamini and Hochberg FDR method. For ubiquitin-remnant proteome analysis only regulated ubiquitin-modified sites with an FDR < 0.05 were considered significant. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of protein groups of enrichment data of the ubiquitin-modified proteome was done using the R-package clusterProfiler. P-values were assessed by clusterProfiler and corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR method. InterPro domain enrichment analysis was performed using EnrichR. Identified protein groups were filtered in a similar manner by potential contaminants, reverse identified peptides, identification only by site, and unique peptides (>1). Statistical analysis was the same as described for the ubiquitin-modified peptides. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of protein groups of enrichment data was done using the R-package clusterProfiler. P-values were assessed by clusterProfiler and corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR method. InterPro domain enrichment analysis was performed using EnrichR. Identified phosphopeptides were filtered for potential contaminants, localization probability (>75%) and reverse reads. Canonical protein isoforms and phosphorylation site positions were assigned using an in-house Python script. MaxQuant normalized ratios of 4 independent replicates were tested for significant differential regulation using moderate t-test in the limma package. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using FDR method. Kinase activities were estimated using KSEA algorithm and the R implementation of KSEApp (PMID: 28655153). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of phospho-proteomics data was done using ViSEAGO R package, and p-values were assessed using a Fisher exact test. Kinase-substrate annotations were obtained from PhosphoSitePlus (PSP) and the NetworKIN database. The Kinase-substrate analysis was performed with a minimum NetworKIN Score of 5 for up- and down-regulated phosphorylation sites with an FDR < 0.05 were included in the prediction. Phosphosite-specific signature analysis was performed using PTMSEA. As input data FDR-values generated during statistical analysis were transformed and multiplied by the sign of the averaged log2-transformed fold changes. As identifier for the phosphorylation sites the flanking sequence (+/− 7 amino acids) was used. PTMSEA was done in R and PTMsigDB was used as reference dataset. The minimum overlap between PTM set and PTMsigDB was set to 10. Motif visualization of phospho-peptide sequences was done using ggseqlogo R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
K6-linked ubiquitylation, Translation, Reactive aldehydes, Rna-protein crosslinks

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany
IMB Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
IMB Mainz, Germany


