### Accession
PXD018080

### Title
GDE2-dependent activation of canonical Wnt signaling in neurons regulates

### Description
Neurons and oligodendrocytes communicate to regulate oligodendrocyte development and ensure appropriate axonal myelination. Here, we show that Glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase 2 (GDE2) encodes a neuronal pathway that promotes oligodendrocyte maturation through the release of soluble neuronally-derived factors. Mice lacking global or neuronal GDE2 expression have reduced mature oligodendrocytes and myelin proteins but retain normal numbers of oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs). WT OPCs cultured in conditioned medium (CM) from Gde2 null (Gde2KO) neurons exhibit delayed maturation, recapitulating in vivo phenotypes. Gde2KO neurons show robust reduction in canonical Wnt signaling and genetic activation of Wnt signaling in Gde2KO neurons rescues in vivo and in vitro oligodendrocyte maturation. Phosphacan, a known stimulant of OL maturation, is reduced in CM from Gde2KOneurons but is restored when Wnt signaling is activated. These studies identify GDE2 control of Wnt signaling as a neuronal pathway that signals to oligodendroglia to promote oligodendrocyte maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Neuronal CM samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion (Shevchenko, et al, 2006). The extracted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded on Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were resolved at 300-nl/min flow rate using a linear gradient of 10% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an EASY-Spray column (50cm x 75 m ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) software was used for quantitation and identification of proteins from the mass spectrometry data using mouse UniProt database (released on May 2018) with common contaminant proteins (Cox et al., 2008). Search parameters included, a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages; b) first search peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm and the main search peptide mass error tolerance of 4 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 20 ppm;  d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification: e) oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) and protein acetyl (+42.01056 Da) on N-terminus as dynamic modifications. Peptides and proteins were filtered at 1 % false-discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Neurons and oligodendrocytes communicate to regulate oligodendrocyte development and ensure appropriate axonal myelination. Here, we show that Glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase 2 (GDE2) signaling underlies a neuronal pathway that promotes oligodendrocyte maturation through the release of soluble neuronally derived factors. Mice lacking global or neuronal GDE2 expression have reduced mature oligodendrocytes and myelin proteins but retain normal numbers of oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs). Wild-type (WT) OPCs cultured in conditioned medium (CM) from Gde2-null (Gde2KO) neurons exhibit delayed maturation, recapitulating in&#xa0;vivo phenotypes. Gde2KO neurons show robust reduction in canonical Wnt signaling, and genetic activation of Wnt signaling in Gde2KO neurons rescues in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro oligodendrocyte maturation. Phosphacan, a known stimulant of oligodendrocyte maturation, is reduced in CM from Gde2KO neurons but is restored when Wnt signaling is activated. These studies identify GDE2 control of Wnt signaling as a neuronal pathway that signals to oligodendroglia to promote oligodendrocyte maturation.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Oligodendrocyte, Gde2

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Shanthini Sockanathan
The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


