### Accession
PXD012488

### Title
Boyce 4023 GlcNac Mapping Project

### Description
Bottom up proteomic analysis of gigaxonin to characterize GlcNac PTMs sites

### Sample Protocol
In gel tryptic digestion protoocl followed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, each sample was subjected to chromatographic separation on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC equipped with a 1.7 µm BEH130 C18 75 µm I.D. X 250 mm reversed-phase column.  The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Following a 5 µL injection, peptides were trapped for 5 min on a 5 µm Symmetry C18 180 µm I.D. X 20 mm column at 20 µl/min in 99.9% A.  The analytical column was held at 5% B for 5 min then switched in-line and a linear elution gradient of 5% B to 40% B was performed over 90 min at 300 nL/min. The analytical column was connected to a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Cambridge, MA) with a 10 µm tip orifice and coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer through an electrospray interface. The instrument was set to acquire a precursor MS scan from m/z 350-1800 with r = 120,000 at m/z 400 and a target AGC setting of 4e5 ions. In a data-dependent mode of acquisition, MS/MS spectra were acquired at r = 15000 at m/z with a target AGC setting of 5e4 ions.  Max fill times were set to 50 ms for full MS scans and 45 ms for MS/MS scans with minimum MS/MS triggering thresholds of 5000 counts. Neutral losses corresponding to loss of GlcNac were further supplemented to EThcD MS/MS scans at r=30,000 with agc target of 3e5 and max IT of 250 ms. For all experiments, a dynamic exclusion of 60 s was employed for previously fragmented precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in Mascot distiller (Matrix Science) and then submitted to independent Mascot database searches (Matrix Science) against SwissProt (homo sapien taxonomy) containing both forward and reverse entries of each protein.  Search tolerances were 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da on C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (+15.9949 Da on M) and O-GlcNacylation (+203 Da on ST) were considered variable modifications.  All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold (Proteome Software) and protein confidence thresholds were set using a Bayesian statistical algorithm based on the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms which yielded a peptide and protein false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Gigaxonin (also known as KLHL16) is an E3 ligase adaptor protein that promotes the ubiquitination and degradation of intermediate filament (IF) proteins. Mutations in human gigaxonin cause the fatal neurodegenerative disease giant axonal neuropathy (GAN), in which IF proteins accumulate and aggregate in axons throughout the nervous system, impairing neuronal function and viability. Despite this pathophysiological significance, the upstream regulation and downstream effects of normal and aberrant gigaxonin function remain incompletely understood. Here, we report that gigaxonin is modified by &lt;italic&gt;O&lt;/italic&gt;-linked &#x3b2;-&lt;italic&gt;N&lt;/italic&gt;-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc), a prevalent form of intracellular glycosylation, in a nutrient- and growth factor&#x2013;dependent manner. MS analyses of human gigaxonin revealed 9 candidate sites of O-GlcNAcylation, 2 of which &#x2014; serine 272 and threonine 277 &#x2014; are required for its ability to mediate IF turnover in gigaxonin-deficient human cell models that we created. Taken together, the results suggest that nutrient-responsive gigaxonin O-GlcNAcylation forms a regulatory link between metabolism and IF proteostasis. Our work may have significant implications for understanding the nongenetic modifiers of GAN phenotypes and for the optimization of gene therapy for this disease.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Glcnac

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke University Dept of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Erik Soderblom

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Boyce
Duke University Dept of Biochemistry


