### Accession
PXD037649

### Title
Proteome comparison of a new human cholangiocarcinoma 3D co-culture tumor model to 3D single cultures.

### Description
Cholangiocarcinomas (CCA) are characterized by their desmoplastic and hypervascularized tumor microenvironment (TME) which is mainly composed of tumor cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). CAFs play a pivotal role in tumor progression, angiogenesis, metastasis and the development of therapy resistance. To our knowledge, no continuous human in vivo-like co-culture model is available for research. Therefore, we aimed to establish a new model that mimics the desmoplastic environment typically seen in CCA. Proteomic data comparing the new CCA tumor cell line with our co-culture tumor model (CCTM) indicated a higher correlation of the CCTM with physiological CCA characteristics according to literature. A pro-angiogenic TME that is typically observed in CCA could also be simulated in the CCTM group. Further analysis of secreted proteins revealed CAFs to be the main source for these angiogenic factors. Our CCTM represents a new, reproducible and easy-to-handle 3D CCA model for preclinical studies focusing on CCA-stromal crosstalk, tumor angiogenesis and invasion, the immunosuppressive microenvironment and the involvement of CAFs in the way that drug resistance develops.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from 3D co- and single cultures of a primary cholangiocarcinoma cell line and human telomerase reverse transcriptase immortalized cancer associated fibroblasts from the same patient were collected on day three and seven. Proteins were further digested by trypsin and separation of peptide extracts was performed on the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano Dionex system (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA, USA) using an Ionopticks Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (Ionopticks, Australia). The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was operated as followed: positive mode, enabled trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS), 100% duty cycle (ramp 100 ms); source capillary voltage (V): 1500 V; dry gas flow: 3 L / min, 180°C; scan mode: data independent parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation (diaPASEF), previously described by Meier using 21 x 25 Th isolation windows, m/Z 475 – 1,000; 0 Th overlap between windows. Two and three isolation windows were fragmented per TIMS ramp after the MS1 scan, respectively (overall DIA cycle time: 1s).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data were further processed with DIA-NN (version 1.8) and analyzed using the SwissProt homo sapiens database (updated in Dec 2020). Deep learning-based spectra and retention time prediction was enabled, minimum fragment m/z was set to 200 and max fragment m/z set to 1800. N-terminal methionine excision was enabled and maximum number of trypsin missed cleavages set to 2. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum to 30 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. DIA-NN optimized the mass accuracy automatically using the first run in the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) are characterized by their desmoplastic and hypervascularized tumor microenvironment (TME), which is mainly composed of tumor cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). CAFs play a pivotal role in general and CCA tumor progression, angiogenesis, metastasis, and the development of treatment resistance. To our knowledge, no continuous human in vivo-like co-culture model is available for research. Therefore, we aimed to establish a new model system (called MUG CCArly) that mimics the desmoplastic microenvironment typically seen in CCA. Proteomic data comparing the new CCA tumor cell line with our co-culture tumor model (CCTM) indicated a higher gene expression correlation of the CCTM with physiological CCA characteristics. A pro-angiogenic TME that is typically observed in CCA could also be better simulated in the CCTM group. Further analysis of secreted proteins revealed CAFs to be the main source of these angiogenic factors. Our CCTM MUG CCArly represents a new, reproducible, and easy-to-handle 3D CCA model for preclinical studies focusing on CCA-stromal crosstalk, tumor angiogenesis, and invasion, as well as the immunosuppressive microenvironment and the involvement of CAFs in the way that drug resistance develops.

### Keywords
Human, 3d cell culture, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria;  Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria;  BiotechMed-Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria; 

### Submitter
Laura Liesinger

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria;  Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria;  BiotechMed-Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;


