### Accession
PXD003864

### Title
Proteomic analysis glomeruli of PAN-treated rats

### Description
Podocytes are terminally differentiated cells at the kidney filtration barrier and exposed to considerable mechanical strain. Podocyte injury causes morphological changes as a result of cytoskeletal reorganizations and failure of the filtration barrier. The transcriptional co-activators YAP/TAZ are tightly controlled through hippo signaling and responsive to mechanical cues. Here, we show that YAP is upregulated upon podocyte injury to activate YAP-dependent target genes. This activation preceded the development of proteinuria. In contrast, similar perturbations of cells in culture did not reveal increased YAP activity but showed a downregulation of YAP/TAZ activity when cells were grown on stiff surface. However, culture of cells on soft matrix or inhibition of stress fiber formation allowed recapitulation of the damage-induced YAP upregulation indicating a mechanotransduction-dependent mechanism of YAP hyper-activity. Interestingly, increased expression of YAP targets was confirmed in renal biopsies from patients with glomerular disease. Consistently, pharmacological inhibition of YAP/TEAD activity ameliorated glomerular disease in vivo. These data suggest that perturbation of the mechanosensitive hippo signaling pathway may be a therapeutic principle in podocyte disease.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized in a buffer containing 8M urea and 100mM Ammoniumbicarbonate. Then, protein lysate was vortexed and sonificated, and subjected to reduction (DTT), alkylation (Iodoacetamide). Urea was diluted to a concentration of 2M using 100mM Ammoniumbicarbonate, and tryptic digestion of 25-50 µg of protein was performed overnight (w/w ratio 1:100). Samples were cleaned up using Stage tips and subjected to nLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by the mass spectrometer (.RAW file) was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.0.1 with default settings. The LFQ option was enabled. Match between run option was enabled. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation and the K-E-Gly-Gly residue for ubiquitylation detection (in experiments corresponding to Fig. S5). FDR for peptide and protein identification was by default 0.01. Processed data (proteingroups.txt file) was analyzed using Perseus 1.5.1.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glomeruli, Rat, Podocytes

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr bernhard schermer
University Hospital Cologne


