### Accession
PXD028843

### Title
Enhanced Chloroplast-Mitochondria Crosstalk Promotes Ambient Algal-H2 Production

### Description
Microalgae are natural biocatalysts of Hydrogen. Their ability to convert solar energy to valuable compounds with minimal ecological footprint potentially puts them as significant contributors to clean energy transition. Currently, this process, although promising, is not scalable because it is limited to oxygen-free conditions and is short-lived due to electron loss to other processes, mainly carbon fixation. Here we show that a strain, defected in thylakoid proton gradient regulation, ∆pgr5, bypasses both challenges simultaneously, leading to a prolonged 12-day hydrogen production under ambient mixotrophic conditions in a one-liter set-up. We report that ∆pgr5 possess a repressed ability to fixate carbon and this limitation is counterbalanced by an enhanced chloroplast-mitochondrion energetic exchange. This unique physiology supported the simplistic, yet robust and scalable hydrogen production capability of ∆pgr5.

### Sample Protocol
Four independent biological samples were grown in Erlenmeyer flasks (100 mL) containing 20 ml TAP medium and diluted after 3 days in fresh TAP medium to keep cells in mid-log phase. TAP grown cells were harvested via centrifugation at 14.000g, 5 min, 4 °C, the supernatant was discarded, and pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Whole cell protein extracts were incubated in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Benzamidine in 100 mM Tris-HCL pH 8). Protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce TM BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Protein extracts (50µg/sample) were typically digested following Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol 62. Peptides were dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in Millipore water at a concentration of 1µg/µl and analyzed using an LC-MS system composed of an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC System (Thermo Scientific USA) coupled through a nanospray interface to an Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). The information regarding instrument settings is detailed in Supplemental Table 1.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 with default settings for peptide and protein identification, label-free quantification (LFQ) and LFQ intensity normalization. Spectra were searched against a database containing protein sequences of the Chlamydomonas v5.6 gene models (Joint Genome Institute, www.phytozome.org), merged with mitochondrial and chloroplast protein sequences from NCBI databases BK000554.2 and NC_001638.1. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation ofprotein N-termini were considered as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to peptide and protein identifications.  LFQ data was imported into Perseus (version 1.6.13.0) for further processing and statistical analysis. Intensity data was log2-transformed, and contaminants, proteins only identified by site and reverse hits were removed. Only proteins with valid LFQ data in at least three out of four replicates in at least one strain were considered for further analysis. Missing intensity values were imputed from a normal distribution. For Suppl. Fig. S1 depicting protein abundances in all strains, the  batch effect was removed using the ComBat plugin in Perseus to account for the fact that samples with t222+ and cc124 background were prepared independently and analysed at different timepoints. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a permutation-based FDR of 5% was performed, followed by Tukey’s range test (FDR 5%) for posthoc analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hydrogen, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Alga, H2

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
WWU Münster (IBBP)

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Münster (IBBP)


