### Accession
PXD002805

### Title
New Insights into the Biosynthesis and Regulation of Wheat Amylose and Amylopectin from Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Characterization of Granule-binding Proteins

### Description
Waxy starch has an important influence on bread dough and the qualities of breads. Generally, grain weight and yield in waxy wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) are significantly lower than in bread wheat. In this study, we performed the first proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of starch granule-binding proteins by comparing the waxy wheat cultivar Shannong 119 and the bread wheat cultivar Nongda 5181. The waxy and non-waxy wheats had similar starch granule morphological features and developmental patterns, and similar amylopectin quality in the grain. These results indicate that reduced amylose content does not affect amylopectin synthesis, but it causes significant reduction of total starch biosynthesis, grain size, weight and yield. Two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis identified 40 differentially expressed protein (DEP) spots in waxy and non-waxy wheats, which belonged mainly to starch synthase (SS) I, SS IIa and granule-bound SS I. Most DEPs involved in amylopectin synthesis showed a similar expression pattern during grain development, suggesting relatively independent amylose and amylopectin synthesis pathways. Phosphoproteome analysis of starch granule-binding proteins, using TiO2 microcolumns and LC-MS/MS, showed that the total number of phosphoproteins and their phosphorylation levels in ND5181 were significantly higher than in SN119, but proteins controlling amylopectin synthesis had similar phosphorylation levels. Dynamic transcriptional expression profiling of starch biosynthesis-related genes indicated similar transcriptional expression profiles in both cultivars. Our results revealed that phosphorylation modifications played critical roles in amylose and amylopectin biosynthesis, but the lack of amylose did not affect the expression and phosphorylation of the starch granule-binding proteins involved in amylopectin biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
The procedure for enrichment of phosphopeptides from three biological replicates was as reported by Wu et al. (32) and Zhang et al. (26). Proteins extracted at 20 DPA were directly reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin. TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) were incubated in 400 μL loading buffer containing 65% acetonitrile (ACN)/2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/saturated with glutamic acid. A total of 3 mg of tryptic peptides from every biological replicate was dissolved in 600 μL loading buffer, and then incubated with the appropriate amount of TiO2 beads. After washing with 600 μL buffer (65% CAN/0.1% TFA), the phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 300 μL elution buffer (500 mM NH4OH/60% ACN). The eluates were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA)/H2O for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) (33), and were then searched against the wheat database (77,037 entries). Up to two missing cleavage points were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerance was 7 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for the MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to < 1.0% to identify both peptides and proteins. The minimum peptide length was set to 6. Phosphorylation residue localization was evaluated based on the PTM scores, which assign the probabilities for each of the possible residues according to their residue-determining ions. In this study, MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) was used to calculate the PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities. Potential phosphorylation residues were then grouped into three categories depending on their PTM localization probabilities; class I (localization probability, P ≥ 0.75), class II (0.75 > P ≥ 0.5), and class III (P < 0.5) (34, 35). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used to identify phosphorylation residues. Spectra without residue-determining ions led to the identification of phosphopeptides with undetermined residues. Phosphopeptides that met the following conditions were considered as having undergone a significant change in phosphorylation level according to the method described by Lv et al. (36): (1) phosphopeptide detected in all three biological replicates, (2) phosphopeptides with P < 0.05 by Student’s t-test, (3) phosphorylation localization probability ≥ 0.75, and (4) phosphorylation site score difference ≥ 5. The significantly enriched phosphorylation motif set was extracted from phosphopeptides with confidently identified phosphorylation sites (class I) using the motif-X algorithm (http://motif-x. med.harvard.edu/) (37). The phosphopeptides were centered at the phosphorylated amino acid residues and aligned, and six positions upstream and downstream of the phosphorylation site were included. For C- and N-terminal peptides, the sequence was completed to 13 amino acids with the required number of X, where X represents any amino acid. Because the upload restriction of Motif-X is 10 MB, a FASTA format data set (nearly 10 MB) containing the protein sequences from the wheat protein database was used as the background database to normalize the scores against the random distributions of amino acids. The occurrence threshold was set to 5% of the input data, set at a minimum of 20 peptides, and the probability threshold was set to p < 10−6. The Phyre2 online server (38) was used to predict the 3D structure of the proteins of interest. The 3D structures and the phosphorylated site were displayed using the SPDBV (version 4.1) software (39).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic, Phosphoproteomic, Granule-binding proteins

### Affiliations
nercv
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100048 Beijing, China

### Submitter
Guanxing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue-Ming Yan
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100048 Beijing, China


