### Accession
PXD035020

### Title
Perilipin 2 mediates milk fat globule secretion

### Description
Analysis of the milk fat globule membrane proteome from mice with genetic deletion of Perilipin 2 (Plin2/ADRP/ADPH)

### Sample Protocol
Milk fat globules were isolated by mixing fresh whole milk, obtained on lactation day 10, 1:1 with 10% sucrose and layered under 10+ ml of PBS. This preparation was centrifuged at 1500 g at room temperature. The floated globules were collected, washed twice with PBS and stored at −80°C. Frozen MFG were thawed on ice and subjected to Dounce homogenization- 100 strokes, in ice water bath to prevent warming. Resulting liquid, and one PBS wash of the homogenizer, were combined and centrifuged at 22,000 xg for 20 min. at 4°C. The resulting membrane pellet was stored at −80°C until processing for proteomics.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into mgf files using a PAVA script (UCSF, MSF, San Francisco, CA, USA). These mgf files were then independently searched against the mouse SwissProt database using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK). Mass tolerances were ± 15 p.p.m. for MS peaks, and ± 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was used allowing for one missed cleavage. Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation, deamidation of asparagine, glutamine and tryptophan, sulphone of methionine, and tryptophan oxidation to formylkynurenin of tryptophan were allowed for variable modifications while carbamidomethyl of Cys was set as a fixed modification

### Publication Abstract
Secretory epithelial cells (sMEC) in mammary glands of lactating animals secrete lipids by a novel apocrine mechanism in which cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LD) contact and are enveloped by elements of the apical plasma membrane (APM) before being released into the lumen of the gland as membrane bound structures. The molecular properties of LD-APM contacts and the mechanisms regulating LD membrane envelopment and secretion are not fully understood. Perilipin-2 (Plin2) is a constitutive LD protein that has been proposed to tether LD to the APM through formation of a complex with the transmembrane protein, butyrophilin1a1 (BTN) and the redox enzyme, xanthine oxidoreductase (XOR). Using mice lacking Plin2 and physiological inhibition of apocrine lipid secretion, we demonstrate that LD-APM contact and envelopment are mechanistically distinct steps that they are differentially regulated by Plin2 and independent of LD secretion. We find that Plin2 is not required for formation of LD-APM contacts. However, it increases the percentage of LD that contact the APM and mediates enlargement of the LD-APM contact zone as LD undergo membrane envelopment. The effects of Plin2 LD-APM interactions are associated with increased abundances of BTN, XOR and Cidea, which are implicated as mediators of LD-APM contact formation, on membranes surrounding secreted LD, and with promotion of glycocalyx remodeling at LD-APM contact sites. We propose that Plin2 does not directly mediate contact between LD and the APM but acts by enhancing molecular interactions that stabilize LD-APM contacts and govern membrane envelopment of LD during apocrine lipid secretion. Plin2 does not appear to significantly affect the lipid content of milk in fully lactating animals, but it does increase lipid secretion at the onset of lactation in primaparous dams, which suggest a role in facilitating apocrine lipid secretion in sMEC during their initial transition to a secretory phenotype.

### Keywords
Perilipin 2, Lipid droplet, Lc ms/ms, Lactation, Adph, Mouse, Apocrine secretion, Proteomics, Milk fat globule membrane, Adrp

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
UC Denver 

### Submitter
Monika Dzieciatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr James L. McManaman
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus


