### Accession
PXD027934

### Title
Yorkie and Bonus protein interactome-Hippo pathway and Bonus control developmental cell fate decisions in the Drosophila eye

### Description
To identify novel regulators of the Hippo pathway, we performed affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) using Drosophila embryos overexpressing Yki-EGFP with a ubiquitous driver da-GAL4, as well as cultured S2 cells expressing Yki-SBP. We identified the core Hippo pathway components, multiple Hippo pathway regulators and functional groups, and several putative Yki interactors including Bonus (Bon). To identify additional cofactors that are recruited by Bon, we performed AP-MS using Bon-SBP expressed in Drosophila S2 cells. Further genetic tests revealed the involvement of Bon interactors, HDAC1, Su(var)2-10, and Hrb27C, in the Drosophila eye specification that is regulated by the Yki-Bon complex.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification from S2 cells. S2 cells were transfected with pMK33-yki-SBP and pMK33-bon-SBP constructs using the Effectene transfection reagent (Qiagen, Cat# 301427). Stable cell lines were selected with medium containing 300 μg/ml of Hygromycin B (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# H3274). Blank S2 cells (control) and stable cell lines with 50 ml dense culture were induced overnight (~16 hrs) with 0.07 mM CuSO4 at 25°C. Cells were collected and lysed on ice for 20 min using 1 ml of ice-cold Default Lysis Buffer (DLB) (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 125 mM NaCl, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 0.2% (v/v) IGEPAL, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM DTT, and 2x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Cat# 11836145001, 1 tablet per 25 ml lysis buffer)). The lysate was centrifugated at 16,000 rcf for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was incubated with 50 μl of packed Streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 53117) for 2 hrs at 4°C with rotation. The beads were then washed 5 times with 1 ml DLB. Proteins on the beads were eluted with 300 μl DLB containing 2 mM biotin and precipitated by adding 1/10 volume of 8.74 M Trichloroacetic acid solution (TCA, Fisher Scientific, Cat# BP555-500). Precipitated proteins were washed once with 500 μl of 0.874 M TCA and four times with ice-cold acetone. The protein pellet was dried overnight at RT and incubated in 40 μl of 2x SDS sample buffer at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were assessed by silver staining using NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# NP0335) and SilverQuest Silver Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# LC6070). The protein samples for mass spectrometry were separated on a short SDS-PAGE gel (8% Tris Glycine) followed by Coomassie blue staining. Two gel pieces (>75 kDa and < 75 kDa) for each sample were submitted to Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School for mass spectrometry analysis.

Affinity purification from embryos. 5 L fly cages with apple juice plates were set up for yw (control) and for the cross da-GAL4 x UAS-yki-EGFP. Flies were allowed to lay eggs for 15 hrs at RT, then the apple juice plates containing the embryos were incubated for 3 hrs at 25°C. Approximately 1 g embryos were dechorionated with 50% (v/v) Clorox bleach and washed with water. Collected embryos were then mixed with 6 ml of ice-cold DLB containing 0.5% (v/v) IGEPAL and 10 μM MG132 in glass homogenizer and lysed on ice using 20-30 strokes with tight pestle. The lysate was kept on ice for 20 min and centrifuged at 16,000 rcf for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was filtered with pre-chilled 0.45 μm filter and incubated with 50 μl of packed Pierce Control Agarose Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 26150) for 30 min at 4°C with rotation to minimize unspecific binding. The lysate was then incubated with 20 μl of packed GFP-Trap Agarose (Bulldog Bio, Cat# GTA020) for 2 hrs at 4°C with rotation. After binding, the GFP beads were washed 5 times with 1 ml DLB containing 0.5% (v/v) IGEPAL and 10 μM MG132, followed by addition of 40 μl of 4x SDS sample buffer and heating at 95°C for 6 min. The samples were then assessed by silver staining and the protein samples for mass spectrometry were prepared and submitted as above.

### Data Protocol
In-gel trypsin digestion and liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using Thermo Scientific Orbitrap mass spectrometer were performed by Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School. Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Sequest and searches were run using a database of annotated Drosophila proteins created in February 2017. Mass tolerance = 2, mass units = amu, fragment ion tolerance = 1, ion series = nB;nY;b;y, Mods = 15.9949146221 M 14.0157 C, enzyme = trypsin. Mass spectrometry results from two gel pieces for each sample were combined, and the results from the experimental and control samples were analyzed with Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) using the total peptides identified for each protein. SAINT analysis included the following numbers of biological replicates: Yki-SBP, four experiments and four controls; Yki-EGFP, three experiments and five controls; Bon-SBP, two experiments and three controls. The final SAINT output table is provided in the supplement of the publication.

### Publication Abstract
The canonical function of the Hippo signaling pathway is the regulation of organ growth. How this pathway controls cell-fate determination is less well understood. Here, we identify a function of the Hippo pathway in cell-fate decisions in the developing Drosophila eye, exerted through the interaction of Yorkie (Yki) with the transcriptional regulator Bonus (Bon), an ortholog of mammalian transcriptional intermediary factor 1/tripartite motif (TIF1/TRIM) family proteins. Instead of controlling tissue growth, Yki and Bon promote epidermal and antennal fates at the expense of the eye fate. Proteomic, transcriptomic, and genetic analyses reveal that Yki and Bon control these cell-fate decisions by recruiting transcriptional and post-transcriptional co-regulators and by repressing Notch target genes and activating epidermal differentiation genes. Our work expands the range of functions and regulatory mechanisms under Hippo pathway control.

### Keywords
Bon, Embryo, Drosophila, Yki, Lc-ms/ms, S2 cell

### Affiliations
Biology Department, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA
University of Massachusetts Boston

### Submitter
Heya Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Veraksa
Biology Department, University of Massachusetts Boston, USA


