### Accession
PXD005993

### Title
Protein nitrosylation under flooding

### Description
To understand soybean responses to flooding stress, nitrosylated proteome was analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
S-nitrosylated proteins were extracted based on the modified biotin-switch technique (BST) described by Jeffrey et al. (2004), by converting S-nitrosylated Cys to biotinylated Cys, using S-nitrosylated protein detection assay kit (Cayman Chemical Company, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA). Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) with bovine serum albumin as the standard.  The S-nitrosylated proteins were enriched using S-nitrosylated proteins (100 μg) by pulling down by streptavidin agarose. Precipitated S-nitrosylated proteins at each time point were purified with methanol and chloroform to remove any detergent from the sample solutions. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, and proteins in the samples were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56oC and then alkylated with 50 mM indoacetamide for 30 min at 37oC in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 1:100 enzyme/protein concentrations at 37oC for 16 h. The resulting tryptic peptides were acidified by mixing with formic acid (pH<3), and the resulting solution was centrifuged at 20 000 x g for 10 min. The obtained supernatant was collected and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS).  A nanospray LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides in 0.1 % formic acid were loaded on to a C18 PepMap trap column (300 μm ID x 5 mm; Dionex, Germering, Germany) of an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex) and were then eluted with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8-30% over 150 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The eluted peptides were separated and sprayed on a C18 capillary tip column (75 μm ID x 120 mm; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage pf 1.5 kV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the mass spectrometer over 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 30 000. A lock mass function was used for high mass accuracy. The ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 sec to prevent repetitive selection of peptides.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) of a soybean peptide database (55,787 sequences) constructed from the Phytozome (version 9.1; http://www.phytozome.net/soybean). The acquired raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.0288; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The parameters used in the Mascot searches were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the analysis. Mascot results were filtered with the Percolator function to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. False discovery rates for peptide identification in all searches were less than 1.0%. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p < 0.05) were used for protein identification. The relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared using the commercial label-free quantification package SIEVE software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Soybean; post-translational modification; nitrosylaiton; flooding

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
National Institute of Crop, NARO, Japan

### Submitter
Akiko Hashiguchi

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
National Institute of Crop, NARO, Japan


