### Accession
PXD034471

### Title
Coordinate control of endoplasmic reticulum chaperone biosynthesis and peptide hormone secretion revealed by a β-cell model of Prader-Willi syndrome

### Description
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a multisystem disorder caused by loss of expression of a cluster of paternally-expressed, imprinted genes. Neonatal failure to thrive is followed by childhood-onset hyperphagia, obesity, neurobehavioral abnormalities, and hormonal deficits. Prior evidence from a mouse model with a deletion of the orthologous PWS-domain identified abnormal pancreatic islet development with deficient insulin secretion, hypoglucagonemia, and postnatal onset of progressive, lethal hypoglycemia. To investigate PWS-genes in β-cell secretory function, we used CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing to generate isogenic, clonal INS-1 insulinoma lines with 3.16 Mb deletions of the silent, maternal (control) or active, paternal (PWS) alleles. A significant reduction in basal and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion signifies a cell autonomous insulin secretion deficit in PWS β-cells. Parallel proteome and transcriptome studies revealed reduced levels of secreted peptides and for eleven endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones, including HSPA5 and HSP90B1. In contrast to dosage compensation previously seen for ER chaperones in Hspa5 or Hsp90b1 gene knockouts, compensation is precluded by the widespread deficiency of ER chaperones in PWS cells. Remarkably, but consistent with reduced ER chaperone levels, PWS β-cells are more sensitive to ER stress activation of all three regulatory pathways (XBP1, eIF2α-P, ATF6-N). Therefore, a coordinated, chronic deficit of ER chaperones in PWS β-cells is hypothesized to lead to a delay in ER transit and/or folding of insulin and other cargo along the secretory pathway. These findings provide insight into the pathophysiological basis of hormone deficits in PWS and indicate key roles for PWS-imprinted genes in β-cell secretory function.

### Sample Protocol
Each of the 3 control cell lines (5-9, 2, 16) and the 3 PWS cell lines (3, 19-1, 19-4)  were grown in 6-well plates, harvested and then washed with PBS containing Mg++ and  Ca++, incubated 30 min in KRH-high glucose (22 mM, glucose-induced insulin secretion  condition, with BSA excluded from the KRBH buffer) after which the media was collected,  centrifuged 10 min 1300 rpm, and supernatant (“secretory fractions 1-6”; Fig. S12A)  collected and stored at -80°C. Next, 1.0 ml “9091” (90% methanol, 9% water, 1% acetic acid) was added to each well, the cells were scraped and transferred to microfuge tubes  and centrifuged 1300 rpm 15 min. The supernatant (the “9091” fractions 7-12”; Fig. S12A)  and cell pellets (fractions 13-18; Fig. S12A) were collected and stored at -80°C. The  secretory fractions, 9091 fractions, and cell pellets were each concentrated by drying  completely in a speed vac and stored at -80°C. Subsequently, to prepare for mass  spectrometry, proteins from each fraction were dissolved in 8 M urea, 100 µM  Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, reduced with tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with chloroacetamide, then diluted to 2 M  urea with 100 mM TEAB, addition of 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega) and placed in 37°C shaker  for 16 hrs. Secretory protein fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer  (Thermo Fisher) while 9091 protein fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass  spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with each operated in a data-dependent mode. For each,  proteins were injected directly onto a 25 cm, 100 µm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 µm  C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 400 nl/min (secretory  fractions) or 300 nl/min (9091 soluble fractions) on EASY-nLC (Thermo), using 0.1%  formic acid in water (buffer A) or acetonitrile (buffer B). For secretory protein fractions, we  used a gradient of 1–40% B over 80 min, an increase to 80% B over 10 min, and held at  90% B for 5 min for a 120 min total run time, while for 9091 soluble fractions the gradient  was 1–25% B over 110 min, an increase to 40% B over 10 min, an increase to 90% over  10 min, and held at 90% B for 10 min for a 140 min total run time. The column was re- equilibrated with 20 µl of buffer A prior to the injection of each sample, with two injections  performed for each 9091 sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column  and nanospray directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.8 kV voltage at the  back of the column.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification and quantification were determined using IP2  (Integrated Proteomics Applications). The MS raw data files were converted into MS1,  MS2 and MS3 format using RawConverter (10) (version 1.1.0.23) with monoisotopic  option. For peptide identification, tandem mass spectra were searched against a  database including the UniProt Rat database one entry per gene (21589 entries released  5/30/2021), these entries scrambled between K and R to make a decoy database, common contaminants, peptides and custom proteins using ProLuCID (11). The search  was set with 50 and 600 ppm for precursor and fragments mass tolerance, respectively.  The precursor mass range was set from 600 to 6000 with half or fully tryptic status. The  N-term static modification was considered as (+229.1629) for TMT labeling and the amino  acid residue specific static modifications were (+57.02146) on cysteine for  carbamidomethylation and (+229.1629) on lysine for TMT labeling. Data was filtered  using DTASelect with the following parameters, -p 1 -y 2 --trypstat --pfp 0.01 --extra --pI  -DM 10 --DB --dm -in -t 1 --brief –quiet (12). Quantitation was calculated with Census  version 2.51 (13) and filtered with an intensity value of 5000 and isobaric purity value of  0.6 (14). The Quantitative@COMPARE feature of IP2 was used to determine statistical  significance. For secretory protein samples 1-6 the search results were filtered with  parameters -p 1 -y 0 --trypstat --pfp 0.01 --extra --pI -DM 10 --DB --dm -in -t 1 --brief -- quiet. For 9091 fractions 7-12 the search results were filtered with parameters -p 1 -y 1 - -trypstat --pfp 0.01 --extra --pI -DM 10 --DB --dm -in -t 1 --brief --quiet.

### Publication Abstract
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a multisystem disorder with neurobehavioral, metabolic, and hormonal phenotypes, caused by loss of expression of a paternally-expressed imprinted gene cluster. Prior evidence from a PWS mouse model identified abnormal pancreatic islet development with retention of aged insulin and deficient insulin secretion. To determine the collective roles of PWS genes in &#x3b2;-cell biology, we used genome-editing to generate isogenic, clonal INS-1 insulinoma lines having 3.16 Mb deletions of the silent, maternal- (control) and active, paternal-allele (PWS). PWS &#x3b2;-cells demonstrated a significant cell autonomous reduction in basal and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Further, proteomic analyses revealed reduced levels of cellular and secreted hormones, including all insulin peptides and amylin, concomitant with reduction of at least ten endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones, including GRP78 and GRP94. Critically, differentially expressed genes identified by whole transcriptome studies included reductions in levels of mRNAs encoding these secreted peptides and the group of ER chaperones. In contrast to the dosage compensation previously seen for ER chaperones in Grp78 or Grp94 gene knockouts or knockdown, compensation is precluded by the stress-independent deficiency of ER chaperones in PWS &#x3b2;-cells. Consistent with reduced ER chaperones levels, PWS INS-1 &#x3b2;-cells are more sensitive to ER stress, leading to earlier activation of all three arms of the unfolded protein response. Combined, the findings suggest that a chronic shortage of ER chaperones in PWS &#x3b2;-cells leads to a deficiency of protein folding and/or delay in ER transit of insulin and other cargo. In summary, our results illuminate the pathophysiological basis of pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell hormone deficits in PWS, with evolutionary implications for the multigenic PWS-domain, and indicate that PWS-imprinted genes coordinate concerted regulation of ER chaperone biosynthesis and &#x3b2;-cell secretory pathway function.

### Keywords
Crispr/cas9; genomic imprinting; hormone secretion; metabolic disease; pancreatic islet

### Affiliations
Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, UPMC  Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Robert D. Nicholls
Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, UPMC  Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA


