### Accession
PXD017299

### Title
Influence of cross-linker polarity on selectivity towards lysine side chains

### Description
Even though the amine reactive BS2G and DSG cross-linkers have the same length of spacer and are based on N-hydroxysuccinimidic group, our data showed that each of them formed preferentially different cross-links. We demonstrated that the choice of cross-linker can have a significant impact on the output data for structural characterization of biomolecules. Using equimolar mixtures of DSG with d6-BS2G, and BS2G with d6-DSG, we established that the polar BS2G preferentially bound to polar regions of modified molecule, whereas non-polar DSG bound to hydrophobic regions. This phenomenon established that the mixture of polar and non-polar cross-linkers acted as an efficient tool for the determination of distance constraints in proteins.

### Sample Protocol
DSG, BS2G and equimolar mixtures composed of DSG/BS2G, DSG/d6-BS2G and d6-DSG/BS2G were used for modification of 10 µM solution of BSA in 20 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl (pH 7.5) buffer. Additionally, control experiments using mixtures of DSG/d4-DSG and BS2G/d4-BS2G were performed. All previously mentioned cross linkers and mixtures were prepared to a concentration of 10 mg/ml using anhydrous DMSO and added to BSA solution in 100 × molar excess. Reactions were done for 30 minutes at room temperature. Before digestion, disulfide bonds were reduced with 20 mM Tris(2 carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 56 °C for 20 minutes. Free cysteines were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. After modification, samples were diluted by 5 times with a solution of 50 mM 4 ethylmorpholine buffer (pH 8.5):AcN (80:20 v/v); subsequently, trypsin/Lys-C was added (protein:enzyme ratio 1:20). Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C. Digested mixture was quenched with TFA to a final concentration of 0.1% and subsequently dried by SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Germany). All cross-linking experiments were triplicated for consistency. Prior to the LC-MS analysis, digestion mixture was reconstituted with 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid. For analysis, 1 µg of BSA peptide was injected and analyzed with Agilent 1200 series HPLC system equipped with desalting pre-column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 0.3×5 mm) followed by analytical column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 3.5 μm, 0.3×150 mm from Agilent Technologies(USA)) heated to 60°C. A flow rate of 10 μl/min with acetonitrile gradient 5%–40% with 35 minutes running time was used. The chromatographic system was directly coupled with electrospray ionization source of SolariX FT-ICR mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) equipped with 15 T superconducting magnet. Eluted peptides were analyzed in positive broadband mode with 1M transient data points over the range 250–2500 m/z. Data independent mode was used while ESI-TOF tuning mix (Agilent Technologies, USA) served as a lock mass (m/z 922.0098) and as a center of isolation window of ± 500 Da for MS/MS. Fragmentation data were acquired with 22.5 eV collision voltage, 0.2 s MS/MS ion accumulation and 2 accumulated scans per spectra.

### Data Protocol
In all the spectra, complete chromatograms were deconvoluted with SNAP 2.0 algorithm integrated in Data Analysis 4.4 (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) and exported to the mascot generic files. Obtained files were searched by StavroX 3.6.0.1 with the following settings. Protease sides and modification: C terminal cleavage of lysine, arginine and tyrosine with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages; static modification carbamidation of cysteines; variable oxidation of methionines. For all experiments, cross-linker was defined as C5H4O2 due to the same spacer composition of DSG and BS2G. Cross-linkers specificity was set for N terminus, lysine, serine and tyrosine. Precursor and fragmentation errors were set to 1.0 and 2.0 ppm, respectively. All cross-linked candidates were manually checked. Ratio of light and heavy linker was determined for all identified cross-linked peptides as previously published. Based on the previously established cross-links from StavroX, the most intense precursor ion (charge state) for cross-linked peptide was selected and used for the creation of extracted ion chromatogram in Data Analysis software. Final spectrum was exported as .XY file by sum of all spectra where precursor ion for light and heavy cross-linked peptide was found. The ratio of light and heavy linker was evaluated in mMass software (version 5.5.0) by fitting experimental data with theoretically simulated isotopic pattern for each cross-linked peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry is currently a progressive technology for deriving structural information of proteins and protein complexes. In addition, chemical cross-linking is a powerful tool for stabilizing macromolecular complexes for single particle cryo-electron microscopy. Broad pallets of cross-linking chemistry, currently available for the majority of cross-linking experiments, still rely on the amine-reactive N-hydroxysuccinimide esters targeting mainly N-termini and lysine side chains. These cross-linkers are divided into two groups: water soluble and water insoluble; and research teams prefer one or another speculating on the benefits of their choice. However, the effect of cross-linker polarity on the outcome of cross-linking reaction has never been studied. Herein, we use both polar (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) glutarate) and non-polar (disuccinimidyl glutarate) cross-linkers and systematically investigated the impact of cross-linker hydrophobicity on resulting distance constraints, using bovine serum albumin as a model protein. SIGNIFICANCE: Even though the amine reactive BS2G and DSG cross-linkers have the same length of spacer and are based on N-hydroxysuccinimidic group, our data showed that each of them formed preferentially different cross-links. We demonstrated that the choice of cross-linker can have a significant impact on the output data for structural characterization of biomolecules. Using equimolar mixtures of DSG with d6-BS2G, and BS2G with d6-DSG, we established that the polar BS2G preferentially bound to polar regions of modified molecule, whereas non-polar DSG bound to hydrophobic regions. This phenomenon established that the mixture of polar and non-polar cross-linkers acted as an efficient tool for the determination of distance constraints in proteins.

### Keywords
Structural mass spectrometry; protein structure; chemical cross-linking; disuccinimidyl glutarate; bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) glutarate; bovine serum albumin

### Affiliations
1 Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic
2 Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jan Fiala

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novák
Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic


