### Accession
PXD006031

### Title
A comprehensive, open-source platform for mass spectrometry based glycoproteomics data analysis

### Description
Glycosylation is among the most abundant and diverse protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) identified to date. The structural analysis of this PTM is challenging due to the diverse monosaccharides which are not conserved among organisms, the branched nature of glycans, their isomeric structures, and heterogeneity in the glycan distribution at a given site. Glycoproteomics experiments have adopted the traditional high-throughput LC-MSn proteomics workflow to analyze site-specific glycosylation. However, comprehensive computational platforms for data analyses are scarce. To address this limitation, we present a comprehensive, open-source, modular software for glycoproteomics data analysis called GlycoPAT (GlycoProteomics Analysis Toolbox). The program introduces ‘SmallGlyPep’ as a minimal linear representation of glycopeptides for MSn data analysis. It enables MS/MS analysis of N- and O-linked glycosylation using a novel scoring scheme to rank the hits based on cross-correlation and probability based analysis. False discovery calculations, parallel computing facilities and user-friendly GUIs (Graphical User Interfaces) are also provided. GlycoPAT is used to analyze site-specific glycosylation on simple glycoproteins, protein mixtures and human plasma cryoprecipitate. The results show that the simultaneous consideration of peptide and glycan fragmentation enables high quality MS spectrum annotation in three common MS/MS fragmentation modes: CID, HCD and ETD.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem-MS experiment: Bovine asialofetuin, bovine fetuin, bovine RNase B, and human α1-acid glycoprotein 1 (AGP-1) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Human fibronectin was from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY). 5cc human blood was drawn by venipuncture from an O-blood group individual into 1:9 sodium citrate following human subjects protocols approved by the University at Buffalo Health Science IRB. Platelet poor plasma (PPP) was isolated from this blood as described previously 44. This precipitate was rapidly frozen to -80°C, and then slowly thawed at 3°C. Protein precipitate thus formed was collected by centrifugation at 5000g for 15 min. The pellet was resuspended in 20mM HEPES buffer and dissolved by warming to 37°C. For MS, all protein samples were processed with a surfactant aided on-pellet digestion procedure 45,46. Briefly, 100 μg protein of each sample was spiked with 0.5% SDS and then denatured and reduced using 4 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37°C for 30 min. Following this, fresh 20 mM iodoacetamide was added for 30 min in the dark. Then, 6-fold cold acetone was added to the sample volume in two steps with vortexing, and the mixture was incubated overnight at -20°C. Samples thus obtained were centrifuged at 20,000g at 4°C for 30 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed with methanol and then air-dried for several min. This dried pellet was smashed to small particles in 50 mM Tris-FA (formic acid) buffer (pH 8.5) with a sonicator, 1:20 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio of sequencing grade trypsin or Glu-C (Thermo-Pierce) was added to a total volume of 100 μl, and then the sample was incubated at 37°C for 18h. 6µg of digested samples prepared in this manner were analyzed using either an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap-Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), both with ETD module. The nano-LC system used for the study featured low void volume and high chromatographic reproducibility 47,48. Mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in 1% acetonitrile, and phase B was 0.1% FA in 88% acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto a large-ID trap (300 µm ID × 0.5 cm, packed with Zorbax 5µm C18 material) with 1% B at 10µl/min. The trap was washed for 3min before the samples were back-flush onto the nano-LC column (75µm ID × 75cm, packed with Pepmap 3-µm C18 material). The typical elution run was 2h long at 52°C, with a flow rate of 250nl/min. Separation followed the sequence: 3 to 8% B over 5min; 8 to 24% B over 85min; 24 to 38% B over 15min; 38 to 63% B over 10min; 63 to 97% B in 5min. Initial MS1 analysis (m/z 300-2000) was performed at a mass resolution of 60,000 for OrbitrapXL (120,000 for Fusion). MS2 fragmentation was at a resolution of 30,000. In runs with standard proteins (7 runs with fetuin, 2 with asialofetuin, 1 with RNaseB) and defined mixtures (10 runs total), the six most abundant precursors in the MS1 spectra were MS/MS fragmented in CID, HCD, ETD and/or alternating CID/ETD mode. In an additional 12 runs that assayed the human plasma cryoprecipitome, MS/MS CID and ETD mode fragmentation was triggered following the initial detection of glycoprotein product-ions in HCD mode (m/z=204.0871; 138.0545; 366.14002; 163.0606; 292.1032; 657.2354, 168.09). Other instrument parameters were: 3s cycle time; scan range (m/z)= 150-2000; AGC target= 2*104 ; MS: charge state= 2~8; dynamic exclusion after n times= 2; decision: precursor priority= highest charge state then most intense (or most intense then highest charge state); FTMSn (HCD): Isolation mode= quadrupole; isolation window= 3; collision energy (%)= 35; resolution= 30K; AGC target= 1*105; maximum injection time= 60 ms; microscan= 1; Product Ion trigger: at least 2 product ions detected; Top N product ions= 30; Ion Trap (IT) MSn (CID): Isolation mode= quadrupole; isolation window= 3; collision energy (%)= 30; AGC target= 1*105; maximum injection time= 120 ms; microscan= 1; ITMSn (ETD): isolation mode= quadrupole; isolation window= 3; AGC target= 1*104; maximum injection time= 150 ms; microscan= 2; reaction time=200 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS data pre-processing: The .RAW files generated from the MS instruments were converted either to text format with .dta extension using Bioworks 3.3.1 (Thermo-Scientific) or to .mzXML format using the msconvert tool (ProteoWizard, 49). In the .dta files, the first row contains the precursor MS1 mass (M+H+) and charge assignment inferred by Bioworks. The remaining rows list MS2 fragment m/z values along the first column and corresponding intensity (I) data on the second column. The .mzXML file presents the same data and also additional experimental information, like fragmentation mode, in XML format.   Theoretical glycopeptide database generation: The GlyDB was generated for N- and O-linked glycans as explained in Results. GlyPepDB was then synthesized in silico by digesting one or more proteins supplied in FASTA format using the specified proteolytic enzyme(s), and then appending both fixed and variable PTM modifications. The MATLAB function used in this step is called digestSGP and it outputs the GlyPepDB in SGP1.0 format. When generating this database, in this current manuscript, either 2 or 3 missed cleavages, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification (+57.02146 Da) and variable methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was allowed. N-glycans were allowed at appear at Asp in the N-X-S/T sequon and O-glycans were allowed at all Ser/Thr residues. While there was no limit on the number of fixed modifications on any peptide, the number of variable modifications was limited to 2-3.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation is among the most abundant and diverse protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) identified to date. The structural analysis of this PTM is challenging because of the diverse monosaccharides which are not conserved among organisms, the branched nature of glycans, their isomeric structures, and heterogeneity in the glycan distribution at a given site. Glycoproteomics experiments have adopted the traditional high-throughput LC-MS<sup>n</sup> proteomics workflow to analyze site-specific glycosylation. However, comprehensive computational platforms for data analyses are scarce. To address this limitation, we present a comprehensive, open-source, modular software for glycoproteomics data analysis called GlycoPAT (GlycoProteomics Analysis Toolbox; freely available from www.VirtualGlycome.org/glycopat). The program includes three major advances: (1) "SmallGlyPep," a minimal linear representation of glycopeptides for MS<sup>n</sup> data analysis. This format allows facile serial fragmentation of both the peptide backbone and PTM at one or more locations. (2) A novel scoring scheme based on calculation of the "Ensemble Score (ES)," a measure that scores and rank-orders MS/MS spectrum for N- and O-linked glycopeptides using cross-correlation and probability based analyses. (3) A false discovery rate (FDR) calculation scheme where decoy glycopeptides are created by simultaneously scrambling the amino acid sequence and by introducing artificial monosaccharides by perturbing the original sugar mass. Parallel computing facilities and user-friendly GUIs (Graphical User Interfaces) are also provided. GlycoPAT is used to catalogue site-specific glycosylation on simple glycoproteins, standard protein mixtures and human plasma cryoprecipitate samples in three common MS/MS fragmentation modes: CID, HCD and ETD. It is also used to identify 960 unique glycopeptides in cell lysates from prostate cancer cells. The results show that the simultaneous consideration of peptide and glycan fragmentation is necessary for high quality MS<sup>n</sup> spectrum annotation in CID and HCD fragmentation modes. Additionally, they confirm the suitability of GlycoPAT to analyze shotgun glycoproteomics data.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Plasma

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo, SUNY
Professor Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Biomedical Engineering and Clinical & Translational Research Center University at Buffalo  State University of New York

### Submitter
Kai Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Sriram Neelamegham
Professor Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Biomedical Engineering and Clinical & Translational Research Center University at Buffalo  State University of New York


