### Accession
PXD003218

### Title
Human serum from patients at multiple time points after ischemic stroke

### Description
Application of acute therapies such as thrombolysis for ischemic stroke (IS) is constrained because of diagnostic uncertainty and the dynamic nature of stroke biology.  To investigate changes in blood proteins after stroke and as a result of thrombolysis treatment we performed label-free quantitative proteomics on serum samples using high resolution mass spectrometry and long HPLC gradient (5 hours) combined with a 50cm column to optimize the peptide separation. We identified (FDR: 1%) and quantified a total of 574 protein groups from a total of 92 samples from 30 patients. Ten patients were treated by thrombolysis as part of a randomised placebo controlled trial and up to five samples were collected from each individual at different time points after stroke. We identified 26 proteins differently expressed by treatment group (FDR: 5%) and significant changes of expression over time for 23 proteins (FDR: 10%). Molecules such as fibrinogen and CRP showed expression profiles with a high potential clinical utility in the acute stroke setting.  Protein expression profiles vary acutely in the blood after stroke and have the potential to allow the construction of a stroke clock and to have an impact on IS treatment decision making.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were obtained from stroke patients who were recruited in the Extending the time for Thrombolysis in Emergency Neurological Deficits (EXTEND) trial. For each patient, samples were planned to be collected immediately after imaging (baseline), immediately before treatment administration (T0), 12-24h after treatment administration (T12-24h) and at 3 days (T3d), 90 days (T90d) and 12 months (T12m) after stroke.  For biomarker analysis, 5 ml of venous blood were collected for each time point. The serum was separated, centrifuged at 1500g for 10 minutes and stored at -80 ºC. Samples were processed and frozen within 1h from the initial collection time.  Clinical data including age, gender, stroke type according to the trial of ORG 10172 in acute stroke treatment (TOAST) classification and detailed past medical history were recorded. Imaging (by CTp or MRI) was performed on admission and PWI and DWI volumes were measured. Stroke severity was assessed by using the National Institutes of Health stroke scale (NIHSS) score. Functional outcome was evaluated at 3 month after the event by means of the modified Rankin Scale (mRS). Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants or relatives. The study conformed to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the ethics committees of the different involved institutions.    Ten microliters of serum from each patient was first stabilised in 100 µL of 8 M urea pH=8.3 and stored at -80°C until used. For proteomic analysis, the stabilised samples were randomised by batches of 16 and processed as follow: 20 µL protein solution was added to 90 µL of 8 M urea pH=8.3 and reduced for 5 hours with 1 µL of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP). After this, samples were alkylated for 1 hour at 25°C in the dark with 4 µL of 1 M iodoacetamide (IAA). Digests were performed overnight (37°C) by addition of 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, Madison WI, USA) and 900 µL of 50 mM Tris pH=8.3 followed by a second digestion step with 1 µg trypsin and an additional incubation of 4 hours at 37°C.    Two hundred microliters of the digested solution were collected and dried by SpeedVac centrifugation. The digested proteins were resuspended in 100 µl of 1% (v/v) formic acid and centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 2 minutes. The solid phase extraction  was performed with Empore reversed-phase extraction disks (SDB-XC reversed-phase material, 3M) according to Ishihama et al. (Ishihama, Rappsilber et al. 2006) with the following modifications: the membrane was conditioned with 50 µL of 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (w/v) trifluroacetic acid, then washed with 50 µL of 0.1 % trifluroacetic acid before the tryptic peptides were bound to the membrane. The bound peptides were eluted by 50 µL 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (w/v) trifluroacetic acid, and dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge.   Peptides (2 µL) reconstituted in a final volume of 10 µL 0.1 % trifluroacetic acid and 2 % acetonitrile (buffer A) were loaded and washed onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 μL/min for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Easy-Spray 75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nL/min using a linear acetonitrile gradient of two buffers: buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), starting from 5% buffer B increasing to 60% over 300 min. Data were collected on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300–1500 as MS scan range. Collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra were collected for the 20 most intense ions. The dynamic exclusion parameters used were: repeat count 1, duration 90 s and the exclusion list size was set at 500 with early expiration disabled. Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were as follows: MS scan at 120 000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106, CID at 35% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGT target of 5000. The Orbitrap Elite was operated in dual analyser mode with the Orbitrap analyser being used for MS and the linear trap being used for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label free quantitation of proteins across all 92 samples was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30 (Cox and Mann 2008). Identification of peptides and proteins was performed internally by MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine to search against all reviewed and unreviewed human proteins in the Uniprot database (July 2014). Common contaminants and decoys were included automatically by Andromeda. Prior to searching, MS/MS spectra were filtered by retaining only the top eight peaks per 100Da. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5ppm (after precursor refinement) and MS/MS tolerance to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and N-term acetylation and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and peptides were required to be at least seven amino acids in length. False discovery rate cut-offs for both peptides and proteins in the database search were set to 1%. Both unique and razor peptides (peptides shared by different proteins of a group) were used for quantitation with a minimum of two peptides including at least one unique peptide required to calculate a protein quantitative value. The “match between runs” setting in MaxQuant was used to transfer peptide identifications from one run to another on the basis of matching retention time and mass to charge ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Application of acute therapies such as thrombolysis for ischaemic stroke (IS) is constrained because of diagnostic uncertainty and the dynamic nature of stroke biology. To investigate changes in blood proteins after stroke and as a result of thrombolysis treatment we performed label-free quantitative proteomics on serum samples using high-resolution mass spectrometry and long high-performance liquid chromatography gradient (5 hours) combined with a 50-cm column to optimise the peptide separation. We identified (false discovery rate [FDR]: 1%) and quantified a total of 574 protein groups from a total of 92 samples from 30 patients. Ten patients were treated by thrombolysis as part of a randomised placebo-controlled trial and up to 5 samples were collected from each individual at different time points after stroke. We identified 26 proteins differently expressed by treatment group (FDR: 5%) and significant changes of expression over time for 23 proteins (FDR: 10%). Molecules such as fibrinogen and C-reactive protein showed expression profiles with a high-potential clinical utility in the acute stroke setting. Protein expression profiles vary acutely in the blood after stroke and have the potential to allow the construction of a stroke clock and to have an impact on IS treatment decision making.

### Keywords
Human, Serum, Ischemic stroke

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Faculty of Health, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia
James Cook University

### Submitter
Ira Cooke

### Lab Head
Dr David William Howells
School of Medicine, Faculty of Health, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia


