### Accession
PXD016879

### Title
Molecular basis of impaired extraocular muscle function in a mouse model of congenital myopathy due to compound heterozygous RYR1 mutations

### Description
Mutations in the RYR1 gene are the most common cause of human congenital myopathies and patients with recessive mutations are severely affected and characteristically display ptosis and/or ophthalmoplegia. In order to gain insight into the mechanism leading to extraocular muscle involvement, we investigated the biochemical, structural and physiological properties of eye muscles from mouse models we created knocked-in for RYR1 mutations. Ex vivo force production in extraocular muscles from compound heterozygous RyR1p.Q1970fsX16+p.A4329D mutant mice was significantly reduced compared to that observed in WT. The decrease in muscle force was also accompanied by approximately a 40% reduction in RyR1 protein content, a decrease in electrically evoked calcium transients, disorganization of the muscle ultrastructure and a decrease in the number of calcium release units. Unexpectedly, the superfast and ocular-muscle specific myosin heavy chain-EO isoform was almost undetectable in RyR1p.Q1970fsX16+p.A4329D mutant mice.  The results of this study show for the first time that the extraocular muscle phenotype caused by compound heterozygous RYR1 mutations is due to reduced content of ryanodine and dihydropyridine receptors, the presence of fewer calcium release units and associated mitochondria as well as disorganization of myofiber structure. Additionally, the presence of the two mutations leads to the almost complete absence of the extraocular muscle-specific isoform of myosin heavy chain.

### Sample Protocol
1µg of peptides were LC-MS analyzed as described previously (PMID:27345528). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were searched against a protein database containing sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of mus musculus (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2019/03/27), Myh2 and Myh13 from Trembl, the six calibration mix proteins (PMID:27345528) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 17,414 sequences) using the SpectroMine software (Biognosys, version 1.0.20235.13.16424) and the TMT 10-plex default settings. In brief, the precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT6plex (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. The false identification rate was set to 1% by the software based on the number of decoy hits. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statically analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (v2.3, PMID:27345528). This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics. Finally, the calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ryr1, Eom, Proteomics, Muscle

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


