### Accession
PXD022262

### Title
Exercise plasma dampens brain inflammation via clusterin and boosts memory

### Description
Physical exercise seems universally beneficial to human and animal health, slowing cognitive aging and neurodegeneration. Cognitive benefits are tied to increased plasticity and reduced inflammation within the hippocampus, yet little is known about the factors and mechanisms mediating these effects. We discovered “runner” plasma, collected from voluntarily running mice, infused into sedentary mice recapitulates the cellular and functional benefits of exercise on the adult brain. Importantly, runner plasma reduces baseline neuroinflammatory gene expression and experimentally induced brain inflammation. Plasma proteomic analysis revealed a striking increase in complement cascade inhibitors including clusterin (CLU), which is facilitating the anti-inflammatory effects of runner plasma. Intravenously injected CLU strongly binds to brain endothelial cells reducing their inflammatory gene expression in an acute model of brain inflammation and in Alzheimer’s disease model mice. Cognitively impaired patients participating in structured exercise for 6 months showed improved cognition and higher plasma clusterin levels. These findings demonstrate the existence of anti-inflammatory “exercise factors” that are transferrable, target the cerebrovasculature and benefit the brain, and are present in humans engaging in exercise.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested for MS-analysis. In brief, all plasma MS experiments, albumin and immunoglobulin were depleted from 15 μL of dialyzed plasma using an immunoaffinity column (PROTIA Sigma ProteoPrep Immunoaffinity Albumin & IgG Depletion Kit). Depleted plasma and albumin/IgG fractions bound to the immunoaffinity columns were eluted separately and stored at -20°C until further processing. A total of 100 μg protein was diluted in phosphate buffered saline to a final volume of 300 μL. Diluted samples were denatured at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by addition of 5 μL Benzonase and incubated for 30 min at 37°C, then reduced for 30 min at 45°C with 15 μL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and incubated at room temperature in dark for 30 min with 15 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide. Alkylation reaction was quenched using 30 μL of 200 mM DTT. Protein cleanup was performed using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3). In brief, equal parts hydrophobic and hydrophilic carboxyl magnetic beads was added to each sample. Samples were acidified with 10 μL of 1% formic acid and acetonitrile was added to reach at least 50% of the total volume. After mixing and incubating at room temperature for 8 min, protein-laden beads were aggregated and collected using a magnetic rack. Samples were then washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with acetonitrile. Finally, proteins were incubated overnight at 37°C in 50 μL of a 0.1μg/μL solution of Trypsin/LysC in 50 mM HEPES buffer. Following digestion, samples were sonicated for 10 min and acetonitrile was added to samples to be used for label free MS to reach at least 95% of the total volume. After incubation for 8 min at room temperature, supernatant was discarded and beads were washed with 180 μL acetonitrile. Beads were reconstituted in 50 μL of 2% dimethyl sulfoxide, sonicated for 5 min and then the supernatant containing peptides was retained. 5% of formic acid was added to the samples and a final desalting peptide cleanup was performed using StageTip followed by LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  TMT labeling was achieved using a TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the kit’s directions. After labeling 5 % of the material was used to check ion distributions and labeling efficiency. The rest was then combined in adjusted ratios with the other labeled samples, lyophilized in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and resuspended in 5% formic acid followed by a peptide desalting step using StageTip. Samples were then lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 quantitative analyses on an Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data for the label free samples was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.2.0.388 (Thermo Scientific) with SEQUEST-HT and searched against the Uniprot Mouse database, including the identification of common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were variable modifications and the parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.05 Da. A false discovery rate of 1% at the peptide levels was set, and only peptides with at least 6 residues were included. The raw data for TMT-labeled samples was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4.0.305 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST-HT and the parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.6 Da. The spectra were searched against the Uniprot Mouse database, including the identification of common contaminants. Static modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-labeled N-terminus and lysine. Differential modifications were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal. Percolator (Käll et al., 2007) was applied to filter out false MS2 assignments at a false discovery rate of 1% at peptide levels and only peptides with at least 7 residues were included. For the quantification, using MS3, a mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm window was applied to the integration of reporter ions using the most confident centroid method. A co-isolation threshold of 30, and SPS MS3 matches of 65 % and an average reporter signal to noise value of 10 threshold was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Physical exercise is generally beneficial to all aspects of human and animal health, slowing cognitive ageing and neurodegeneration<sup>1</sup>. The cognitive benefits of physical exercise are tied to an increased plasticity and reduced inflammation within the hippocampus<sup>2-4</sup>, yet little is known about the factors and mechanisms that mediate these effects. Here we show that 'runner plasma', collected from voluntarily running mice and infused into sedentary mice, reduces baseline neuroinflammatory gene expression and experimentally induced brain inflammation. Plasma proteomic analysis revealed a concerted increase in complement cascade inhibitors including clusterin (CLU). Intravenously injected CLU binds to brain endothelial cells and reduces neuroinflammatory gene expression in a mouse model of acute brain inflammation and a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Patients with cognitive impairment who participated in structured exercise for 6 months had higher plasma levels of CLU. These findings demonstrate the existence of anti-inflammatory exercise factors that are transferrable, target the cerebrovasculature and benefit the brain, and are present in humans who engage in exercise.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-msms, Mouse

### Affiliations
Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Stanford University

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Wyss-Coray
Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford, CA 94305, USA


