### Accession
PXD011415

### Title
piRNA-guided co-transcriptional silencing coopts nuclear export factors

### Description
The PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that controls the expression of transposons and maintains genome integrity in animal germlines1,2. In Drosophila, piRNA-guided silencing is achieved, in part, via co-transcriptional repression of transposons by Piwi. This depends on Panoramix (Panx)3,4; however, precisely how an RNA binding event silences transcription remains to be determined. Here we show that Nuclear Export Factor 2 (Nxf2) and its co-factor, Nxt1, form a complex with Panx, and are required for co-transcriptional silencing of transposons in somatic and germline cells of the ovary. Tethering of Nxf2 to either RNA or DNA results in silencing of target loci and the concomitant accumulation of repressive chromatin marks. Nxf2 and Panx proteins are mutually required for proper localization and stability. We mapped the protein domains crucial for the Nxf2/Panx complex formation and show that the amino-terminal portion of Panx is sufficient to induce transcriptional silencing. Loss of Nxf2 or Panx results in nuclear accumulation of transposon transcripts, which is for some transposons Piwi-dependent.

### Sample Protocol
Ovaries from ~170 GFP-Panx, GFP-Nxf2 and control flies (3-5 days old) were dissected in ice-cold PBS and lysed in 300 μl of CoIP Lysis Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF, 0.2% NP-40 supplemented with complete protease inhibitors [Roche]) and homogenized using a motorized pestle. Lysates were cleared for 5 min at 16000g and the residual pellet re-extracted with the same procedure. GFP-tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated by incubation with 30 µl of GFP-Trap magnetic beads (Chromotek) for 3 hrs at 4 °C on a tube rotator. The beads were washed 6x with Lysis Buffer and 2x with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, before TMT-labelling followed by quantitative Mass Spectrometry. TMT chemical isobaric labelling were performed as described in Papachristou E.K., et al. 2018

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine. The data were searched against a custom database derived from FlyBase (“dmel-all-translation-r6.24”) at a 1% spectrum level FDR criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). For the SequestHT node the following parameters were included: Precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of M (+15.995 Da), deamidation of N, Q (+0.984 Da) and static modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus and K (+229.163 Da). The consensus workflow included S/N calculation for TMT intensities and only unique peptides identified with high confidence (FDR < 0.01) were considered for quantification. Downstream data analysis was performed on R using the qPLEXanalyzer package (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1237825) as described (Papachristou et al., 2018). Only proteins with more than one unique peptide were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that controls the expression of transposons and maintains genome integrity in animal gonads. In <i>Drosophila</i>, piRNA-guided silencing is achieved, in part, via co-transcriptional repression of transposons by Piwi. This depends on Panoramix (Panx); however, precisely how an RNA binding event silences transcription remains to be determined. Here we show that Nuclear Export Factor 2 (Nxf2) and its co-factor, Nxt1, form a complex with Panx and are required for co-transcriptional silencing of transposons in somatic and germline cells of the ovary. Tethering of Nxf2 or Nxt1 to RNA results in silencing of target loci and the concomitant accumulation of repressive chromatin marks. Nxf2 and Panx proteins are mutually required for proper localization and stability. We mapped the protein domains crucial for the Nxf2/Panx complex formation and show that the amino-terminal portion of Panx is sufficient to induce transcriptional silencing.

### Keywords
Pirna transposons piwi nuclear export

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Cambridge CB2 0RE United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marzia Munafo

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J Hannon
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Cambridge CB2 0RE United Kingdom


