### Accession
PXD007891

### Title
iTRAQ LLC-PK1 CnI -  Sum of peak intensities outperforms peak area integration in iTRAQ protein expression measurement by LC-MS/MS using a TripleTOF 5600+ platform

### Description
In the field of quantitative proteomics, the Isobaric Tags for Relative & Absolute Quanti-tation (iTRAQ) technology has demonstrated efficacy for proteome monitoring despite its lack of a consensus for data handling. In this study, after peptide and protein identification, we com-pared the widespread quantitation method based on the calculation of MS/MS reporter ion peaks areas ratios (Protein Pilot) to the alternative method based on the calculation of ratios of the sum of peak intensities (jTRAQx (Quant)) and we processed output data with the in-house Customi-zable iTRAQ Ratios Calculator (CiR-C) algorithm. Quantitation based on peak area ratios dis-played no significant linear correlation with Western blot quantitation. On the contrary, quantita-tion based on the sum of peak intensities displayed a significant linear association with Western blot quantitation (non-zero slope; Pearson correlation coefficient test, r = 0.2962, p = 0.0099 **) with an average bias of 0.08747 ± 0.5004 and 95% Limits of Agreement from - 0.8932 to 1.068. We proposed the Mascot-jTRAQx-CiR-C strategy as a simple yet powerful data processing ad-junct to the iTRAQ technology

### Sample Protocol
After 24 h drug exposure, LLC PK-1 cells were washed twice with Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffer Saline and lysed by scrapping in a custom RIPA lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM TRIS-HCl, 0.1 % NP-40, 0.1 % SDS, 1 mM EDTA in ultrapure H2O, supplemented with an anti-protease / anti-phosphatase mix). Cell lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged for 15 min at 21000 g. Supernatants were stored until protein concentration was measured using the Bradford colorimetric method and iTRAQ labeling. Twenty five micrograms of proteins were precipitated by - 20 °C cold acetone. After acetone evaporation, the precipitates were solubilized in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate then were incubated with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 40 min at 60 °C, to reduce disulfide bonds, 100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 40 min at room temperature, to alkylate/block cysteine residues and eventually were digested for 24 h at 37 °C with mass-spectrometry grade trypsin (V5280, Promega) at a 1: 50 enzyme: substrate ratio. After digestion, samples were incubated with iTRAQ tags (iTRAQ Reagents Multiplex kits, 4-plex, #4352135, Sigma-Aldrich) – one tag per drug exposure condition and five different tag/condition associations over five experiments – for 1 h at room temperature. Labeled samples were mixed and separated into 12 fractions by isoelectric focusing (OFFGEL 3100 Fractionator, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) for 24 h at increasing voltage and steady intensity of 50 µA in a 3-10 pH IPG strip. Fractions were retrieved for further MS analysis after the IPG strip was incubated in a 1:1 acetonitrile (ACN): water, 0.1 % formic acid (FA) wash solution for 15 min at room temperature.  NANO-LC PEPTIDE SEPARATION AND Q-Q-TOF MASS SPECTROMETRY   IEF fractions were analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS using a nano-chromatography liquid Ultimate 3000 system (LC Packings DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Toronto, Canada). For each sample, 5 µL were injected into a pre-column (C18 PepmapTM 300 µm ID x 5 mm, LC Packings DIONEX) using the loading unit. Af-ter desalting for 3 min with loading solvent (2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)), the pre-column was switched online with the analytical column (C18 PepmapTM 75 µm ID x 150 mm, LC Packings DIONEX) pre-equilibrated with 95 % solvent A (ACN 5 % - FA 0.1 %). Peptides were eluted from the pre-column into the analytical column and then into the mass spectrometer by a linear gradient from 5 % to 25 % in 70 min, then to 95 % of solvent B (98 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) over 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min.     Data acquisition was carried out by IDA (Information-Dependent Acquisition) mode of Analyst 1.7 TF software (ABSciex). The data from MS and MS/MS were continuously recorded with a cyclic duration of 3 s. For each MS scan, up to 50 precursors were selected for fragmenta-tion on the basis of their intensity (greater than 20,000 cps), their charge state (2+, 3+) and if the precursor had already been selected for fragmentation (dynamic exclusion). The collision energies were automatically adjusted according to charge state, ionic mass of selected precursors and iTRAQ labelling.

### Data Protocol
MASS SPECTROMETRY DATA PROCESSING AND RELATIVE PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION / QUANTIFICATION  QUANTITATION METHOD BASED ON RSPI  MS and MS/MS data for five independent experiments (*.wiff, 1 per fraction, 12 files per experiment) were submitted to Mascot Server 2.2.03 via Protein Pilot (version 5.0, ABSciex) for protein identification, and searched against two complementary Sus scrofa databases: a Swiss-Prot database (2015_10 release) and a TrEMBL database (2015_10 release). Carbamidomethyl (C) was defined as a fixed modification. Oxidation (O), iTRAQ4plex (K), iTRAQ4plex (Y), iTRAQ4plex (N-term) were defined as variable modifications. MS/MS fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.3 Da. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 0.2 Da. Mascot raw data files (*.dat, 1 per experiment) were saved for further isobaric tags-based peptide and protein quantitation with the Java implementation of the Quant algorithm, jTRAQx (version 1.13, (16)). Reporter mass tolerance was set at 0.05 Da while iTRAQ correction factors were implemented as provided by ABSciex. This tool generated one .jpf file (tab-delimited text file) for each series.   QUANTITATION METHOD BASED ON RPA MS and MS/MS data for five independent experiments (*.wiff, 1 per fraction, 12 files per experiment) were submitted to protein identification using the Paragon algorithm as implemented in the Protein Pilot software (version 5.0, AB SCIEX) and searched against two complementary Sus scrofa databases: a Swiss-Prot database (2015_10 release) and a TrEMBL database (2015_10 release). Quantitation was conducted with or without auto bias correction, an available option implemented in the Protein Pilot software to normalize uneven protein across the multiplex samples, improving further quantitation. Mass tolerances and identification parameters were automatically set and optimized for the ABSciex 5600+ TripleTOF™-generated MS/MS data (MS/MS Fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.1 Da. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 0.05 Da). The *.group results files (1 per experiment) were exported as Peptide Summaries. The CiR-C shell script excluded irrelevant data according to: i) identification confidence: peptides are retained if the probability that the observed positive match is a random match is below 5 % (p < 0.05, Mascot score > 30; Paragon confidence score > 95); ii) quantification confidence: peptides are retained if all iTRAQ ratios have been successfully calculated i.e., peptides with 0.0 ratios or uncalculated ratios are discarded; iii) peptides related to ‘Fragment’- and ‘REVERSED’-annotated proteins are discarded. After irrelevant data re-moval, CiR-C drew up an exhaustive catalogue of identified peptide sequences with their associ-ated SwissProt or TrEMBL accession IDs. Peptides were assigned to a frequency index of posi-tive matches (identification in {1;2;3;4;5} out of 5 independent experiments) and CiR-C drew a second catalogue of peptides with the highest frequency index (n=5). Protein ratios were calcu-lated as both overall and series-specific median values of peptide ratios associated with a given accession ID and frequency index.

### Publication Abstract
In the field of quantitative proteomics, the Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) technology has demonstrated efficacy for proteome monitoring despite its lack of a consensus for data handling. In the present study, after peptide and protein identification, we compared the widespread quantitation method based on the calculation of MS/MS reporter ion peaks areas ratios (ProteinPilot) to the alternative method based on the calculation of ratios of the sum of peak intensities (jTRAQx [Quant]) and we processed output data with the in-house Customizable iTRAQ Ratios Calculator (CiR-C) algorithm. Quantitation based on peak area ratios displayed no significant linear correlation with Western blot quantitation. In contrast, quantitation based on the sum of peak intensities displayed a significant linear association with Western blot quantitation (non-zero slope; Pearson correlation coefficient test, r = 0.296, <i>P</i>=0.010**) with an average bias of 0.087 &#xb1; 0.500 and 95% Limits of Agreement from -0.893 to 1.068. We proposed the Mascot-jTRAQx-CiR-C strategy as a simple yet powerful data processing adjunct to the iTRAQ technology.

### Keywords
Calcineurin inhibitors, Itraq, Llc pk-1

### Affiliations
UMR INSERM S-850
MSLab, MolSys RU, University of Liege

### Submitter
Bastien Burat

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Essig
UMR INSERM S-850


