### Accession
PXD013343

### Title
Simple targeted assays for metabolic pathways and signaling: a powerful tool for targeted proteomics

### Description
We introduce STAMPS, a pathway centric web service for the development of targeted proteomics assays. STAMPS guides the user by providing several intuitive interfaces for a rapid and simplified method design. Applying our curated framework to signaling and metabolic pathways, we reduced average assay development time by a factor of ~150 and revealed that the insulin signaling is actively controlled by protein abundance changes in insulin sensitive and resistance states.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed with a 1% SDS lysing buffer. To remove interfering DNA, the samples were treated with Benzonase® for 30 min at 37 °C, followed by protein precipitation using 3 volumes of ice cold acetone overnight at  20 °C. Precipitated proteins were harvested by centrifugation at 20.000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and dissolved in 100 µl 8 M Urea for 3 h at room temperature (RT). Protein amount was checked by conducting a BCA according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were reduced by adding 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated by adding 15 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at 21 °C (dark). Hydrolysis of proteins was done overnight at 37 °C using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100. The reaction was stopped by adding 2 µl of formic acid (FA, 99%). The samples were desalted using solid phase extraction with C18 filter cartridges, washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN). Cleaned samples were dried by using a vacuum concentrator. Concentration was adjusted to 1 µg/µl with 0.1% TFA. Proteolytic digests were checked for complete digestion after desalting by using monolithic column separation (PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB PL-CAP200-PM, Dionex) on an inert Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Germering, Germany) by direct injection of 1 μg sample. A binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% TFA, solvent B: 0.08% TFA, 84% ACN) ranging from 5-12% B in 5 min and then from 12-50% B in 15 min at a flow rate of 2.2 μL/min and at 60 °C, was applied. UV traces were acquired at 214 nm.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS2 spectra were identified using Mascot version 2.4.111 and X!Tandem12 (Vengeance (2015.12.15.2)). The search was conducted using SearchGUI13. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy14 version of the mus musculus complement of the UniProtKB15 database (version of July 22nd, 2015 containing 16716 (target) sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin specific cleavages, 5.0 ppm at MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.0214 Da), variable modification: Oxidation of M (+15.9949 Da). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker16 (1.16.3). Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and inferred proteins were validated at a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
We introduce STAMPS, a pathway-centric web service for the development of targeted proteomics assays. STAMPS guides the user by providing several intuitive interfaces for a rapid and simplified method design. Applying our curated framework to signaling and metabolic pathways, we reduced the average assay development time by a factor of &#x223c;150 and revealed that the insulin signaling is actively controlled by protein abundance changes in insulin-sensitive and -resistance states. Although at the current state STAMPS primarily contains mouse data, it was designed for easy extension with additional organisms.

### Keywords
Databases, Proteomics, Proteomic analysis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
ISAS, Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
ISAS, Dortmund, Germany


