### Accession
PXD003101

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of SAPs in an industrial yeast strain

### Description
Most proteogenomic approaches for mapping single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs) require construction of a sample-specific database containing protein variants predicted from the next-generation sequencing (NGS) data. We present a new strategy for direct SAP detection without relying on NGS data. Among the 348 putative SAP peptides identified in an industrial yeast strain, 85.6% of SAP sites were validated by genomic sequencing.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed by glass-bead shaking in the buffer of 5% SDS, 50 mM DTT and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Germany). The protein extracts were quantified with the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA). Thereafter, the protein extract was digested using the FASP protocol with certain adjustment. The protein digests were subjected to 2D RPLC separation and MS/MS identification. The first dimension basic-pH RPLC was performed on Nexera UHPLC system (SHIMADZU, Japan) using a 4.6 mm × 250 mm Durashell-C18 column (Agela, China) at a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min. Solvents were composed of water/acetonitrile/ammonium acetate (A: 100%/0%/200 mM, B: 20%/80%/200 mM). The LC method was 0-5 min 5% B, 5-30 min 5-15% B, 30-45 min 15-38% B, 45-46 min 38-90%, 46-50 min 90%, and re-equilibrium for 10 min at 5% B. A total of 45 fractionated peptides were collected and consolidated to 15. The fractionated peptides were dried in speed vacuum and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to the nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on an Eksigent nanoLC system connected to TripleTOFTM 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA). Peptide samples were loaded onto a trap column (10 mm×100 μm, 5 μm C18 resin) and separated on an analytical column (100 mm×75 μm) in-house packed with C18-AQ resin (3 μm, Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany), using a gradient of 5-36% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 98% acetonitrile) over 80 min at flow rate of 300 nl/min. In each MS data collection cycle, one full MS scan (300-1,500 m/z) was acquired and top 30 ions were selected for isolation and MS/MS scans (100-1,500 m/z), with the abundance threshold of 120 cps. The accumulation time for MS and MS/MS scan was 250 ms and 50 ms respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was set at 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
For SAP discovery, ProteinPilotTM software 4.5 (AB SCIEX) equipped with Paragon algorithm was employed to search the 2D LC-MS/MS dataset against an ORF database for S. cerevisiae (strain S288c，6750 entries, 17-Oct-2014, SGD) supplemented with common protein contaminant sequences. In the error-tolerant search mode (Thorough ID + ID focus), all modifications included in UniMod and all possible single amino acid substitutions were searched simultaneously. Up to two substitutions per peptide were allowed. ProteinPilot automatically clusters the identified proteins into protein groups sharing common peptides. Protein and peptide level FDRs were controlled below 1% using a target-decoy search strategy. Putative SAP peptides identified in this search were filtered and consolidated into peptides of unique sequences and carrying a single SAP.

### Publication Abstract
Detection of proteins containing single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs) encoded by nonsynonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) can aid researchers in studying the functional significance of protein variants. Most proteogenomic approaches for large-scale SAPs mapping require construction of a sample-specific database containing protein variants predicted from the next-generation sequencing (NGS) data. Searching shotgun proteomic data sets against these NGS-derived databases allowed for identification of SAP peptides, thus validating the proteome-level sequence variation. Contrary to the conventional approaches, our study presents a novel strategy for proteome-wide SAP detection without relying on sample-specific NGS data. By searching a deep-coverage proteomic data set from an industrial thermotolerant yeast strain using our strategy, we identified 337 putative SAPs compared to the reference genome. Among the SAP peptides identified with stringent criteria, 85.2% of SAP sites were validated using whole-genome sequencing data obtained for this organism, which indicates high accuracy of SAP identification with our strategy. More interestingly, for certain SAP peptides that cannot be predicted by genomic sequencing, we used synthetic peptide standards to verify expression of peptide variants in the proteome. Our study has provided a unique tool for proteogenomics to enable proteome-wide direct SAP identification and capture nongenetic protein variants not linked to nsSNPs.

### Keywords
Sap, Proteogenomics, Industrial yeast strain

### Affiliations
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Guo Yufeng

### Lab Head
Dr Wenqing Shui
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


