### Accession
PXD017115

### Title
Mutant huntingtin stalls ribosomes and represses protein synthesis independent of fragile X mental retardation protein

### Description
Ribosomes translocate one codon at a time in mRNA during protein synthesis, but the regulators of ribosome translocation and their impact on neurodegenerative disease remain poorly understood. Here, we show that huntingtin (Htt) and its poly-Q expanded form, mHtt, a cause of Huntington disease (HD), promotes ribosome stalling and suppresses protein synthesis in vivo and in vitro. We found that fragile mental retardation protein (FMRP), a known promoter of ribosome stalling, is upregulated in HD cells and patients’ tissue. Unexpectedly, FMRP depletion fails to reverse mHtt-mediated ribosome stalling in HD cells. mHtt binds directly to ribosomes in a RNase-sensitive manner and interacts with ribosomal proteins. Combining high-resolution ribosome footprint profiling (Ribo-Seq) and RNA-Seq, we provide a global snapshot of stalling on mRNA transcripts, with a shift in ribosome occupancy toward the 5’ and 3’ end and single-codon unique pauses in HD cells. We also found ribosomes that appear to have stalled in mHtt mRNA before CAG repeat expansion. Thus, Htt regulates protein synthesis via ribosome stalling mechanisms and in turn may affect mRNA elongation, which may be exploited for HD therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, samples and 4ug of BSA control were subjected in parallel to SDS-PAGE at 120 V for 12 min. The gel was Coomassie stained for 1 hour at room temperature with shaking, followed by de-staining in water overnight. The gel bands were cut, in-gel treated with 25mM DTT followed by 55mM iodoacetamide, and subjected trypsin digestion with ProteaseMax Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer for one hour at 50°C. The peptide pools were acidified and desalted through Zip-Tip μC18 tip columns. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis the samples were reconstructed in 5 μl of 0.1% formic acid and 5 μl were loaded into the system. Each sample was analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 system. Peptides were on-line eluted on an analytical RP column (0.075 x 150 mm Acclaim PepMap RLSC nano Viper, Thermo Fisher Scientific), operating at 300nl/min using the following gradient: 5–25% B for 90 mins, 25-44% B for 30 min, 44-80% B in 10 sec, 80% for 5 min, 80-5% B in 10 sec, and 5% B for 40 min [solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (v/v); solvent B: 0.1% formic acid (v/v), 80% CH3CN (v/v) (Fisher Scientific)]. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a data-dependent MS/MS mode using top speed precursor selection detected in a survey scan from 380 to 1,400 m/z performed at 120K resolution. Tandem MS was performed by HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30.0%.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using Sequest algorithm, allowing Oxidation (Met) and Deamination (Q) as variable modifications. Other settings included Carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification, three missed cleavages, and mass tolerance of 10ppm and 0.02Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. MS/MS raw files were searched against a Uniprot human database.

### Publication Abstract
The polyglutamine expansion of huntingtin (mHTT) causes Huntington disease (HD) and neurodegeneration, but the mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we found that mHtt promotes ribosome stalling and suppresses protein synthesis in mouse HD striatal neuronal cells. Depletion of mHtt enhances protein synthesis and increases the speed of ribosomal translocation, while mHtt directly inhibits protein synthesis in vitro. Fmrp, a known regulator of ribosome stalling, is upregulated in HD, but its depletion has no discernible effect on protein synthesis or ribosome stalling in HD cells. We found interactions of ribosomal proteins and translating ribosomes with mHtt. High-resolution global ribosome footprint profiling (Ribo-Seq) and mRNA-Seq indicates a widespread shift in ribosome occupancy toward the 5' and 3' end and unique single-codon pauses on selected mRNA targets in HD cells, compared to controls. Thus, mHtt impedes ribosomal translocation during translation elongation, a mechanistic defect that can be exploited for HD therapeutics.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Huntingtin, Protein synthesis, Fragile x

### Affiliations
Neuroscience Deaprtment, The Scripps Reasearch Institute, FL
The scripps research institute

### Submitter
gogce crynen

### Lab Head
Dr Srinivasa Subramaniam
Neuroscience Deaprtment, The Scripps Reasearch Institute, FL


