### Accession
PXD030291

### Title
Atlantic salmon gastric mucosa LC-MSMS

### Description
The Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) genome contains 10 chitinase encoding genes, but little is known about the function of these chitinases. Three of the chitinase genes have previously been shown to be expressed in the stomach tissue of Atlantic salmon. In the current study we show that the protein products of these genes, the family 18 glycoside hydrolase (GH18) chitinases, Chia.3, Chia.4 and Chia.7 are secreted into the stomach mucosa and are amongst the most abundant proteins in this matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Gastric mucosa of adult Atlantic salmon (n = 3, two male and one female, average fish weight 2245 g) was obtained from the process plant for fish farming laboratory at The Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU). The fish was starved for one day before they were euthanized by a blow to the head. The stomach was dissected from the fish, the gastric mucosa was scraped off and mixed with 1 mL ice-cold phosphate buffer [20 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl] with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (complete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) by pipetting and gentle vortexing. The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 °C and the supernatant was filtered through a 40- μm cell strainer. The total protein concentration was determined with Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) using Bovine Serum Albumin as standard. A total amount of 2 µg protein was loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel. The proteins were allowed to enter the gel, but without full separation of the proteins in the gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) and de-stained before the region of the gel containing proteins were cut out for in-gel digestion, essentially performed as described by Shevchenko et al (43). In brief, proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide before trypsination. ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore) were used to purify peptides, followed by drying under vacuum. The peptides were dissolved in 10 µl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) and the peptide concentration was measured using av NanoDrop One and used to normalize the amount of peptides injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) and backflushed onto a 50 cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d., Thermo Scientific). At the start, the columns were in 97.8 % solution A [0.1 % (v/v) formic acid], 3.2% solution B [80 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid]. Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient developing from 3.2 to 35 % (v/v) solution B in 93 minutes and finally to 60% B in 5 minutes before the wash phase at 80 % B for 4.9 minutes, followed by a decrease to 3.2% B for the rest of the gradient time, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. In order to isolate and fragment the 12 most intense peptide precursor ions at any given time throughout the chromatographic elution, the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to switch automatically between orbitrap-MS and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) orbitrap-MS/MS acquisition. The selected precursor ions were then excluded for repeated fragmentation for 20 seconds. The resolution was set to R=70,000 and R=35,000 for MS and MS/MS, respectively. For optimal acquisition of MS/MS spectra, automatic-gain-control target values were set to 1,000,000 charges and a maximum injection time of 128 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (45) version 1.6.17.0, and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm (46). Samples were searched against the proteome of Salmo salar, downloaded from Uniprot (UP000087266) and a list of common contaminants (included in the MaxQuant software package). As variable modifications protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were used, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Trypsin was used as a digestion enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. The feature ‘Match between runs’ in MaxQuant, which enables identification transfer between samples based on accurate mass and retention time, was applied with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
While a significant fraction of topological materials has been characterized using symmetry requirements<sup>1-4</sup>, the past two years have witnessed the rise of novel multi-gap dependent topological states<sup>5-9</sup>, the properties of which go beyond these approaches and are yet to be fully explored. Although already of active interest at equilibrium<sup>10-15</sup>, we show that the combination of out-of-equilibrium processes and multi-gap topological insights galvanize a new direction within topological phases of matter. We show that periodic driving can induce anomalous multi-gap topological properties that have no static counterpart. In particular, we identify Floquet-induced non-Abelian braiding, which in turn leads to a phase characterized by an anomalous Euler class, being the prime example of a multi-gap topological invariant. Most strikingly, we also retrieve the first example of an 'anomalous Dirac string phase'. This gapped out-of-equilibrium phase features an unconventional Dirac string configuration that physically manifests itself via anomalous edge states on the boundary. Our results not only provide a stepping stone for the exploration of intrinsically dynamical and experimentally viable multi-gap topological phases, but also demonstrate periodic driving as a powerful way to observe these non-Abelian braiding processes notably in quantum simulators.

### Keywords
Stomach, Lc-msms, Mucosa, Atlantic salmon

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
The Protein Engineering and Proteomics Group (PEP), Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway

### Submitter
Matilde Mengkrog Holen

### Lab Head
Dr Gustav Vaaje-Kolstad
The Protein Engineering and Proteomics Group (PEP), Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway


