### Accession
PXD010364

### Title
Preeclampsia causes sex-specific transcriptional and proteomic changes in foetal erythroid cells

### Description
Preeclampsia (PE) has been associated with placental dysfunction, resulting in foetal hypoxia, accelerated erythropoiesis and increased erythroblast count in the umbilical cord blood (UCB). Although the detailed effects remain unknown, placental dysfunction can also cause inflammation, nutritional and oxidative stress in the fetus that can affect erythropoiesis. Here, we compared the expression of surface adhesion molecules and erythroid differentiation capacity of UCB hematopoietic stem/ progenitor cells (HSPCs), UCB erythroid profiles along with transcriptome and proteome of these cells between male and female foetuses from PE and normotensive pregnancies. While no significant differences were observed in UCB HSPC migration/ homing and in vitro erythroid colony differentiation, the UCB HSPC transcriptome and the proteomic profile of the in vitro differentiated erythroid cells differed between PE vs normotensive samples. Accordingly, despite absence of significant differences in the UCB erythroid populations in male or female foetuses from PE or normotensive pregnancies, transcriptional changes were observed during erythropoiesis, particularly affecting male foetuses. Pathway analysis suggested deregulation in mTORC1/AMPK signaling pathways controlling cell cycle, differentiation and protein synthesis. These results associate PE with transcriptional and proteomic changes in foetal HSPCs and erythroid cells that may underlie the higher erythroblast count in the UCB in PE.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed at The Proteomics Core Facility at the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg. Cell pellets were lysed in 2% SDS, 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer during mixing for 1h. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad) with BSA solutions as standards. Aliquots of 20 µg of total protein from each sample and 20 µg from a reference pool containing equal amounts of all samples were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (REF:Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). Briefly, protein samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences), washed with 8M urea solution repeatedly and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Digestion was performed by addition of Pierce MS grade Trypsin (0.20 µg, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer in a ratio of 1:100 relative to protein amount and incubated overnight at 37°C. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two hours. The peptides were collected by centrifugation, labeled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The labeled samples were combined into two separate TMT-sets each containing six samples and the reference.  Sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA.  The two TMT-sets were fractionated into 40 fraction with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions were combined into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis. The fractions were analyzed on an QExactive HF mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 300 mm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient from 9% to 35% B over 75 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 5 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. The instrument operated in data-dependent mode where the precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60 000, the 10 most intense ions were isolated in a 0.8 Da isolation window and fragmented using collision energy HCD settings at either 28 or 50. MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60 000, charge states 2 to 4 were selected for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s with 10 ppm tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Human Swissprot Database version March 2017 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland). Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 200 mmu. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, cysteine alkylation and fixed modifications of N-terminal TMT-label and lysine TMT-label were selected. The detected peptide threshold in the software was set to 1% False Discovery Rate by searching against a reversed database and identified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS2 spectra at Minimum Quan Value Threshold set to 2000. The resulting ratios were normalized in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 on the median protein value of 1.0 in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Preeclampsia (PE) has been associated with placental dysfunction, resulting in fetal hypoxia, accelerated erythropoiesis, and increased erythroblast count in the umbilical cord blood (UCB). Although the detailed effects remain unknown, placental dysfunction can also cause inflammation, nutritional, and oxidative stress in the fetus that can affect erythropoiesis. Here, we compared the expression of surface adhesion molecules and the erythroid differentiation capacity of UCB hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs), UCB erythroid profiles along with the transcriptome and proteome of these cells between male and female fetuses from PE and normotensive pregnancies. While no significant differences were observed in UCB HSPC migration/homing and in vitro erythroid colony differentiation, the UCB HSPC transcriptome and the proteomic profile of the in vitro differentiated erythroid cells differed between PE vs. normotensive samples. Accordingly, despite the absence of significant differences in the UCB erythroid populations in male or female fetuses from PE or normotensive pregnancies, transcriptional changes were observed during erythropoiesis, particularly affecting male fetuses. Pathway analysis suggested deregulation in the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1/AMP-activated protein kinase (mTORC1/AMPK) signaling pathways controlling cell cycle, differentiation, and protein synthesis. These results associate PE with transcriptional and proteomic changes in fetal HSPCs and erythroid cells that may underlie the higher erythroblast count in the UCB in PE.

### Keywords
Erythropoiesis, Umbilical cord blood, Q exactive hf, Preeclampsia, Hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Zahra Masoumi
Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


