### Accession
PXD026774

### Title
Rapid factor depletion highlights intricacies of nucleoplasmic RNA degradation

### Description
Turnover of nucleoplasmic transcripts by the multi-subunit RNA exosome is mediated by two adaptors; the Nuclear EXosome Targeting (NEXT) complex and the Poly(A) tail eXosome Targeting (PAXT) connection. Functional analyses of NEXT and PAXT have largely been based on long-term factor depletion strategies. Here, we rapidly deplete a NEXT, a PAXT and a core-exosome component, uncovering direct consequences of their losses. Global proteome analyses displayed only minor changes, yet exposed the immediate co-depletion of exosome and adaptor subunits, reflecting possible sub-complex compositions. Parallel high-resolution 3’end sequencing of newly synthesized RNA confirmed earlier established long-term depletion phenotypes. Still, rapid NEXT depletion displayed a narrower phenotype, illustrated by its restricted effect on snoRNA-hosting introns, whereas long-term NEXT depletion data had suggested a more general role of the complex in mediating intron turnover. While this validates snoRNA-hosting introns as primary NEXT targets, our data suggest that nuclear 5’-3’ RNA decay is altered after prolonged NEXT depletion, obscuring interpretation. Further analysis of snoRNA-hosting introns also uncovered an unusual mode of core exosome-independent RNA decay. Due to its non-processive nature, we speculate that this reflects a hitherto undisclosed exosome-independent activity of the EXOSC10 ribonuclease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were digested with trypsin, the resulting peptides were TMTpro 16plex labelled,combined and fractionated by high pH chromotography. The peptides were analyzed on an Easy nanoLC system coupled directly to a ThermoFisher Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) defined by real time database searches for accurate TMT reporter ion quantitation in MS3 spectra (SPS-MS3 method).

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were searched in a human UniProt filtered database using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) and TMTpro of peptide N termini and lysine residues (304.2071 Da) were set as static modifications, while the oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for neighbouring isotope signals stemming from incomplete isotope incorporation and natural isotopes and then normalized between triplicate experiments and to the average of all signals for a given protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna exosome, Next, Paxt, Degron tag, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark, Department og Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Jens Andersen

### Lab Head
Dr Jens S. Andersen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark


