### Accession
PXD044615

### Title
A stop-and-go mechanism controls mitochondrial respiration

### Description
Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is essential for the synthesis of the vast majority of ATP in eukaryotic cells. It is carried out by multi-protein assemblies that form the electron transport chain (ETC), which are coupled to the mitochondrial ATP synthase, which uses the proton gradient generated by the ETC to drive ATP synthesis. The assembly of the OXPHOS protein machinery requires the coordinated integration of proteins encoded in the nuclear and the mitochondrial genomes, imposing an additional layer of complexity. While the biogenesis of the individual OXPHOS complexes is well understood, it remains unknown how the assembly of the ETC and ATP synthase is coordinated to achieve the correct stoichiometry of the OXPHOS machinery. Here, we identify the mitochondrial regulatory hub for respiratory assembly (MiRA), which serves as a platform on which complex IV and complex V biogenesis are synchronised to ensure balanced assembly of the ETC and complex V. At the molecular level, this is achieved by a stop-and-go safeguarding mechanism: The novel mitochondrial protein Mra1 binds to and slows down complex IV assembly. Two Go signals are then required for assembly to proceed: Binding of the complex IV assembly factor Rcf2 and interaction with the mitoribosome, which translates the complex V subunit Atp9. Both Go signals induce the clipping and subsequent degradation of Mra1, relieving the molecular brake and allowing parallel maturation of complexes IV and V. The absence of the stop-and-go safety mechanism results in the formation of immature complexes, decreased ATP levels and reduced cell viability. The antagonistic activities at MiRA provide a regulated orchestration of complex IV and V assembly which is essential to avoid the predominance of either complex and an unbalanced ratio of OXPHOS complexes, thus ensuring the correct stoichiometry of protein machineries encoded by two different genomes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic in-solution digestion Proteins were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 min at 37°C and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 22°C in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. Proteins were subjected to proteolytic digestion by trypsin at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37°C in 1.3 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteolysis was stopped by acidifying the samples with 80% TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptide mixtures were desalted using self-packed C18 Stop And Go Extraction tips using two layers of 1.0 × 1.0 mm C18 Empore Disks (3M, St. Paul, USA) and directly analysed by LC-MS.  LC-MS analysis Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a Q Exactive instrument coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated on nanoEase™ M/Z Symmetry C18 precolumns (20 mm x 180 μm inner diameter; Waters) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min and separated using nanoEase™ M/Z HSS C18 T3 columns (25 cm x 75 μm inner diameter; pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 1.8 μm; Waters) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min and 40°C. Peptide elution was controlled with a binary solvent system consisting of  0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/86% (v/v) ACN (solvent B) using a gradient of 4 - 39% solvent B in 195 min, 39 - 54% in 15 min, 54 - 95% in 5 min, and 5 min at 95%, interfaced online with the Nanospray Flex ion source with PST-HV-NFU liquid junction (MS Wil, The Netherlands) and fused silica emitters (EM-20-360; MicrOmics Technologies LLC). The following parameters were applied for MS scans: mass range of m/z 375 - 1,700, a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target value (AGC) of 3 x 106 ions, and a maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms. For MS2 scans, up to 15 most intense precursor peptides with a charge ≥ 2 were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 28%, a resolution of 35,000, AGC of 1 x 105 ions, a max. IT of 120 ms, and dynamic exclusion for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification and quantification, mass spectrometric raw data were searched with MaxQuant (version 2.0.2.0) against a protein sequence database containing all systematically named ORFs of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; http://www.yeastgenome.org/, version R64-3-1, 2021-04-21; 6,716 entries). Default settings were used in MaxQuant, with Trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme and up to three missed cleavages allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications. 1% false discovery rate was applied on both peptide and protein level. Match between runs was enabled and label-free quantification (LFQ) was used for delayed normalization, with a minimum ratio count of 2. The proteingroups.txt file of MaxQuant was used and entries for reverse and potential contaminant hits as well as proteins only identified by site were excluded from the analysis. Only protein groups with LFQ intensities in at least 3 replicates of one growth condition were considered for further analysis. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution based on the mean and standard deviation of the distribution of all log10 LFQ intensities using a downshift of 2.0 and a width adjustment of 0.3. To assess differential abundances of mitochondrial proteins, data were normalized by subtracting the log10 LFQ intensity difference between the median across all proteins in a sample and the median across proteins assigned to the mitochondrial proteome in all samples. For statistical analysis, log10 transformed LFQ intensities were subjected to linear modeling implemented in the R package limma, with correction of P values for multiple testing by Benjamini and Hochberg’s method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Respiratory chain, Protein complex assembly, Complex stoichiometry, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology, University of Freiburg
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Friedel Drepper
Institute of Biology, University of Freiburg


