### Accession
PXD023418

### Title
Global analysis of protein-RNA interactions in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells reveals key regulators of infection

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2 relies on cellular RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) to replicate and spread, although which RBPs control SARS-CoV-2 infection remains largely unknown. Here, we employ a multi-omic approach to identify systematically and comprehensively the cellular and viral RBPs that are involved in SARS-CoV-2 infection. We reveal that SARS-CoV-2 infection profoundly remodels the cellular RNA-bound proteome, which includes wide-ranging effects on RNA metabolic pathways, non-canonical RBPs and antiviral factors. Moreover, we apply a new method to identify the proteins that directly interact with viral RNA, uncovering dozens of cellular RBPs and six viral proteins. Amongst them, several components of the tRNA ligase complex, which we show regulate SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, we discover that available drugs targeting host RBPs that interact with SARS-CoV-2 RNA inhibit infection. Collectively, our results uncover a new universe of host-virus interactions with potential for new antiviral therapies against COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
The cRIC, vRIC and WCP protein samples were processed via the bead-based single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) method, using Speed Bead Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Sigma-Aldrich, cat.no.45152105050250) (Hughes et al., 2019). Protein digestion was performed using Trypsin Gold (MS grade; Promega, cat. no. V5280). Processed peptides were acidified by formic acid (final concentration 5%) prior to Mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) (Cox 2011) under default parameters (Cox et al., 2011). Peptides were searched against reference Uniport datasets: human proteome (Uniprot_id: UP000005640, downloaded Nov2016) and SARS-CoV-2 (Uniprot_id: UP000464024, downloaded 24June2020). False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for both peptide and protein identification. For cRIC and WCP samples, MaxQuant search was performed with “match between run” activated. For vRIC samples, since each sample was analyzed on both Eclipse and QExactive mass spectrometers, raw spectra form both runs were combined as separate fractions in the MaxQuant search (the spectra from the Eclipse was assigned fraction 1 and the spectra from the QExactive is assigned fraction 5, and each sample was as independent experiment).

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). SARS-CoV-2 relies on cellular RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) to replicate and spread, although which RBPs control its life cycle remains largely unknown. Here, we employ a multi-omic approach to identify systematically and comprehensively the cellular and viral RBPs that are involved in SARS-CoV-2 infection. We reveal that SARS-CoV-2 infection profoundly remodels the cellular RNA-bound proteome, which includes wide-ranging effects on RNA metabolic pathways, non-canonical RBPs, and antiviral factors. Moreover, we apply a new method to identify the proteins that directly interact with viral RNA, uncovering dozens of cellular RBPs and six viral proteins. Among them are several components of the tRNA ligase complex, which we show regulate SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, we discover that available drugs targeting host RBPs that interact with SARS-CoV-2 RNA inhibit infection. Collectively, our results uncover a new universe of host-virus interactions with potential for new antiviral therapies against COVID-19.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Calu-3, Wcp, Cric, Vric

### Affiliations
Oxford University
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences University of Glasgow 464 Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland (UK)

### Submitter
Wael Kamel

### Lab Head
Dr Alfredo Castello Palomares
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences University of Glasgow 464 Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland (UK)


