### Accession
PXD004895

### Title
PROTEOMIC PROFILING OF EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES OBTAINED FROM Toxoplasma gondii AND TOXOPLASMA-INFECTED CELLS

### Description
Here, we purified T. gondii obtained from human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) infected cells and performed the first comprehensive proteomic profiling of the extracellular vesicles secreted by these parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Protein levels were assessed by Qubit fluorometric quantification (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three EV sample preparations from each condition were used to obtain five micrograms of protein per sample which were denatured for 5 min at 95 ºC in a sample buffer (250mM Tris-HCl pH 7,5, 250mM DDT, 7,5% SDS), following the addition of XT Sample Buffer and XT Reducing Agent (BIO-RAD). Proteins extracts were loaded on a 12% Bis-TrisSDS-PAGE gel (CriterionTM XT Precast Gel, BIO-RAD) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The gel lanes were excised and bands were cut into 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were washed with water for 5 min and then washed twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3, 50% EtOH for 20 min at 25 ºC, followed by dehydration in 100% EtOH for 10 min at 25 ºC. Gel pieces were dried for 5 min at 40 ºC and then re-hydrated at 4 ºC for 40 min with the trypsin solution (12.5 ng/µl of modified sequencing grade, Promega), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8,0). Protein digestion was performed at 37ºC overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8,0 and stopped with 15 ml of 0,5% C2HF3O2. Supernatants were transferred into a new Eppendorf tube and peptides extraction was performed with two 10 min extraction steps at room temperature using the extraction buffer (3% C2HF3O2,30% ACN). All peptide extracts were dried completely in a low-pressure centrifuge. Prior to LC-MS/MS, protein digests were re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 ml of 0.2% formic acid. Desalting/ cleanup of the digests was performed by using C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Eluates were dried down in vacuum centrifuge and then re-solubilized under agitation for 15 min in 10 mL of 2% ACN/1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS Data Analysis:  The reference proteome for Homo sapiens and Toxoplasma gondii were downloaded from the UniProt consortium. PatternLab for proteomics 4.0 was used for generating a target-decoy database by first removing subset sequences and then including the sequences of 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants, and, finally, for each sequence,including a reversed version of it. The final database used for PSM contained 122,325 sequences.   PSM: The Comet 2015 rev. 2 search engine, which is embedded into PatternLab for proteomics 4.0, was used to compare experimental MS2 against those theoretically generated from our sequence database and select the most likely peptide sequence candidate for each spectrum. Briefly, the search was limited to fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates; we imposed carbamidomethylation and oxidation of Methionine as fixed and variable modification, respectively. The search engine accepted peptide candidates within a 40-ppm tolerance from the measured precursor m/z, up to two missed-cleavages and used the XCorr as the primary search engine score with bins of 1.0005.  PSM validity was assessed using the search engine processor (SEPro), which is embedded in PatternLab 4.0. Briefly, identifications were grouped by charge state (+2 and > +3) and then by tryptic status (fully tryptic, semi-tryptic), resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each result, the Comet XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaPPM, and Peaks Matched values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. The identifications were sorted in non-decreasing order according to the discriminator score. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level based on the number of labeled decoys. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in an FDR that was independent of tryptic status or charge state. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six amino-acid residues was required. Results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with less than 6 ppm from the global identification average. One-hit wonders (i.e., proteins identified with only one mass spectrum) were only considered if an XCorr greater than 2.5 was obtained. These criteria led to FDRs, now at the protein level, to be lower than 1% for all search results.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii infects a wide range of hosts worldwide, including humans and domesticated animals causing toxoplasmosis disease. Recently, exosomes, small extracellular vesicles (EV) that contain nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids derived from their original cells were linked with disease protection. The effect of EVs derived from T. gondii on the immune response and its relevance in a physiological context is unknown. Here we disclose the first proteomic profiling of T. gondii EVs compared to EVs isolated from a human foreskin fibroblast infected cell line cultured in a vesicle-free medium. Our results reveal a broad range of canonical exosomes proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD004895.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Laboratório de regulação da expressão gênica, Instituto Carlos Chagas, Fiocruz - Paraná
Laboratory for proteomics and protein engineering

### Submitter
Paulo Carvalho

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Morking
Laboratório de regulação da expressão gênica, Instituto Carlos Chagas, Fiocruz - Paraná


