### Accession
PXD030092

### Title
The proteome of irradiated glioma stem cells and of their extracellular vesicles

### Description
Glioblastoma is a malignant brain tumor that is highly resistant to radiation and chemotherapy, where patients survive on average only 15 months after diagnosis. Furthering the understanding of mechanisms leading to radiation resistance of glioma is paramount to identify novel therapeutic targets. Previous studies have shown that glioma stem cells (GSCs) play an important role in promoting radiation resistance and disease recurrence. Herein we analyze the proteomic alterations occurring in patient-derived GSCs upon radiation treatment in order to identify molecular drivers of resistance. We show that proteome changes upon radiation accurately predict the resistance status of the cells, and that resistance to radiation does not correlate with glioma transcriptional subtypes. We further show that the radio-resistant cell line GSC-267 sheds microvesicles (MVs) enriched in the metabolic enzyme nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT).

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Protein extracts were processed following the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol with slight modifications. Briefly, a bead slurry was prepared by mixing 50 μl of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Carboxyl Magnetic Beads, hydrophobic with 50 μl of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Carboxyl Magnetic Beads, hydrophilic (both from GE Healthcare). The bead slurry was washed two times with 200 μl of MQ water using a magnetic rack, prior to resuspension in 500 μl of MQ water. Protein samples for whole cell proteomics (200 μg each) were diluted to a final volume of 200 μl using the cell lysis buffer described above. EV protein samples (~10-40 μg each) were diluted to a final volume of 120 μl using 4% SDS cell lysis buffer, and the volumes and amount of reagents were adapted (in parenthesis). Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding chloroacetamide (Sigma) to a final concentration of 40 mM, 40 μl (6 μl) of SP3 bead slurry and acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70% (to bind proteins to the SP3 beads). Samples were then incubated for 20 minutes on a rotating rack. Following the incubation, supernatants were removed and SP3 beads were washed twice with 200 μl (100 μl) of 70% EtOH and once with 180 μl (100 μl) of 100% acetonitrile using a magnetic rack. SP3 beads were air-dried for 30 seconds prior to digestion at 37°C overnight in 100 μl (20 μl) of a solution containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 M urea and 4 ug (0.6 μg) of Lysyl Endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako) with mild shaking. Subsequently, 100 μl (20 μl) of a solution containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and 4 ug (0.6 μg) trypsin (Pierce) was added and samples were incubated again at 37°C overnight with mild shaking. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and peptide concentrations were quantified using the DC Protein Assay (Bio‐Rad). 50 μg (4 μg) of each sample were set aside for TMT labeling. Linker samples were prepared by pooling equal amounts of proteins from each of the 16 samples, up to a final amount of 50 μg each (or by pooling four EV samples to a final amount of 4 μg, for EV analysis). All samples were lyophilized prior to TMT labeling.   TMT labelling Peptide samples were labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific) as previously described in Panizza et al. Briefly, before labeling samples were resuspend using TEAB pH 8.5 (50 mM final concentration) to adjust the pH. Each sample was labeled with an isobaric TMT-tag. Labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling the samples. Pooled samples were desalted with Reversed Phase-Solid Phase Extraction cartridges (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and then lyophilized in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  Sample clean-up was performed by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex).   Peptide-level HiRIEF for whole cell proteomic analysis High-resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) was performed as previously described in Branca et al. Briefly, peptides from whole cell samples were focused on immobilized pH gradient (IPG) gel strips (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) on a linear pH range of 3-10. Strips were divided into 72 fractions and extracted to V-bottom 96-well plates with a liquid handling robot (GE Healthcare prototype modified from Gilson liquid handler 215). Peptides were dried, then dissolved in 3% ACN/0.1% FA and consolidated into 40 fractions (as described in the HiRIEF fraction scheme file of the data set PXD020191).    LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by the Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry facility at Karolinska Institutet-Karolinska University Hospital, Science for Life Laboratory in Stockholm, Sweden. Briefly, each HiRIEF fraction was analyzed independently using a reversed-phase gradient that proceeded from 6% phase B (90% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 5% water, and 0.1% formic acid) to 37% phase B over 30-90 min depending on the complexity of the fraction being analyzed. A nano Easy-Spray column (PepMap Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography; C18; 2-µm bead size; 100Å pore size; 75-µm internal diameter; 50 cm long; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used on the nanoelectrospray ionization Easy-Spray source at 60°C. Online LC-MS/MS was performed using a hybrid Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fourier transform–based mass spectrometer (FTMS) master scans with a resolution of 60,000 (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the 5 most abundant ions using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursor ions were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control targets were 1 × 106 for MS1 and 1 × 105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ∼1.5 s. Automated precursor-ion dynamic exclusion was used with a 60 s duration. Precursor ions with unassigned charge states or a charge state of +1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was applied.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics database search and ratio calculation Raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite 104. Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) 105 and Percolator (v2.08) 106. The reference database was the Homo sapiens protein subset of Swissprot, canonical isoforms, released on 2018-08-2. MSGF+ settings included precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) allowed for up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 10-plex on lysine and the N terminus were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification while searching all MS/MS spectra. Quantification of TMT 10-plex reporter ions was performed using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) 108. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied at the PSM level. To obtain relative quantification of steady-state protein abundances for whole cell samples, ratios were first normalized to the median of each TMT channel, assuming equal peptide loading of all samples. Then, the TMT reporter ion value for each PSM was divided by the TMT reporter ion value for channel 131 (the linker) within its TMT set, in order to normalize protein quantification across the two TMT sets. Finally, the median ratio of PSMs belonging to a unique gene symbol was used to obtain gene-centric protein quantifications. To obtain relative quantification of protein level changes upon radiation, protein TMT ratios were divided by the average of untreated and treated for each individual cell line and each protein. This normalization method allows to highlight protein expression changes upon treatment. MS/MS spectra for the EV proteomic analysis were matched against the human and bovine subset of the Swissprot database, release 2018-08-2, using Sequest/Percolator under the Proteome Discoverer software platform (PD 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Settings for the search were the same as specified in Panizza et al. (30). Peptides that matched to the bovine reference proteome filtered out. TMT ratios were calculated using the average of all MV and exosome samples a denominator.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor-initiating cells contained within the aggressive brain tumor glioma (glioma stem cells, GSCs) promote radioresistance and disease recurrence. However, mechanisms of resistance are not well understood. Herein, we show that the proteome-level regulation occurring upon radiation treatment of several patient-derived GSC lines predicts their resistance status, whereas glioma transcriptional subtypes do not. We identify a mechanism of radioresistance mediated by the transfer of the metabolic enzyme NAMPT to radiosensitive cells through microvesicles (NAMPT-high MVs) shed by resistant GSCs. NAMPT-high MVs rescue the proliferation of radiosensitive GSCs and fibroblasts upon irradiation, and upon treatment with a radiomimetic drug or low serum, and increase intracellular NAD(H) levels. Finally, we show that the presence of NAMPT within the MVs and its enzymatic activity in recipient cells are necessary to mediate these effects. Collectively, we demonstrate that the proteome of GSCs provides unique information as it predicts the ability of glioma to resist radiation treatment. Furthermore, we establish NAMPT transfer via MVs as a mechanism for rescuing the proliferation of radiosensitive cells upon irradiation.

### Keywords
Human, Glioma stem cells, Glioma, Glioblastoma, Radiation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
Cornell University

### Submitter
Elena Panizza

### Lab Head
Dr Richard A. Cerione
Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853


