### Accession
PXD001430

### Title
Proteomic analysis of urinary exosomes in cystinuria patients

### Description
Cystinuria is a rare renal genetic disease caused by mutations in cystine transporter genes and characterized by defective cystine reabsorption leading to kidney stones. In 14% of cases patients undergo nephrectomy, but given the difficulty to predict the evolution of the disease, the identification of markers of kidney damage would improve the follow up of patients with a higher risk. The aim of the present study is to develop a robust, reproducible and non-invasive methodology for proteomic analysis of urinary exosomes using high resolution mass spectrometry. A clinical pilot study, conducted on 8 cystinuria patients vs. 10 controls, highlighted 165 proteins, of which 38 were up-regulated, that separate cystinuria patients from controls, and further discriminate between severe and moderate forms of the disease. These proteins include markers of kidney injury, circulating proteins and a neutrophil signature. Analysis of selected proteins by immunobloting, performed on six additional cystinuria patients, validated the mass spectrometry data. To our knowledge, this is the first successful proteomic study in cystinuria unmasking potential role of inflammation in this disease. The workflow we have developed is applicable to investigate urinanry exosomes in different renal diseases and to search for diagnostic/prognostic markers.

### Sample Protocol
Urine collection, eGFR and cystinuria determination All subjects provided written informed consent before the study. First morning void of urine (50-150 ml) was collected in a sterile container and mixed with an anti-protease cocktail (3,30 mM NaN3, 2,5 ml of 0,2 mg/ml PMSF, and 1 µg/ml leupeptin) and frozen at -80°C, within 3 hours after collection. For cystinuria patients, eGFR was calculated using, for adults, MDRD formula and for children Schwartz formula, based on creatininemia. Cystine concentration was measured by HPLC (High-Performance Liquid Chromatography) using AminoTac AminoAcid analyzer (Jeol, MA, USA). For leukocyte detection, we dipped reagent strips (Multistix 8 SG, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) directly in urines.  Exosome preparation Protocol “ModB”, corresponding to a previously published protocol by Gonzales et al., was chosen for exosome isolation in all subsequent experiments. Briefly, the urine sample mixed with anti-proteases was centrifuged at 17 000 g for 30 min at 20°C. The 17 000 g supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 200 000 g for 3 h at 20°C on an XL-70 ultracentifuge (Beckman, CA, USA). The pellet was suspended in 300 l of 200 mg/ml DTT and heated at 37°C for 30 min. The sample was complemented with 8 ml of “isolation solution” (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM triethanolamine, pH 7,6) and centrifuged at 200 000 g for 1h30 at room temperature. Eventually, the pellet was resuspended in 100 µl of 2 M urea for immunoelectrofocalisation (IEF) fractionation, Western blot analysis, SDS-PAGE and silver staining, or in phosphate sodium buffer (PBS) for immunoelectron microscopy. Protein concentration was determined using the RC-DC assay (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Samples were then stored and frozen at -80°C until further experiments.  In-solution IEF analysis Fifty to 120 µg of exosomal proteins obtained from urine were used for separation by IEF fractionation on an OFF-Gel 3100 fractionator (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. The IEF was performed on 13 cm long immobiline strips, pH 3-10, in 12 fractions (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) applying the standard protein separation OG12PR01 program (total final accumulated voltage is set at 20000V, current intensity is fixed at 50µA,  maximum voltage set to 4500V, maximum power set at 200mW)  Protein digestion and NanoLC- MS/MS After OFFgel, the 12 liquid fractions were precipitated with ethanol, centrifuged, and pellets were resuspended in Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters, MA, USA) 0.1% and digested in-solution using a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio. In parallel, the gel strip was cut into 12 fractions and also digested according to Jeanson et al. Peptides from the same fraction were pooled and desalted using C18 Zip tip (EMD Millipore, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried in a Speedvac and kept at -20°C until MS analysis. Dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µl of 10% ACN, 0,1%TFA and analysed on a  nanoRSLC-LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Five µl were preconcentrated on a 75 μm i.d. reversed-phase (RP) trapping column and injected in a with separated on a reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex) using an acetonitrile (ACN) gradient of 40 min. Solvent A was 5% ACN, 95% H2O, 0,1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% ACN, 20% H2O and 0,085% formic acid.  The LTQ-Orbitrap MS resolution was set at 30 000, 2 microscans, dynamic ion exclusion was set for 12 seconds. The top 20 most intense peptides were selected per MS scan and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using 35eV as activation energy.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2 and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2013 04, 20 252 entries) . To search for parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4,5 ppm and 0,5 Da (CID) respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 aminoacids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. The reverse and common contaminant hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities, both protein quantification and identification were obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein.  All bioinformatic analyses, including scatterplots, heatmaps and clustering were performed with Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3). For statistical comparison, we set two groups, 8 patients vs 10 controls, the LFQ intensities were log (base 2) transformed, then filtered so as to have at least 8 out of 18 samples with valid values. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 5% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and one standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We applied a non-parametric Welch t-test (p<0,01), with a permutation-based testing correction that was controlled by using a false discovery rate threshold of 0,01. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus after z-score normalization of data, using Euclidean distances on randomized samples.

### Publication Abstract
Cystinuria is a purely renal, rare genetic disease caused by mutations in cystine transporter genes and characterized by defective cystine reabsorption leading to kidney stones. In 14% of cases, patients undergo nephrectomy, but given the difficulty to predict the evolution of the disease, the identification of markers of kidney damage would improve the follow-up of patients with a higher risk. The aim of the present study is to develop a robust, reproducible, and noninvasive methodology for proteomic analysis of urinary exosomes using high resolution mass spectrometry. A clinical pilot study conducted on eight cystinuria patients versus 10 controls highlighted 165 proteins, of which 38 were up-regulated, that separate cystinuria patients from controls and further discriminate between severe and moderate forms of the disease. These proteins include markers of kidney injury, circulating proteins, and a neutrophil signature. Analysis of selected proteins by immunobloting, performed on six additional cystinuria patients, validated the mass spectrometry data. To our knowledge, this is the first successful proteomic study in cystinuria unmasking the potential role of inflammation in this disease. The workflow we have developed is applicable to investigate urinary exosomes in different renal diseases and to search for diagnostic/prognostic markers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001430.

### Keywords
Urine proteomics, Exosome, Orbitrap, Cystinuria

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Necker Proteomics INSERM US24 University Paris Descartes-  Sorbonne Paris Cité

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Necker Proteomics INSERM US24 University Paris Descartes-  Sorbonne Paris Cité


