### Accession
PXD031377

### Title
Elacestrant demonstrates strong anti-estrogenic activity in PDX models of estrogen receptor positive endocrine-resistant and fulvestrant-resistant breast cancer

### Description
Human breast cancer cell lines were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1nM E2. All cell lines were banked in multiple aliquots to reduce the risk of phenotypic drift and identity confirmed using STR. Cells were routinely screened for mycoplasma contamination. Long-term E deprived (LTED) cells modelling resistance to an AI were derived from all parental cell lines as previously described. Two models of MCF7-LTED cells were available: one harbouring a Y537C mutation in ESR1 and the other with wt-ESR1. SUM44-LTED was shown to harbour a natural heterozygous ESR1Y537S mutation. Elacestrant resistant cell lines were generated by growing parental cells (MCF7-LTEDY537C) long-term in the presence of RPMI1640 containing 10% DCC + 0.1nM E2 + 1μM elacestrant. All cell lines were stripped of steroids for 48-72 hours prior to the start of experiments.

### Sample Protocol
TMT: Cells were lysed and labelled using the iFASP (isobaric mass tagging with Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) protocol (1). In brief, cells were lysed in 8M UREA and 50mM TEAB. 100μg for each condition were individually reduced using TCEP, alkylated using chloroacetamide and digested using trypsin in FASP. The tryptic digests were isobarically labelled with tandem-mass tags (TMT) (10-plex-labelled), mixed and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS. The raw data was analysed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.16. The corrected reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed and median-centre normalized. P-values were calculated in GraphPad Prism using the false discovery rate (FDR) method of Benjamini and Hochberg, with Q=5%. Quantitative RIME: Immunoprecipitation of ER on cross-linked WT and LTED cells was conducted as previously described with slight modifications (Mohammed et al., 2013 and Martin et al., 2017). In summary, the cross-linked samples were washed with ice-cold PBS and upon harvesting with cell scrapers, the nuclear fraction was extracted. The samples were sonicated using a water bath sonicator (Q700) using mild conditions. After sonication, 10% Triton X-100 was added to a final 1% and the sample was centrifuged to purify the debris. The supernatant was incubated with magnetic beads Protein G overnight at 4oC. The next day, the beads were washed ten times with RIPA buffer and five with ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Overnight on-bead digestion was followed using trypsin at 37oC (in a thermomixer with high rpm). The next day, on bead labelling of tryptic peptides was caried out using TMT tags, followed by equal mixing, drying and high pH fractionation of samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 following the developers’ (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009, 2011) guidelines. Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database and a common contaminant database by the Andromeda search engine (built in MaxQuant) (Cox et al., 2011). The automatic decoy search option was enabled. Resulting peptide lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 1% and protein lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 1%. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. Search parameters were chosen as follows: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines and oxidation of Methionines was considered as optional modification. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The selective oestrogen receptor (ER) degrader (SERD), fulvestrant, is limited in its use for the treatment of breast cancer (BC) by its poor oral bioavailability. Comparison of the orally bioavailable investigational SERD elacestrant, versus fulvestrant, demonstrates both drugs impact tumour growth of ER+&#x2009;patient-derived xenograft models harbouring several ESR1 mutations but that elacestrant is active after acquired resistance to fulvestrant. In cell line models of endocrine sensitive and resistant breast cancer both drugs impact the ER-cistrome, ER-interactome and transcription of oestrogen-regulated genes similarly, confirming the anti-oestrogenic activity of elacestrant. The addition of elacestrant to CDK4/6 inhibitors enhances the antiproliferative effect compared to monotherapy. Furthermore, elacestrant inhibits the growth of palbociclib-resistant cells. Lastly, resistance to elacestrant involves Type-I and Type-II receptor tyrosine kinases which are amenable to therapeutic targeting. Our data support the wider clinical testing of elacestrant.

### Keywords
Rime, Tmt, Breast cancer, Elacestrant

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research Breast Cancer Now
BRFAA

### Submitter
Nikiana Simigdala

### Lab Head
Dr Lesley-Ann Martin
The Institute of Cancer Research Breast Cancer Now


