### Accession
PXD020008

### Title
CB1 receptor-mediated inhibitory LTD triggers presynaptic remodeling via protein synthesis and ubiquitination

### Description
Long-lasting forms of postsynaptic plasticity commonly involve protein synthesis-dependent structural changes of dendritic spines. However, the relationship between protein synthesis and presynaptic structural plasticity remains unclear. Here, we investigated structural changes in cannabinoid-receptor 1 (CB1)-mediated long-term depression of inhibitory transmission (iLTD), a form of presynaptic plasticity that requires protein synthesis and involves a long-lasting reduction in GABA release. We found that CB1-iLTD in acute rat hippocampal slices was associated with protein synthesis-dependent presynaptic structural changes. Using proteomics, we determined that CB1 activation in hippocampal neurons resulted in increased ribosomal proteins and initiation factors, but decreased levels of proteins involved in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, such as Arp2/3, and presynaptic release. Moreover, while CB1-iLTD increased ubiquitin/proteasome activity, ubiquitination but not proteasomal degradation was critical for structural and functional presynaptic CB1-iLTD. Thus, CB1-iLTD relies on both protein synthesis and ubiquitination to elicit structural changes that underlie long-term reduction of GABA release.

### Sample Protocol
Primary hippocampal neurons were prepared from E18-19 rat brains and grown on poly-D-lysine coated 15 cm plates at a density of 3.5 million cells/ 15 cm plate in DMEM media without l-arginine or l-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Tewksbury, MA, USA, Cat# DMEM-500), with pen/strep and B-27 supplement (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). 84mg/L of l-arginine 13C6  (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 146mg/ L of l-lysine D4  (Thermofisher, Waltham, MA, USA) was supplemented for ‘medium’ labelled media and 84mg/L of l-arginine 13C615N4 and 146mg/ L of l-lysine 13C615N4 was added to ‘heavy’ labelled media. Neurons were grown in this media for 15 days, which results in >90% incorporation of labeled amino acids into the cellular proteomes (Zhang et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012). For treatment, neuron cultures DIV 16 received 15 ml fresh media containing either vehicle or WIN (5 µM) for 25 min. Neurons were washed 3X with ice-cold PBS without Mg2+ or Ca2+ (0.01 M, pH = 7.4). After 3 washes, cells were harvested and lysed in SDS lysis buffer containing: (50 mM Tris, 2% SDS, 2mM EDTA) for 30 min at RT. Lysates were then sonicated briefly, allowed to incubate for another 30 min at RT, and centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000g to remove insoluble debris. 10 µg of lysate from ‘medium’ cells treated with vehicle were mixed with 10 µg ‘heavy’ WIN treated cells (Forward sample). Separately, 10 µg of lysate from ‘medium’ cells treated with WIN were mixed with 10 µg ‘heavy’ vehicle treated cells (Reverse sample). These mixtures (20 µg total protein) were loaded onto a 10% Bis-Tris gel and subjected to SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomasie for 1 hr and protein lanes were cut up into 12 equal sized portion in order to improve protein coverage (Jordan 2004).  Mass spectrometry was performed in collaboration with the Einstein Proteomic Facility using the LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Jamie Hill Instrument Services) was used. An Eksigent nanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with a self-packed 750-μm × 12-cm reverse phase column (Reprosil C18, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Germany) was coupled to the mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of 3–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 110 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with one 60,000 resolution MS survey scan by the Orbitrap and up to eight MS/MS scans in the LTQ for the most intense peaks selected from each survey scan. Automatic gain control target value was set to 1,000,000 for Orbitrap survey scans and 5,000 for LTQ MS/MS scans. Survey scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1.3). Mascot was set up to search the NCBInr_20160618.fasta; SwissProt_AC_20170620 database (selected for Rattus, 92376 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme stricttrypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 50 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, label:2H(4) of lysine, label:13C(6) of arginine, label:13C(6)15N(2) of lysine, label:13C(6)15N(4) of arginine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Long-lasting forms of postsynaptic plasticity commonly involve protein synthesis-dependent structural changes of dendritic spines. However, the relationship between protein synthesis and presynaptic structural plasticity remains unclear. Here, we investigated structural changes in cannabinoid-receptor 1 (CB<sub>1</sub>)-mediated long-term depression of inhibitory transmission (iLTD), a form of presynaptic plasticity that involves a protein-synthesis-dependent long-lasting reduction in GABA release. We found that CB<sub>1</sub>-iLTD in acute rat hippocampal slices was associated with protein synthesis-dependent presynaptic structural changes. Using proteomics, we determined that CB<sub>1</sub> activation in hippocampal neurons resulted in increased ribosomal proteins and initiation factors, but decreased levels of proteins involved in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, such as ARPC2 and WASF1/WAVE1, and presynaptic release. Moreover, while CB<sub>1</sub>-iLTD increased ubiquitin/proteasome activity, ubiquitination but not proteasomal degradation was critical for structural and functional presynaptic CB<sub>1</sub>-iLTD. Thus, CB<sub>1</sub>-iLTD relies on both protein synthesis and ubiquitination to elicit structural changes that underlie long-term reduction of GABA release.

### Keywords
Cannabinoids, Cb1, Neurons, Win 55, 212-2

### Affiliations
Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Pablo Castillo

### Lab Head
Dr Pablo Castillo
Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA


