### Accession
PXD025691

### Title
Fibrosis-activated transcriptional networks govern hepatocyte reprogramming and intra-hepatic communication in metabolic associated liver fibrosis

### Description
Liver fibrosis is a strong predictor of long-term mortality in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; yet the mechanisms underlying the progression from the comparatively benign fatty liver state to advanced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and liver fibrosis are incompletely under-stood. Using a cell type-resolved genomics approach, we show that comprehensive alterations in hepatocyte genomic and transcriptional settings during NASH progression, led to a partial loss of hepatocyte identity. The hepatocyte reprogramming was under tight cooperative control of a net-work of NASH-activated transcription factors (TFs), as exemplified by Elf3 and Glis2. Indeed, Elf3 and Glis2 controlled hepatocyte identity and fibrosis-dependent hepatokine genes targeting disease-associated hepatic stellate cell (HSC) gene programs. Thus, interconnected TF networks not only promoted hepatocyte dysfunction, but also directed the intra-hepatic crosstalk with HSCs necessary for NASH and fibrosis progression implying molecular “hub-centered” targeting strategies to be superior to existing mono-target approaches as currently used in NASH therapy.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative comparison of Elf3 and Glis2 in control and NASH mice, whole liver nuclei (~10 μg of protein) were lysed in denaturing buffer (8 M guanidine hydrochloride in 25 mM ammonium biocarbonate) at 95 °C for 5 minutes. On-bead protein aggregation (Batth et al., 2019) was induced using magnetic HILIC beads, 70 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), and 30 minutes of incubation with shaking at room temperature. Bead bound protein aggregates were retained using a magnet and the supernatant was removed before washing once with pure acetonitrile and once with 70 % (v/v) ethanol. Protein aggregates were diluted in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 2 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes, alkylated with 11 mM chloracetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Following proteolytic digestion with LysC (1:200) for 1 hour at 37 °C, samples were digested with trypsin (1:100) overnight at 37 °C, and subsequently oxidized using 0.05 % (v/v) hydrogen peroxide. After acidification with trifluoroacetic acid, samples were desalted on C18 StageTips, eluates were vacuum-dried in a speed-vac and resuspended in 10 μL of 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid.  Peptides from Elf3 and Glis2 to be targeted using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)-mass spectrometry (Peterson et al., 2012) were selected based on a combination of previous mass spectrometry results registered in the PeptideAtlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org), PABST peptide rankings, and general recommendations for selecting peptides (Lange et al., 2008). Synthetic peptides were purchased from Synpeptide Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) with heavy-isotope labelling of the C-terminal amino acid (being either arginine +10 or lysine +8). Synthetic peptides were dissolved in varying concentrations of acetonitrile, pooled together in equimolar amounts, and diluted (1:100) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the concentration of acetonitrile. Peptides were prepared by reduction, alkylation, oxidization, acidification, desalting, vacuum-drying, and resuspending, as described above.Approximately 0.5 μg of sample was loaded along with 1 picomol of synthetic peptides onto  an LC-MS/MS system consisting in an Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo scientific), coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo scientific). Reverse phase (RP) Chromatography was performed on a 20 cm analytical column, packed in house with ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 1.9m resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The nano-HPLC was operating with an ACN/water solvent system containing 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 0.25 μL per minute. Peptides RP separation was achieved using a step-gradient from 4 to 8% ACN in 7 min, followed by a slow gradient to 30% ACN in 86 min, a ramp to 55% ACN in 25 min and a plateau of 80% ACN for 5 min. The total run time was approximately 150 min, including sample injection and column equilibration.   A PRM inclusion list containing the mass over charge (m/z) of the peptides in their heavy (synthetic) and light (endogenous) form, was uploaded in the Exploris 480 PRM method editor. After a full MS survey scan from 350 to 1500 m/z, at 60.000 resolution, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target of 300%, the MS/MS spectra of the target peptides were acquired in unscheduled PRM mode, using a resolution of 60.000, quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da, HCD collision energy of 30% and an AGC target of 200% with a maximum injection time of 110 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Skyline™ 20.2.0.343 software (MacLean B. et al. 2010). Briefly, after building a spectral library using MaxQuant v.1.6.2.3 (Cox J. et al. 2008), PRM acquired raw files were imported in Skyline software with MS1 and MS/MS filtering resolving power set to 60.000 and mass analyzer as Orbitrap. MS/MS filtering was set as targeted, and retention time filtering was set to include all matching scans. In peptide settings, carbamidomethyl cysteine and oxidation of methionine was set as fixed and variable modification, respectively. After using the retention time and fragmentation patterns of the synthetic peptides as a reference, MS/MS area fragment values relative to 3 – 5 fragment ions for each of the Elf3 and Glis2 endogenous peptides were exported and used for statistical analysis. Raw quantitation values were normalized among different runs using the area under the curve of full MS total ion current measured in Thermo Xcalibur v.4.4.16.14 (Thermo scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Liver fibrosis is a strong predictor of long-term mortality in individuals with metabolic-associated fatty liver disease; yet, the mechanisms underlying the progression from the comparatively benign fatty liver state to advanced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and liver fibrosis are incompletely understood. Using cell-type-resolved genomics, we show that comprehensive alterations in hepatocyte genomic and transcriptional settings during NASH progression, led to a loss of hepatocyte identity. The hepatocyte reprogramming was under tight cooperative control of a network of fibrosis-activated transcription factors, as exemplified by the transcription factor Elf-3 (ELF3) and zinc finger protein GLIS2 (GLIS2). Indeed, ELF3- and GLIS2-controlled fibrosis-dependent hepatokine genes targeting disease-associated hepatic stellate cell gene programs. Thus, interconnected transcription factor networks not only promoted hepatocyte dysfunction but also directed the intra-hepatic crosstalk necessary for NASH and fibrosis progression, implying that molecular "hub-centered" targeting strategies are superior to existing mono-target approaches as currently used in NASH therapy.

### Keywords
Elf3, Mouse, Exploris 480, Glis2, Prm, Liver fibrosis, Nash

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; University of Southern Denmark; Odense; 5230; Denmark

### Submitter
Michele Puglia

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; University of Southern Denmark; Odense; 5230; Denmark


