### Accession
PXD004343

### Title
Activity-Based Protein Profiling of BRAF Inhibitor Resistance in Melanoma Cell Lines

### Description
To investigate mechanisms of resistance to BRAF inhibitor therapy in melanoma, BRAF mutant cell lines have been chronically exposed to BRAFi to create phenotypes with acquired drug resistance.  Activity-based protein profiling with desthiobiotinylating ATP probes (ActivX, Thermo) is used to examine the differences between naive and drug-resistant cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells are lysed, and protein lysates (1 mg each) are prepared and labeled with desthiobiotinylating ATP probes (ActivX, Thermo), according to the manufacturer's instructions.  After labeling, proteins are digested with trypsin; labeled proteolytic peptides are enriched with streptavidin prior to duplicate LC-MS/MS analyses (RSLC-QExactive Plus, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were conducted against the UniProt database using Mascot (Matrix Science); quantification is achieved using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Patients with BRAF V600E mutant melanoma are typically treated with targeted BRAF kinase inhibitors, such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib. Although these drugs are initially effective, they are not curative. Most of the focus to date has been upon genetic mechanisms of acquired resistance; therefore, we must better understand the global signaling adaptations that mediate escape from BRAF inhibition. In the current study, we have used activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) with ATP-analogue probes to enrich kinases and other enzyme classes that contribute to BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi) resistance in four paired isogenic BRAFi-na&#xef;ve/resistant cell line models. Our analysis showed these cell line models, which also differ in their PTEN status, have considerable heterogeneity in their kinase ATP probe uptake in comparing both na&#xef;ve cells and adaptations to chronic drug exposure. A number of kinases including FAK1, SLK, and TAOK2 had increased ATP probe uptake in BRAFi resistant cells, while KHS1 (M4K5) and BRAF had decreased ATP probe uptake in the BRAFi-resistant cells. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed BRAFi resistance is associated with a significant enhancement in ATP probe uptake in proteins implicated in cytoskeletal organization and adhesion, and decreases in ATP probe uptake in proteins associated with cell metabolic processes. The ABPP approach was able to identify key phenotypic mediators critical for each BRAFi resistant cell line. Together, these data show that common phenotypic adaptations to BRAF inhibition can be mediated through very different signaling networks, suggesting considerable redundancy within the signaling of BRAF mutant melanoma cells.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Braf, Drug resistance, Kinase inhibitor, Abpp

### Affiliations
Molecular Oncology Chemical Biology and Molecular Medicine Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, SRB3 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr John Koomen
Molecular Oncology Chemical Biology and Molecular Medicine Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, SRB3 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.


