### Accession
PXD002290

### Title
GRK2 influences the phosphorylation of PER proteins by LC-MS/MS

### Description
To test whether GRK2 influences the phosphorylation of PER proteins, we used mass spectrometry to identify residues in V5-tagged murine PER2 that may be differentially phosphorylated upon GRK2 overexpression in Neuro2A cells.

### Sample Protocol
Neuro2A cells were co-transfected with plasmids encoding PER2-V5 with either GRK2-FLAG, kinase-dead GRK2 K220R, or pcDNA3.1/Hygro+ empty vector 18-24 hours post-transfection, cells were treated with/without PF-670462 (9 µM) for 4 hrs prior to harvest. Three biological replicates were performed for each transfection condition.  Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, and 10% glycerol supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors), and the cell lysate was incubated with anti-V5 agarose beads (Life Technologies Inc.) at 4°C overnight. Beads were further washed by lysis buffer (4 times) and eluates (40 uL) from IP pellets were loaded per lane and resolved on an 4-12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. Proteins were visualized using colloidal blue staining (Life Technologies Inc.), and the gels were sliced for the in-gel digestion. All resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed by an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray interface (ekspert™ nanoLC 400 system) operated in positive ion mode. The separation of peptides was performed on an analytical column (75 µm × 10 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (using a 60 min gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nL/min. The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the temperature of heated capillary was 300°C. The instrument method consisted of one full MS scan from 400 to 2000 m/z followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2, and a repeat duration of 90 s. The full mass was scanned in an Orbitrap analyzer with R = 60,000 (defined at m/z 400), and the subsequent MS/MS analyses were performed in LTQ analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed and analyzed with MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) using Andromeda as search engine against the UniProt (release 2013_05) database restricted to Mouse (Mus musculus) taxonomy concatenated with a decoy reversed sequences. The following parameters were used: cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; and the methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were set variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Up to two missing cleavages of trypsin were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 6 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.8 Da for MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein was set at 1% and a minimum length of six amino acids was used for peptide identification. Default settings were used for all the other parameters in MaxQuant. Spectral counts-based quantitation was carried out using the intensity information in Phospho (STY)Sites file. Three biological replicates were performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuro2a cells, Lc-ms/ms, In-gel digestion

### Affiliations
university of ottawa
university of ottawa, Dr. Daniel Figeys lab

### Submitter
kerwin chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng-Kang Chiang
university of ottawa, Dr. Daniel Figeys lab


