### Accession
PXD005847

### Title
High Density Lipoprotein Proteome in Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease Patients

### Description
Characterization of HDL proteome in patients diagnosed with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and to evaluate the impact on HDL function.

### Sample Protocol
HDL particles were separated by SEC from 100 uL aliquots of serum for each injection. Fractions positive for Apo-AI and in the expected size range for HDL particles were combined and processed for delipidation by extraction with methanol-chloroform to isolate HDL particle-associated proteins. Proteins were quantified and prepared for MS analysis on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
All 45 data files (3 technical MS replicates per sample) were searched against the human Uniprot canonical and isoform database (release 2016_03) using MaxQuant ver. 1.5.3. Proteins were identified with 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR), determined empirically by reversed decoy database searching according to standard MS analysis approaches. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021) was considered as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (+15.995) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.010) were considered as variable modifications. The precursor tolerance was kept at 4.5ppm and product ion tolerance was kept at 0.5 Da. Label free normalization and quantitation was performed using the LFQ feature of MaxQuant (MaxLFQ).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdl, Obesity, Nafld, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX
Texas Biomedical Research Institute

### Submitter
Prahlad Rao

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Olivier
Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX


