### Accession
PXD004257

### Title
Thermal shock induces host proteostasis disruption and endoplasmic reticulum stress in the model symbiotic cnidarian Aiptasia

### Description
Coral bleaching has devastating effects on coral survival and reef ecosystem function, but many of the fundamental cellular effects of thermal stress on cnidarian physiology are unclear. We used label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to assess the effects of high temperatures on the proteome of the model symbiotic anemone Aiptasia sp. Anemones were acclimated to elevated temperatures (30 °C and 33.5 °C) for two weeks or exposed to short-term thermal shock (33.5 °C, 24 hours) without acclimation. We identified 2,137 protein clusters in Aiptasia, 136 of which were differentially abundant between treatments. There were minimal differences (nine proteins) in protein abundances between the control (25 °C) and acclimated high-temperature (30 °C and 33.5 °C) treatments, indicating that thermal acclimation in symbiotic cnidarians is not primarily regulated at the level of protein expression. Heat shock resulted in significant changes in the abundance of 104 proteins, including those involved in protein folding and synthesis, redox homeostasis, and central metabolism. Nineteen highly abundant cytoskeletal and structural proteins showed particularly reduced abundance (approximately 50%), demonstrating proteostasis disruption and inhibition of protein synthesis. Heat shock induced proteins involved in multiple mechanisms for stabilizing nascent proteins, preventing protein aggregation and degrading damaged proteins, indicative of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Antioxidant mechanisms and metabolic enzymes necessary for redox homeostasis were also upregulated. Disruption of host proteostasis occurred before either bleaching or symbiont photoinhibition was detected, strongly suggesting endogenous reactive oxygen species production as the proximate cause of thermal damage. The effects of thermal shock were most pronounced at the endoplasmic reticulum, and proteostasis maintenance and protein turnover mechanisms may be essential in the response to severe thermal stress in symbiotic cnidarians.

### Sample Protocol
LC-ESI MS/MS with label-free quantification of whole animal tissue, symbionts removed. Samples were prepared by a sodium deoxycholate in-solution digestion method with 1 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich New Zealand) using the methods and instrument settings described in Oakley et al. (2016). Samples were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS with a 300 minute gradient (buffer A:0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 0.3 µL min-1 on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (#160321, Thermo Scientific) and Ultimate 3000 (Dionex), with the column oven at 35 °C. An LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) analyzed peptides were injected at 1.9 kV spray voltage at 30,000 resolution. The ion trap analyzed MS/MS spectra, taking only the top 8 MS peaks and rejecting +1 charge states with dynamic exclusion enabled (180 s). The LC-ESI-MS/MS instruments were operated with Chromeleon Xpress (v2.11.0.2914, Dionex), Thermo Xcalibur (v2.1) and ThermoTune Plus (v2.5.5, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using a custom sequence database previously used for Aiptasia protein identification. This database consists of the Aiptasia genome, all UniProt cnidarian sequences, all open reading frames from an Aiptasia strain CC7 transcriptome, and a database of common contaminants (320,798 total sequences).  Peak lists were generated by Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) via SEQUEST HT searches followed by Percolator scoring. SEQUEST HT searches assumed trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, one minimum matching peptide per protein, a minimum peptide length of six amino acids, maximum delta Cn of 0, a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 parts per million, and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da. Carbamylation of the N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification.  Scaffold (4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc.) was used for further validation and for quantification via label-free total ion current using the SEQUEST and X!Tandem algorithms (The GPM, thegpm.org; version Cyclone 2010.12.01.1). Protein probabilities were assigned by Protein Prophet. False discovery rates (FDRs) were calculated using a decoy database. The FDR threshold for reported peptides and proteins was set to 0.1% and 1%, respectively, with a minimum of two peptides per protein.  Proteins that shared significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters using Scaffold’s Protein Cluster Analysis algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Coral bleaching has devastating effects on coral survival and reef ecosystem function, but many of the fundamental cellular effects of thermal stress on cnidarian physiology are unclear. We used label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to compare the effects of rapidly (33.5 &#xb0;C, 24 h) and gradually (30 and 33.5 &#xb0;C, 12 days) elevated temperatures on the proteome of the model symbiotic anemone Aiptasia. We identified 2133 proteins in Aiptasia, 136 of which were differentially abundant between treatments. Thermal shock, but not acclimation, resulted in significant abundance changes in 104 proteins, including those involved in protein folding and synthesis, redox homeostasis, and central metabolism. Nineteen abundant structural proteins showed particularly reduced abundance, demonstrating proteostasis disruption and potential protein synthesis inhibition. Heat shock induced antioxidant mechanisms and proteins involved in stabilizing nascent proteins, preventing protein aggregation and degrading damaged proteins, which is indicative of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Host proteostasis disruption occurred before either bleaching or symbiont photoinhibition was detected, suggesting host-derived reactive oxygen species production as the proximate cause of thermal damage. The pronounced abundance changes in endoplasmic reticulum proteins associated with proteostasis and protein turnover indicate that these processes are essential in the cellular response of symbiotic cnidarians to severe thermal stress.

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Coral reefs, Cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis, Model organisms

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington
School of Biological Sciences Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Keith Davy
School of Biological Sciences Victoria University of Wellington


