### Accession
PXD002292

### Title
Characterization of secretomes from brain microvascular endothelial cells after ischemia

### Description
The human immortalized brain endothelial cell line hCMEC/D3 is considered an in vitro model of the blood-brain-barrier. We aimed to characterize changes in the secretome of hCMEC/D3 subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) by SILAC, in order to identify new proteins involved in ischemia-triggered blood-brain-barrier disruption and test their potential as blood biomarkers for ischemic stroke diagnosis. After SILAC analysis, 19 proteins were found differentially secreted between OGD and normoxia/normoglycemia conditions (Fold Change>|1.4| and peptide count≥2). Protein folding and nucleic acid binding were the main molecular functions and epithelial adherens junctions and aldosterone signaling appeared as the main canonical pathways represented by OGD-secreted proteins. ANXA1, CLUS, IGFBP2, PRDX3, TIMP2 and COL1A2 were replicated by western blotting in 9 independent cell cultures. Five replicated proteins were analyzed in human serum samples of 38 ischemic stroke patients compared to 18 stroke-mimicking conditions and 18 healthy controls by ELISA. IGFBP2 showed increased blood levels when strokes were compared with stroke-mimicking patients (p<0.1).  In conclusion, we characterized changes in the secretome of hCMEC/D3 after an ischemic insult and highlighted some candidates to become biomarkers for ischemic stroke diagnosis related to blood-brain-barrier disruption.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture  SILAC media The medium used for the OGD experiment consisted in SILAC RPMI 1640-Flex (Invitrogen), supplemented with heavy lysine and arginine, and without dFBS, glucose or growing factors. In addition, OGD medium was deprived of oxygen for 24 hours prior to use. In contrast, the medium used for normoxia/normoglycemia condition was supplemented with light lysine and arginine, and was also free of serum and growing factors, but maintained the concentration of 2 g/L glucose.  We performed a cross-labeling replication. In experiment 1 light aminoacids (lys and arg) were used in normoxia/normoglycemia and heavy labeling was used for OGD, whereas in experiment 2 the labeling was reversed.   Media for cell cultures in the replication phase Growing medium used for replication in independent cell cultures consisted in RPMI1640 (Sigma) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen),  0.29g/L L-glutamine (Invitrogen), 5mg/L Phenol Red (Invitrogen), 200mg/L L-proline (Sigma), and with 1:2 of the following specific growing factors hVEGF, hFGF-b, hydrocortisone, R3-IGF-1, ascorbic acid, hEGF, GA-100 and heparin (Lonza). The medium used for OGD experiment consisted in RPMI 1640 without glucose (Lonza), and without FBS or growing factors. In addition, OGD medium was deprived of oxygen for 24 hours prior to use. In contrast, the medium used for normoxia/normoglycemia conditions was RPMI 1640 (Sigma), with 2 g/l glucose and free of serum and growing factors.  hCMEC/D3 secretome  analysis SILAC cell culture Figure 1 schematically represents the experimental procedure. Initially, hCMEC/D3 were seeded separately in 2 subcultures, one in light medium and the other one in heavy medium and grown at 37ºC, 21% O2, 100% humidity. During adaptation phase cells were successively passed when 90% of confluence was reached. Once heavy labeling was >98%,  both cell subcultures were seeded in 15 cm petri dishes with a density of 10000 cells/mL. All cells used in this study were used between pass 20 and pass 35.  Once cells reached 90% of confluence, cultures were washed five times with PBS and kept with heavy or light media without dFBS during 16h. Starvation is recommended in order to reduce the signaling levels in cells to a basal level, and to avoid serum interferences in the posterior MS/MS analysis20 (Harsha 2008). Oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) After dFBS deprivation we started the experimental phase. We washed each subculture twicewith PBS and one time with the corresponding (heavy or light) serum-free medium. Heavy subculture was subjected to OGD treatment for 6h with OGD medium in an hypoxia chamber (INVIVO2 200, Ruskinn UK) with 0.5% O2, 5% CO2, N2 and 100% humidity , whereas light subculture was kept under normoxia/normoglycemia for 6h as a control condition. Cell supernatant After OGD or normoxia/normoglycemia, supernatants were collected on 50 mL Falcon tubes and centrifuged at 1500g during 5 minutes at 4 °C to eliminate cellular debris. The supernatant was recovered and concentrated through Amicon ultra-15 filtration (3k molecular weight cut-off) units (Merck Millipore, Germany) by centrifugation during 40 minutes at 5000g and again through Amicon ultra-0.5 centrifugal filters ((3k molecular weight cut-off) by centrifugation at 14000g during 30 minutes. Samples were kept at 4ºC during the process to avoid protein degradation. Finally, we added 4.5 µL of aprotinin (Sigma) and 10 µL of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Sigma) to supernatant concentrates and kept them at -80ºC until use. LC- MS/MS analysis Concentrated supernatants were quantified with the RC DC protein assay (Biorad, USA) prior to MS analysis. Within each experiment, equal amounts of light/heavy secretomes were mixed 1:1 (w:w) according to the quantification. The two mixtures (experiment 1 & 2) were digested with trypsin and 500 ng of each digestion were analyzed on a Maxis Impact Q-TOF spectrometer (Bruker, Germany), coupled to a nano-HPLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, USA). The digested samples, dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water, were first concentrated on a 100 µm ID, 2 cm nanotrapping column (Proxeon Biosystem) and then loaded into a 75 µm ID, 25 cm Acclaim PepMap nanoseparation column (Thermo Scientific, USA). Chromatography was run using a 0.1% formic acid - acetonitrile gradient (2-30% in 180 min for total supernatant digests; flow rate 300 nL/min). The column was coupled to the mass spectrometer inlet through a Captive Spray ionization source (Bruker). MS acquisition was set to cycles of MS (2Hz), followed by MS/MS (2-20Hz) of the 20 most intense precursor ions with an intensity threshold for fragmentation of 2500 counts and using a dynamic exclusion time of 0.32 min. All spectra were acquired on the range 130-2200 Da. LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using Data Analysis 4.2 software (Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  Proteins were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science, UK). MS/MS spectra were searched in the Swissprot database (version 2012.06) and setting the taxonomy to Homo sapiens (40.624 sequences). The search parameters were: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.05 Da, trypsin specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Significance threshold for the identifications was set to p<0.05, minimum ions score of 20.    Quantification was performed with the WARP-LC software (Bruker). Stable isotope-labelled peptides were identified with a mass shift of +6Da for lysine and +10Da for arginine. We performed a relative quantification regarding ratios of normoxia&normoglycemia/OGD (light/heavy and heavy/light for the reverse experiment). MS and MS/MS spectra of the relevant proteins were visually reviewed for protein quantification. The results were normalized against the median assuming that the distribution of the quantified values is centered in 1. Finally, obtained quantifications were filtered out using an in-house excel macro considering: i) proteins identified and quantified in both experiments, ii) proteins identified with a Mascot Score>30, iii) proteins quantified with at least 2 peptides and with a coefficient of variation (CV) between experiments <30%, and iv) proteins that showed a consistent fold change in both experiments (taking into account the cross-labeling) (i. e. ratio with the same sign in both replicates).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcmec/d3, Oxygen and glucose deprivation, Silac, Secretome, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Vall Hebrón Institute of Research
Vall Hebron Institute of Research

### Submitter
Víctor Llombart

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Montaner
Vall Hebron Institute of Research


