### Accession
PXD025996

### Title
MYCN and MAX alterations in Wilms tumor and identification of novel interactors as biomarker candidates

### Description
Wilms tumor (WT) is the most common renal tumor in childhood. Among others, MYCN copy number gain and MYCN P44L and MAX R60Q mutations have been identified in WT. The proto-oncogene MYCN encodes a transcription factor that requires dimerization with MAX to activate transcription of numerous target genes. MYCN gain has been associated with adverse prognosis. The MYCN P44L and MAX R60Q mutations, located in either the transactivating or basic helix-loop-helix domain, respectively, are predicted to be damaging by different pathogenicity prediction tools. We screened a large cohort of unselected WTs and revealed frequencies of 3 % for MYCN P44L and 0.8 % for MAX R60Q, associated with a higher risk of relapse in the case of MYCN. Biochemical characterization identified a reduced transcriptional activation potential for MAX R60Q, while the MYCN P44L mutation did not change activation potential or protein stability. The protein interactome of N-MYC-P44L was likewise not altered as shown by mass spectrometric analyses of purified N-MYC complexes. Nevertheless, we could identify a number of novel N-MYC partner proteins, and several of these are known for their oncogenic potential. Correlated expression in WT samples suggests a role in WT oncogenesis and they expand the range of potential biomarkers for WT stratification and targeting, especially for high-risk WT.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitation of wild-type and mutant HA-MYCN was performed overnight at -20 °C with a fourfold volume of acetone. Pellets were washed three times with acetone at -20 °C. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in NuPAGE® LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies), reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 120 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min. Separation was performed on NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 45 min with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 2 h, gel lanes were cut into 15 slices. For PTM analysis, only the area corresponding to the N-MYC protein size was used. Excised gel bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin (or chymotrypsin, for PTM analysis) per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective), coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self- packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 30-minute linear gradient from 3 % to 30 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 sec was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 (Cox and Mann 2008). Database search was performed with Andromeda, integrated in MaxQuant, against the UniProt Human database. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (1 % FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against the following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used (Cox et al., 2014). Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed. Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5 % quantile of the combined log10- transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For the identification of significantly co-immunoprecipitated proteins, boxplot outliers were identified in intensity bins of at least 300 proteins. Log2 transformed protein ratios of Co-IP versus control (Log2FC) with values outside a 1.5x (potential) or 3x (extreme) interquartile range (IQR), respectively, were considered as significantly co-immunoprecipitated. Data analysis for phosphorylation site identification of wild type and P44L HA-MYCN was performed with PEKAS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Canada). Database searching was performed against a custom database containing the protein sequence of HA-MYCN with the following parameters: parent mass tolerance: 8 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, enzyme: chymotrypsin, variable modifications: oxidation (M), pyro-glutamate (N-term. Q), Protein N-term acetylation, phosphorylation (STY). Results were filtered to 1% PSM-FDR by target-decoy approach, and MS/MS spectra of phosphopeptides were validated manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wilms tumour, Pediatric cancer, N-myc, Prognostic marker, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Wüerzburg
Theodor-Boveri-Institute/Biocenter, Developmental Biochemistry, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Ovidio Jimenez Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Gessler
Theodor-Boveri-Institute/Biocenter, Developmental Biochemistry, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany


