### Accession
PXD036824

### Title
TMT-based phosphoproteomics and proteomics analysis of the developing mouse heart

### Description
We Investigate of the mice hearts from embryonic day 10.5 to postnatal week 8 and reveal developmental changes in phosphoproteome, proteome encompassing cardiogenesis and cardiac maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissues were subjected to protein extraction, digestion, and TMT labeling. In brief, tissues were disrupted by tissuelyser (Tissuelyser-48, Jingxin, China) and lysed with protein extraction buffer [8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (vol/vol) EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate,10 mM sodium pyrophosphate] (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) followed by centrifugation, concentrations were determined using Bradford assay (Beyotime，China). Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM DTT (Thermo, USA) for 25 min at 56 °C followed by alkylation with 14 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) for 30 min in darkness, and unreacted iodoacetamide were quenched by DTT for 15 min. The urea concentration was diluted with 25 mM Tris (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), pH 8.2 to 1.2 M, and the proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with 5 ng/ul trypsin (Promega, USA) and 1 mM CaCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). The peptides were desalted by tC18 Sep-Pak column (Waters, USA), followed by TMT 10-Plex(Thermo，USA) labeling. After labeling, each of the 3 groups was mixed respectively and desalted by Waters tC18 Sep-Pak column. For protein quantification, TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using ACQUITY UPLC M-Class with XBridge BEH C18 column (300 μm×150 mm, 1.7 μm; 130Å, Waters). 25 fractions were collected by using nonadjacent pooling scheme within a 128 min gradient of 3% buffer B (A: 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10; B: 100% ACN) for 14 min, 3%–8% B for 1 min, 8%–29% B for 71 min, 29%–41% B for 12 min, 41%–100% B for 1 min, 100% B for 8 min, 100%-3% B for 1 min followed by 20 min at 3% B. For phosphoproteomic quantification, TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated using Agilent 1260 system with XBridge BEH300 C18 column (4.6×150 mm, 3.6 μm; 130Å, Waters). 3 fractions were collected by using nonadjacent pooling scheme within a 32 min gradient of 0%–10% buffer B (5 mM ammonium formate/90% ACN, pH 10) for 2.5 min, 10%–27% B for 16 min, 27%–31% B for 1 min, 31%–39% B for 3.9 min, 39%–60% B for 3.2 min, followed by 5 min at 60% B. The 3 fractions were then dried by vacuum concentration for further enrichment of phosphopeptide. TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were enriched through Ti-IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography, JKchemical, China). In short, each fraction was dissolved in loading buffer (80% ACN, 6% TFA) and incubated with IMAC beads for 30min at room temperature, wash with wash buffer I (50% ACN, 200 mM NaCl, 6% TFA) and II (30% ACN, 0.1% TFA) for 30 min respectively, and eluted by elution buffer (10% NH4OH) for 15min. The eluates of phosphopeptides were dried and desalted by C18 StageTips. For LC-MS analyses, TMT-labeled peptides or enriched TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1200. The trap column (75 μm×2 cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA) effluent was transferred to a reverse-phase microcapillary column (75 μm×25 cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA). For protein quantification analysis, a 95 min linear gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 5 seconds, 5% to 15% buffer B for 40 min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 34.8 min, 28% to 38% buffer B for 12 min, 30% buffer to 100% buffer B for 5s and to 100% buffer B for 8 min) was applied while using the following buffer: 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. And for phosphor-proteomic analysis, a 125 min linear gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 5 seconds, 5% to 15% buffer B for 53.5 min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 47 min, 28% to 38% buffer B for 16.5 min, 38% buffer to 100% buffer B for 5 s and to 100% buffer B for 8 min). A full survey scan was obtained for the m/z range of 350–1500. For both protein expression and phosphorylation quantification, the resolution of HCD MS/MS was 50,000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched against the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt, 01/15/2020) database on MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008) platform (version 1.6.5.0) with match between runs (MBR) algorithms, phosphorylation (S/T/Y) was activated as a variable modification for phosphoproteomic analysis. Other parameters were set as default. For proteins and phosphorylation sites, only those were quantified in at least 2 of the 3 replicates were used for subsequent analyses. For phosphorylation sites with proteins quantified, the levels of phosphorylation sites were normalized against the abundances of the corresponding proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiogenesis is a tightly regulated dynamic process through a continuum of differentiation and proliferation events. Key factors and pathways governing this process remain incompletely understood. Here, we investigate mice hearts from embryonic day 10.5 to postnatal week 8 and dissect developmental changes in phosphoproteome-, proteome-, metabolome-, and transcriptome-encompassing cardiogenesis and cardiac maturation. We identify mitogen-activated protein kinases as core kinases involved in transcriptional regulation by mediating the phosphorylation of chromatin remodeling proteins during early cardiogenesis. We construct the reciprocal regulatory network of transcription factors (TFs) and identify a series of TFs controlling early cardiogenesis involved in cycling-dependent proliferation. After birth, we identify cardiac resident macrophages with high arachidonic acid metabolism activities likely involved in the clearance of injured apoptotic cardiomyocytes. Together, our comprehensive multi-omics data offer a panoramic view of cardiac development and maturation that provides a resource for further in-depth functional exploration.

### Keywords
Developmental, Heart, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
nanjing medical university
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
xiangzheng zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


