### Accession
PXD039830

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and RNA-sequencing of mouse liver endothelial cells identify novel regulators of BMP6 by iron

### Description
Iron induces hepcidin by activating bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)6-SMAD signaling. Liver endothelial cells (LECs) produce BMP6, but the molecular mechanisms are incompletely understood. To address this, we performed proteomics and RNA-sequencing on LECs from iron-adequate and iron-loaded mice. Gene set enrichment analysis identified transcription factors activated by high iron, including Nrf-2, which was previously reported to contribute to BMP6 regulation, and proto-oncogene c-Jun (encoded by Jun). Jun knockdown blocked Bmp6, but not Nrf-2 pathway, induction by iron in LEC cultures. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation of mouse livers showed iron-dependent c-Jun binding to predicted sites in Bmp6 regulatory regions. Finally, c-Jun inhibitor blunted induction of Bmp6 and hepcidin, but not Nrf-2 activity, in iron-loaded mice. However, Bmp6 expression and iron parameters were unchanged in endothelial Jun knockout mice. Our data suggest that c-Jun participates in iron-mediated BMP6 regulation independent of Nrf-2, though the mechanisms may be redundant and/or multifactorial.

### Sample Protocol
Liver endothelial cells were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting from 7-week-old wild-type 129S6/SvEvTac male mice fed purified iron-deficient (2-6 ppm iron), iron-adequate diet (37 ppm iron as ferric citrate), or iron-loaded diet (10,000 ppm carbonyl iron) for 4 weeks.  Quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics were performed as previously described (Paulo et al, 2015). Cells were homogenized by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1x Roche protease inhibitors, 1x Roche PhosphoStop phosphatase inhibitors) at a protein concentration of 5 mg/mL. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol (37°C, 25 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 15 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark).   Chloroform–methanol precipitation of proteins from cells was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, four parts neat methanol was added to each sample and vortexed, one part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and three parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for digestion. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay.   For each sample, protein was digested at 37°C for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were labeled with TMT reagent at a 1:2 ratio. TMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile and added to the peptides in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and 30% v/v acetonitrile. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% v/v. The TMT-labeled samples were combined 1:1 across all samples.   We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. We followed the manufacturer’s instructions except the acetonitrile percentage used in the elution buffers and the subsequent concatenation strategy. Twelve fractions were collected using 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 35%, and 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine. The samples were then concatenated into six by combining as follows: 7.5% and 22.5%, 10% and 25%, 12.5% and 27.5%, 15% and 30%, 17.5% and 35%, 20% and 60%. Combined fractions were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Liver endothelial cells were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting from 7-week-old wild-type 129S6/SvEvTac male mice fed purified iron-deficient (2-6 ppm iron), iron-adequate diet (37 ppm iron as ferric citrate), or iron-loaded diet (10,000 ppm carbonyl iron) for 4 weeks.  Quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics were performed as previously described (Paulo et al, 2015). Cells were homogenized by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1x Roche protease inhibitors, 1x Roche PhosphoStop phosphatase inhibitors) at a protein concentration of 5 mg/mL. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol (37°C, 25 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 15 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark).   Chloroform–methanol precipitation of proteins from cells was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, four parts neat methanol was added to each sample and vortexed, one part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and three parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for digestion. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay.   For each sample, protein was digested at 37°C for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were labeled with TMT reagent at a 1:2 ratio. TMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile and added to the peptides in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and 30% v/v acetonitrile. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% v/v. The TMT-labeled samples were combined 1:1 across all samples.   We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. We followed the manufacturer’s instructions except the acetonitrile percentage used in the elution buffers and the subsequent concatenation strategy. Twelve fractions were collected using 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 35%, and 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine. The samples were then concatenated into six by combining as follows: 7.5% and 22.5%, 10% and 25%, 12.5% and 27.5%, 15% and 30%, 17.5% and 35%, 20% and 60%. Combined fractions were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS data acquisition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iron homeostasis, Liver, Bone morphogenetic proteins, Endothelial cells, C-jun

### Affiliations
Nephrology Division and Endocrine Unit Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical School Boston, MA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Jodie L Babitt
Nephrology Division and Endocrine Unit Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical School Boston, MA


