### Accession
PXD001807

### Title
Apoplastic proteome under UVB - In this work we want to shed light on the functions of apoplastic gamma-glutamyl transferase/transpeptidase (GGT; E.C. 2.3.2.2) in the plant’s adaptation to the environment. We investigate the effects of UV-B radiation as an oxidizing stress condition affecting the apoplastic environment in wild type Arabidopsis and a previously-characterized ggt1 knockout mutant line.

### Description
In this work we want to shed light on the functions of apoplastic gamma-glutamyl transferase/transpeptidase (GGT; E.C. 2.3.2.2) in the plant’s adaptation to the environment. We investigate the effects of UV-B radiation as an oxidizing stress condition affecting the apoplastic environment in wild type Arabidopsis and a previously-characterized ggt1 knockout mutant line.

### Sample Protocol
We use fractionation (subcellular proteomics) to reduce the complexity of the total protein extract and enable the visualization of proteins occurring in low quantities. Following extraction with the extracellular washing fluid (ECWF) technique, we carried out apoplastic proteome analysis to better understand the complex network of extracellular proteins involved in plant defense. We investigated the changes occurring in the extracellular proteome as a consequence of the null mutation and/or UV-B treatment by means of iTRAQ labelling for relative peptide quantification and LC-MS-MS analysis. The MS analyses were conducted with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, CA, USA) coupled online with a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex - Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to a Mascot Search Engine server (version 2.2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK). The spectra were searched against a ARATH Uniprot protein database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with two missed cleavages, and peptide and fragment tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Methylthiocysteine, 4-plex iTRAQ at the N-terminus and Lys were set as fixed modifications, while Met oxidation was selected as a variable modification. False discovery rates  (FDR) were calculated by the software, based on the search against the corresponding randomized database. Only proteins identified and quantified with at least 2 unique peptides with 99% 247 confidence (FDR 1%) were considered as positive identifications. Data were pre-filtered to exclude MS/MS spectra containing less than 5 peaks or with a total ion count  below 50. Quantification was done by normalizing the results on the median value of all measured iTRAQ reporter ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Redox, Leaf, Apoplast, Itraq, Glutathione

### Affiliations
University of Padova

### Submitter
Antonio Masi

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Masi
University of Padova


