### Accession
PXD004970

### Title
Proteomics profiles of prostate cancer cell lines

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is a major public health issue in industrialized countries, mainly because of patients’ relapse by castration-refractory disease after androgen ablation. PCa progresses through a series of clinical states characterized by the extent of the disease, the hormonal status (castration-sensitive or castration-resistant) and the presence or absence of metastases. Progression to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPCa) involves several mechanisms such as ligand-independent androgen receptor activation and adaptive up-regulation of anti-apoptotic genes. CRPCa is highly aggressive and incurable, jeopardizing the patient’s quality of life and lifespan. Identifying the molecular events responsible for the progression to CRPCa is essential to avoid its development and design specific therapies. Despite the existing treatment guidelines for PCa and novel clinical trials for CRPCa, major challenges still remain for identifying specific CRPCa biomarkers and therapeutic targets for effective tailored therapy design for these patients. In this context, molecular profiling of human PCa may importantly contribute to the identification of new disease-specific biomarkers in order to improve PCa early diagnosis, prognosis and disease course and to predict strategies that help develop novel therapies.  System-wide approaches such as transcriptomics and proteomics are nowadays applied to monitor molecular variations at the cellular level. Proteomics approaches offer a great potential for the discovery of novel biomarkers  and the identification of new therapeutic agents by accurate quantification of proteins. Several studies have been published in the past where different proteomics approaches were used to identify PCa proteome. In the present study we analyzed the PCa proteome from several PCa cell lines representing different hormonal status of the disease to identify potential biomarkers differentially expressed in CRPCa.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and SILAC Labeling We cultivated 4 cell lines derived from prostate tissue for proteomics analyses; PNT1A, a non-tumorigenic SV40-immortalized human prostatic epithelial cell line (ECACC, European Collection of Cell Cultures, England), castration sensitive (CS) LNCaP (ATCC, American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD, USA)) as well as castration-resistant (CR) DU145 and PC3 cell lines (ATCC). All cell lines were routinely cultured at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2-95% air atmosphere. They were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (PC3) and RPMI-1640 (Roswell Park Memorial Institute) (Invitrogen, Cergy Pontoise, France), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).    SILAC labeling of cell lines was carried out by incorporating amino acids Lys8 and Arg10 containing stable isotopes C13 and N15. The heavy amino-acid incorporation and the rate of conversion of isotopic arginine into proline were checked prior to spike-in SILAC using mass spectrometry. Cells were washed on ice with PBS and collected in a lysis buffer. Lysates were incubated 10 min on ice and then centrifuged at 18.000 g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatants containing the protein extract were recovered and quantified using BCA.   Trypsin digestion, peptide fractionation and LC/MS analysis We mixed the protein extracts from the 4 heavy cell lines (PNT1A, LNCaP, DU145, and PC3) in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to produce a Super-SILAC reference proteome.  This reference proteome was mixed in equimolar amounts with protein extracts from each cell lines (PNT1A, LNCaP, DU145, and PC3) cultivated in normal conditions.  Prefractionation of proteomes 40ug of protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4–12% bis–Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to separate proteins and was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Each lane of the gel was cut into 20 bands that were placed in individual eppendorf tubes. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using few steps of 100mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at RT. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56°C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at RT. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with 12.5 ng/ul trypsin (Promega) for 1h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system.   Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column at 37°C. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solution A (0.05% trifluoroacetic  acid - 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration by 4% of solution B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-25% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 40 min and 25-50% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min. For peptides ionisation in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.5 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. Instrument method for the Orbitrap Velos was set up in data dependant mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the orbitrap in the range of m/z 300-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 70 000 (AGC target at 1e6, maximum IT 120 ms). For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 12 most intense ions per survey scan (Intensity threshold 1e5) were selected for HCD fragmentation (AGC target 5e5, NCE 25%, maximum IT 60 ms) and resulting fragments were analysed at a resolution of 17500 in the Orbitrap. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with unassigned, 1 and >8 charge states. Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity–based SILAC quantification was processed using the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.3.0.5. First the acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. This database was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants.  The following parameters were used for searches : (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 6 ppm for the main search and 20 ppm for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. The re-quantify option was enabled to search for missing SILAC partners. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 2 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level and protein level were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Proteomics, Cell lines, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc CAMOIN
Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes


