### Accession
PXD023127

### Title
A wolf in another wolf’s clothing: Post-genomic regulation dictates venom profiles of medically-important cryptic kraits in India

### Description
This study investigates the widespread cryptic Bungarus caeruleus (Comman krait) in India and clinical repercussions of their bits by implementing multidisciplinary approach involving proteomics, transcripomics, and assessment of toxicity and efficacy of currently marketed anivenoms. The study also aims at understanding the evolutionary relationships between these phenotypically simillar kraits.

### Sample Protocol
Crude snake venom samples (50 µg) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37°C, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and digested with trypsin (0.2 µg/µL) at 37° C overnight, in a total volume of 50 µL. The reaction was stopped using 0.1% formic acid, and desalting was carried out to remove the buffer salt and detergent using ZipTip with acetonitrile. The resulting tryptic peptide mixtures were separated using Thermo EASY nLC 1200 series system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled online with a Thermo Orbitrap FusionTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 0.5 µg of peptide mixture was loaded on a 50 cm x 75 µm C18 (3 µm, 100 Å) nano-LC column. The mobile phase solution consisted of 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water (solution A) and elution buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (solution B). The flow rate of solution B was set to 300 nL/min and was used in the following concentrations: 10-45% over 98 min, 45-95% over 4 min and 95% over 18 min.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were acquired in positive mode at 2.0 kV, with a capillary temperature of 200°C, using 1μ scan in the range 375-1700 m/z, maximum injection time of 50 ms and resolution of 120,000. Fragment scans (MS/MS) were performed using an ion trap detector with high collision energy fragmentation (30%), scan range between 100-2000 m/z and maximum injection time of 35 ms. For the identification of various toxin families in the proteomic profiles of venoms, raw MS/MS spectra were searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information’s (NCBI) non-redundant (nr) database (Serpentes: 8570; November 2020), as well as the venom gland transcriptomes generated in this study, using PEAKS Studio X Plus (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., ON, Canada). Parent and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 10 parts per million (ppm) and 0.6 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin in the semispecific mode were allowed. Filtration parameters for match acceptance were set to FDR 0.1%, detection of ≥1 unique peptide and -10lgP protein score ≥40. Hits with at least one unique matching peptide were considered for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The Common Krait (<i>Bungarus caeruleus</i>) shares a distribution range with many other 'phenotypically-similar' kraits across the Indian subcontinent. Despite several reports of fatal envenomings by other <i>Bungarus</i> species, commercial Indian antivenoms are only manufactured against <i>B. caeruleus</i>. It is, therefore, imperative to understand the distribution of genetically distinct lineages of kraits, the compositional differences in their venoms, and the consequent impact of venom variation on the (pre)clinical effectiveness of antivenom therapy. To address this knowledge gap, we conducted phylogenetic and comparative venomics investigations of kraits in Southern and Western India. Phylogenetic reconstructions using mitochondrial markers revealed a new species of krait, Romulus' krait (<i>Bungarus romulusi</i> sp. nov.), in Southern India. Additionally, we found that kraits with 17 mid-body dorsal scale rows in Western India do not represent a subspecies of the Sind Krait (<i>B. sindanus walli</i>) as previously believed, but are genetically very similar to <i>B. sindanus</i> in Pakistan. Furthermore, venom proteomics and comparative transcriptomics revealed completely contrasting venom profiles. While the venom gland transcriptomes of all three species were highly similar, venom proteomes and toxicity profiles differed significantly, suggesting the prominent role of post-genomic regulatory mechanisms in shaping the venoms of these cryptic kraits. In vitro venom recognition and in vivo neutralisation experiments revealed a strong negative impact of venom variability on the preclinical performance of commercial antivenoms. While the venom of <i>B. caeruleus</i> was neutralised as per the manufacturer's claim, performance against the venoms of <i>B. sindanus</i> and <i>B. romulusi</i> was poor, highlighting the need for regionally-effective antivenoms in India.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Transcripomics, Bungarus venom, Snake venoms

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Kartik Sunagar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kartik Sunagar
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


