### Accession
PXD046260

### Title
Predicting the efficacy of glucocorticoids in pediatric primary immune thrombocytopenia using plasma proteomics

### Description
A four-dimensional data-independent acquisition(4D-DIA) approach was used to analyse protein expression in glucocorticoid-sensitive (GCS) and glucocorticoid-resistant (GCR) children with ITP. 47 differentially expressed proteins (36 up-regulated and 11 down-regulated) were identified in the GCR group compared with the GCS group.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Frozen peripheral plasma specimens were lysed at room temperature, followed by the removal of high-abundance proteins using the ProteoMinerTM Protein Enrichment Small Volume Kit (Bio-Rad). The resulting eluate was collected to determine the total protein concentration through BCA protein quantification analysis. An aliquot of protein solution was taken based on its concentration, and the volume was adjusted to 200 µL with 8 M urea. Subsequently, it was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min at 37°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min under dark conditions at room temperature. For precipitation, pre-cooled acetone, added in four-fold volume to the protein solution, was employed. This precipitation process was performed at -20°C for 2 h. Following centrifugation, the protein precipitates were collected and resuspended in a 200 µL solution comprising 25 mM amine bicarbonate solution and 3 µL of trypsin. The mixture was allowed to undergo digestion at 37°C overnight. After digestion, peptides from each sample were subjected to desalination using a C18 column, concentrated via vacuum centrifugation, and subsequently redissolved in a 0.1% (v/v) formic acid solution.  Liquid chromatography-MS/MS detection The samples were separated using a nanolitre flow rate NanoElute ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system. Mobile phase A comprised a 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, while mobile phase B comprised a 0.1% formic acid ethene solution (acetonitrile 100%). An autosampler loaded the samples onto an analytical column (25 cm × 75 µm, C18 packing 1.6 µm) for separation. The analytical column was maintained at 50°C, and the sample volume was set at 200 ng, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 60-min gradient. The liquid-phase gradient program was as follows: 0 min–45 min, linear increase of liquid B from 2% to 22%; 45 min–50 min, linear gradient from 22% to 35% for liquid B; 50 min–55 min, linear gradient from 35% to 80% for liquid B; 55 min–60 min, liquid B was maintained at 80%. After chromatographic separation, the mixed samples were subjected to MS data collection in data-dependent acquisition (dda) PASEF mode using the timsTOF Pro2 mass spectrometer. The analysis featured a 60-min effective gradient, positive ion detection mode, a parent ion scanning range of 100–1700 m/z, ion mobility range (1/K0) of 0.7–1.4 Vs/cm2, ion accumulation and release time of 100 ms, and nearly 100% ion utilisation. Parameters included a capillary voltage of 1500 V, a drying gas rate of 3 L/min, and a drying temperature of 180 ℃. In the ddaPASEF acquisition mode, parameters included 10 MS/MS scans with a total cycle time of 1.17 s, charge range of 0–5, dynamic exclusion time of 0.4 min, ion target intensity set at 10,000, ion intensity threshold at 2500, collision-induced dissociation fragmentation energy of 42 eV, and an isolation window setting of 2 for <700 Th and 3 for >700 Th. For the diaPASEF acquisition mode, parameters encompassed a mass range of approximately 400–1200, mobility range of 0.7–1.4 Vs/cm2, mass width of 25Da, a mass overlap of 0.1, 32 mass steps per cycle, and two mobility windows, resulting in a total of 64 acquisition windows. The average acquisition period was 1.8 s.

### Data Protocol
The library search software employed in the study was DIA-NN (v1.8.1). For library searching, the Libraryfree method was used with specific parameters. The database used was swissprot_Homo_sapiens_9606_20376.fasta database (20376 entries). A deep learning-based parameter was activated to predict a spectral library. The match-between-runs option was selected to create a spectral library using DIA data and reanalyse the DIA data to obtain protein quantification. Precursor ions and protein-level false discovery rates were filtered at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucocorticoids, Plasma biomarker, Immune thrombocytopenia, Children, 4d-dia

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics, the Affiliated Huai’an No.1 People’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Huai’an , China
The Affiliated Huaian No. 1 People’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
qingqing Cao

### Lab Head
Dr yufang yuan
Department of Pediatrics, the Affiliated Huai’an No.1 People’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Huai’an , China


