### Accession
PXD016333

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of Leishmania parasite isolates obtained from visceral and cutaneous leishmaniases patients

### Description
As a vector-borne disease, leishmaniasis is caused by a parasitic protozoans of leishmania genus and transmitted by female Phlebotomine sandflies. Depending on the body location where immotile form of the parasite namely amastigote is proliferated, three main clinical forms as cutaneous, muco-cutaneous and visceral leishmaniases are defined. While manifestation of cutaneous leishmaniasis is skin lesions on the exposed part of the body, enlarged lymph nodes, spleen or liver along with fever, fatigue and weight loss are the symptoms of visceral leishmaniasis. The most dangerous form is visceral leishmaniasis since it may end up with fatalities if patients are not treated. The purpose of this study was to investigate the difference between the protein expression profiles of leishmania isolates obtained from visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis patients. To compare two sample groups to each other genetically, L.infantum was chosen since it causes both visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis. Additionally, another sample group as cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by L.tropica was included to make the comparison both intra- and interspecies level. For protein profiling, both gel-based and gel-free proteomic approaches were carried out. In brief, a total of 15 samples, 5 from each group, were separated on pI 3-10 2D-PAGE gel. Additionally, 9 of those 15 samples, 3 from each group, were analyzed according to qualitative shotgun proteomics method and differential proteins were determined by drawing venn diagram.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen promastigote cells whose cryopreservation was maintained by liquid nitrogen were first cultivated in enriched NNN (Novy-MCNeal-Nicolle) medium at 25 C and transferred to RPMI-1640 medium including 10% FCS, 200 U of penicillin/ml, and 0.2 mg of streptomycin/m. Cell lysis was performed by adding 1 ml of Mammalian Cell Lysis Reagent (Fermentas Life Sciences). All protein samples were adjusted to an amount of 400 µg in 330µL rehydration buffer and non-linear pH 3-10, 17 cm IPG strip (ReadyStrip™, Bio-Rad) was soaked with this protein solution for the isoelectric focusing step (Protean IEF cell, Bio-Rad). Apart from that, one pI 5-8 and two pI 4-7 strips were tested on some remaining samples. After the completion of electrophoresis program, strips to be subjected to second dimension with gel electrophoresis were placed onto 12% PAGE gel and proteins were separated according to their molecular weight under the electrical field which was run 16 mA for one hour and 8-9 hours at 180 Volt. After the silver staining, proteins of interest were determined by visual inspection, cleaved to peptides with in-gel digestion method and analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF (Bruker, autoflex). Total protein were dissolved in rehydration buffer of 2D-PAGE before therefore centrifugal weight cut-off filter was used to remove contaminants for tryptic digestion thus digestion according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) were applied. 400µg total protein was pipetted into 10kDa MWCO filter tube and trypsin enzyme (1:100) was added after the alkylation and reduction steps. Peptide complexity was reduced by off-line HPLC. According to high pH RPLC with fraction concatenation method, 16 fractions were obtained by combining 6 wells of 96 well plate. After evaporation, peptides were desalted with ZipTip and loaded to 15 cm x 500 µm capillary RP column (Sigma Supelco Ascentis). LC-MS/MS analysis were carried out using LTQ XL ion trap mass spectrometry (Thermo) during the 35 minutes peptide elution at low pH LC run. Tandem mass spectra were collected from m/z 400 to 1800 with data‐dependent ion‐trap MS/MS spectra of nine most abundant ions, using 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Proteins obtained from gel spots were acquired and processed by flexControl 3.0 and flexAnalysis 3.0 programs respectively  (Bruker) then they were transferred to another Bruker’s licensed program biotools to be searched with Mascot against NCBI leishmania genus database (or NCBIprot). Search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, allowance for up to one tryptic cleavage. Peptide mass tolerance was either 200 ppm or 1 Da and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0,5 Da. Charge state was 1+ and monoisotopic mass was chosen. Mass range of the analyses was set to 700-3500 Da. All of the raw data of shotgun proteomics were converted to mgf format by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and merged to a single file. The database was created by combining Leishmania infantum proteome (UniProt) with trypsin sequence and contaminant list obtained from cRAP protein sequences (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Merged mgf files of 9 samples were search against that L.infantum+contaminants database using in-house copy of Mascot (version 2.3.02) server. Mascot Percolator were used to re-calculate the scores to decrease the decoy matches and improve true identifications. Apart from that, multiple-search was conducted by SearchGUI (v 3.2.20) including search engines Comet, MS Amanda, MSGF+ and xTandem then results were visualized and exported by PeptideShaker (1.16.15). Since mzIdentML version 1.0 files are not supported, mzIdentml version 1.1 files of Mascot search results were generated via PeptideShaker using Mascot dat files. Information about Search GUI, PeptideShaker and more on proteomics are available in CompOmics web site (https://www.compomics.be/). Search parameters were entered for all searches as the following: fixed modifications was carbomidomethyl, variable modification was oxidation, peptide charge was both 2+ and 3+, instrument was ESI-TRAP and experimental mass values were monoisotopic. Peptide and fragment mass tolerances were 1.2 Da and 0.6 Da respectively for Mascot search likewise 1.0Da and 0.5 Da for Search GUI.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmaniasis is an infectious disease in which different clinical manifestations are classified into three primary forms: visceral, cutaneous and mucocutaneous. These disease forms are associated with parasite species of the protozoan genus Leishmania. For instance, Leishmania infantum and Leishmania tropica are typically linked with visceral (VL) and cutaneous (CL) leishmaniasis, respectively; however, these two species can also cause other form to a lesser extent. What is more alarming is this characteristic, which threatens current medical diagnosis and treatment, is started to be acquired by other species. Our purpose was to address this issue; therefore, gel-based and gel-free proteomic analyses were carried out on the species L. infantum to determine the proteins differentiating between the parasites caused VL and CL. In addition, L. tropica parasites representing the typical cases for CL were included. According to our results, electrophoresis gels of parasites caused to VL were distinguishable regarding the repetitive down-regulation on some specific locations. In addition, a distinct spot of an antioxidant enzyme, superoxide dismutase, was shown up only on the gels of CL samples regardless of the species. In the gel-free approach, 37 proteins that were verified with a second database search using a different search engine, were recognized from the comparison between VL and CL samples. Among them, 31 proteins for the CL group and six proteins for the VL group were determined differentially abundant. Two proteins from the gel-based analysis, pyruvate kinase and succinyl-coA:3-ketoacid-coenzyme A transferase analysis were encountered in the protein list of the CL group.

### Keywords
Leishmania infantum, Neglected tropical disease, Leishmania, Sandfly, Parasite, Leishmania tropica, Leishmaniasis, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, B-205 İzmir Institute of Technology (IzTech)
Izmir Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Melike Dinc

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Talat YALCIN
Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, B-205 İzmir Institute of Technology (IzTech)


