### Accession
PXD028432

### Title
Salvi_PNAS_Phosphoproteome_ATRwt-cko

### Description
Phosphoproteomic data obtained from mouse muscle stem cells from wildtype and muscle stem cell specific conditional ATR knockout mice

### Sample Protocol
Samples were obtained by pooling FACS-isolated MuSCs from greater than 25 mice per condition. MuSCs were isolated, spun at 1800g, washed once with HBSS (Thermo Fischer Scientific, 14025-076), PhosStop (Roche, 04906837001), and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, 4693132001), and pellets were stored at -80oC until use. Cells were lysed in 2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl and DTT along with phosphatase and protease inhibitors. For a typical mass spectrometry analysis, 200 µl of each sample was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 55°C for 30 min. Following reduction, proteins were alkylated using 30 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. Digestion was performed with 1 µg Trypsin/LysC (Promega) in a standard overnight digest at 37°C. After digestion, the reaction was quenched using 1% formic acid and peptides were de-salted on C18 Monospin reversed phase columns (GL Sciences). The de-salted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo-Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA) before reconstitution in 20 µl of loading buffer for phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment was performed with MagReSyn Ti-IMAC (ReSyn Biosciences) following the vendor protocol. Both enriched and unenriched fractions were collected and injected on the instrument. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with liquid chromatography using a Nanoacquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). For a typical LCMS experiment, a flow rate of 450 nL/min was used, where mobile phase A was 0.2% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. Analytical columns were prepared in-house with an I.D. of 100 microns packed with Magic 1.8 micron 120Å UChrom C18 stationary phase (nanoLCMS Solutions) to a length of ~25 cm. Peptides were directly injected onto the analytical column using a gradient (2-45% B, followed by a high-B wash) of 80 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent fashion for two different types of fragmentation: 1) using CID fragmentation for MS/MS spectra generation collected in the ion trap with a collisional energy setting of 35 and 2) using a combination of ETD in ion trap and HCD in Orbitrap fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the .RAW data files were processed using Byonic v2.14.27 (Protein Metrics) to identify peptides and infer proteins using mus musculus database from Uniprot including isoforms. Proteolysis with Trypsin/LysC was assumed to be semi-specific allowing for N-ragged cleavage with up to two missed cleavage sites. Precursor and fragment mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm. Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%, using standard approaches as described previously.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Muscle stem cell, Phosphoproteome, Atr

### Affiliations
Stanford University

### Submitter
Jayesh Salvi

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Rando
Stanford University


