### Accession
PXD037093

### Title
Isolation and Characterization of ZK002, A Novel Dual Function Snake Venom Peptide from Deinagkistrodon acutus with Anti-angiogenic and Anti-inflammatory Properties

### Description
Pathological angiogenesis, the abnormal or excessive generation of blood vessels, plays an important role in many diseases including cancer, diabetic retinopathy, psoriasis, and arthritis. Additionally, increasing evidence supports the close linkage between angiogenesis and inflammation. Snake venoms are a rich natural source of biologically active molecules and carry rich potential for the discovery anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory modulators. Here, we isolated and purified a novel protein, ZK002, from the venom of the snake Deinagkistrodon acutus, and investigated its anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory activities and mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Sample Preparation The sample was added with its 4-fold volume -20oC pre-cooled acetone and incubated at -20oC for overnight to precipitate the protein. The sample was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 15 mins and the supernatant was discarded. The protein pellet is resuspended with 8M urea, and the protein amount was quantified by a DC protein assay. 100µg protein sample was taken and top up the volume to 100 µL with 8M urea. Then the peptide reduction was with 25µL 200mM DTT solution and incubated at room temperature for 45 mins. After that, the peptide alkylation was with 4µL 1M IAA solution and incubated at room temperature for 20 mins in dark. Next, 671µL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added to dilute the urea concentration in the sample to 1 M. For trypsin digestion, 2µL of trypsin gold solution was added to the sample and incubated at 37oC overnight. 200µL MilliQ water and 7µL 100% TFA were added to the sample. Cleanup the digested peptide sample with QASIS HLB 1CC Extraction cartridges by washing with 0.5% TFA twice and eluting with 70% ACN twice. The eluate was dried with SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator. Final, the sample was resuspended in 100µL 0.1% FA and transferred to an LC vial with an insert for Nano-LCMS analysis.     Proteomics Mass Spectrometry The proteomics analysis was carried out on UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific) and Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 Columns 250 mm (Thermo Scientific, Cat# 164569) with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer(Thermo Scientific). The mobile included: 0.1 % formic acid in water as solvent A and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile as solvent B. The NanoLC program was as follows: 0-10 mins B 2%; 10-12 mins B 2-6%; 12-47 mins B 6-20%; 47-52mins B 20-30%; 52-56mins B 30-90%; 56-61mins B 90%; 61-61.1mins B 90%-2%; 61.1-66mins B 2%.  The flow rate was 0.3 µL/mins, and the column temperature was 50oC. The detail of the MS condition was as follows: Mode of detection: positive mode; The scan range: 400-1500 m/z; Ionization Source: NSI; Spray Voltage: Static; Positive ion source voltage: 2300V; Ion transfer tube temperature: 300oC. The data acquisition was in parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis  The ZK protein sequence was saved as a “.fasta” file and uploaded to Mascot Server(Matrix Science). The proteomics MS data was processed by Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Waters) with default setting. The peptide ion was identified by Mascot MS/MS ion search by following criteria. Peptide charge: 2+, 3+, 4+ ; Peptide tolerance: 10 Da(13C=2); MS/MS tolerance: 0.1 Da; Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl(C); Variable modification: Oxidation(M); Enzyme: No specific; Max missed cleavages: 2; Instrument type: ESI-FTICR;

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Pathological angiogenesis, the abnormal or excessive generation of blood vessels, plays an important role in many diseases including cancer, diabetic retinopathy, psoriasis, and arthritis. Additionally, increasing evidence supports the close linkage between angiogenesis and inflammation. Snake venoms are a rich natural source of biologically active molecules and carry rich potential for the discovery of anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory modulators. <b>Methods:</b> Here, we isolated and purified a novel protein, ZK002, from the venom of the snake <i>Deinagkistrodon acutus</i>, and investigated its anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory activities and mechanisms. <b>Results:</b> ZK002 was identified as a 30&#xa0;kDa heterodimeric protein of &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; chains, which exhibited anti-angiogenic activity in various <i>in vitro</i> assays. Mechanistically, ZK002 inhibited activation of VEGF signaling and related mediators including eNOS, p38, LIMK, and HSP27. ZK002 also upregulated the metalloproteinase inhibitor TIMP3 and inhibited components of the VEGF-induced signaling cascade, PPP3R2 and SH2D2A. The anti-angiogenic activity of ZK002 was confirmed in multiple <i>in vivo</i> models. ZK002 could also inhibit the <i>in vitro</i> expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, as well as <i>in vivo</i> inflammation in the carrageenin-induced edema rat model. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our findings highlight the potential for further development of ZK002 as a dual function therapeutic against diseases with involvement of pathogenic angiogenesis and chronic inflammation.

### Keywords
Zk002; snake venom; anti-angiogenesis; anti-inflammation

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong S.A.R., China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

### Submitter
William Chi-Shing Tai

### Lab Head
Dr William Chi-Shing Tai
Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong S.A.R., China


