### Accession
PXD003289

### Title
Dysregulation of Cell-Cell Interaction in Brain Arteriovenous Malformations: A Quantitative Proteomics Study

### Description
Object. Detailed and exact mechanisms underlying brain arteriovenous malformations (bAVM) are still confusing in clinic. Understanding the quantitative changes of proteins and signaling pathways would provide useful information for clinicians to understand the formation and development of bAVM and therefore give proper individual treatment strategies. This study was performed to establish a huge human bAVM proteome database by tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling technique and detect the alteration of proteins and pathways in the development of human bAVM.  Methods. This study used quantitative proteomics to profile protein changes with the 6-plex TMT labeling in bAVM lesions. Integrated bioinformatics analysis were used to classify and identify the altered proteins and relating signaling pathways. Western blot analyses were used to identify the reliability of the proteomic data.  Results. Our work established one of the largest human bAVM proteome databases to date. A total of 1264 proteins were identified, among which the expression of 316 proteins were changed with 249 proteins upregulated. Bioinformatics analysis revealed a close relevance between cell-cell interactions including focal adhesion, tight junction, gap junction and the development of bAVM. Conclusions. Cell-cell interactions, including focal adhesion, tight junction and gap junction played vital roles in the formation and development of bAVM. Understanding the molecular mechanism underlying bAVM is important for the development of future therapeutic approaches, thereafter making precise and individual treatment strategies in clinic.

### Sample Protocol
The human bAVM specimens, normal intracranial vessels (in temporal and frontal lobe), and normal brain tissues were included in the present analysis. The specimens of all groups were weighed, immediately frozen over liquid nitrogen, and ground to powder. Then prepared lysis buffer (8 M urea in PBS (pH 8.0), 1 × cocktail, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) was added for lysing, and the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The protein concentrations of supernatants were measured by NanoDrop 2000 at an absorbance of 280 nm. Then the supernatants were mixed respectively in an equal amount. The mixed proteins with 100 μg proteins were digested by coincubation with Trypsin/Lys-C (4 μg) mixture overnight at 37 °C.  After termination, the protein digests from the three groups were labeled with 0.8 mg of TMT-126 (bAVM specimens), TMT-127 (normal intracranial vessels), or TMT-129 (normal brain tissues), respectively. Equal amount of the labeled protein digests were combined for further mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.The combined protein digests were fractionated using HPLC. 48 fractions were collected every 1.5-min interval. The tractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA for further liquid-chromatograph (LC)-MS/MS analysis. A Q Exactive mass spectrometer was used for the LC-MS/MS analysis. The protein digests were separated with a 120-min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min in an UltiMate 3000 RSLCano System (Thermo Scientific), and analyzed with a directly interfaced Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discover software suite 1.4 with the SEQUEST search engine and the human FASTA database from UniProt (review downloaded on Oct. 3, 2015). In the SEQUEST search engine, full trypsin specificity was selected, two missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT 6-plex (K and peptide N terminals) were set as the static modification, precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20mmu for all MS/MS spectra acquired. The thresholds for downregulation and upregulation were set at 0.67 and 1.50 respectively. The enrichment analysis was conducted using the WebGestalt online toolkit with significance level set as p < 0.0001 The altered proteins were classified using PANTHER and DAVID Classification System online, analyzed with STRING, Cytoscape 3.1.1 software and KEGG enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Cell-cell interaction, Proteomics, Brain arteriovenous malformations, Quantitative

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


