### Accession
PXD000332

### Title
N-linked glycosylation enrichment for in-depth cell surface proteomics and the classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma subtypes

### Description
The classification of histologically similar yet molecularly distinct tumors into specific subtypes remains a clinically challenging task.  Classification of such tumors into distinct entities based on their cell surface protein expression profiles has been hindered by the lack of an unbiased global approach.  Here we use N-glyco FASP, a recently developed mass spectrometric approach based on lectin-enrichment of N-linked glycoproteins, in conjunction with a super-SILAC based  quantitative strategy, on patient derived diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines. We mapped 2383 glycosites on more than 1300 proteins, which were highly enriched for cell membrane proteins.  The resulting sub-proteome was highly enriched for cell membrane proteins. This N-glyco sub-proteome alone allowed the segregation of the ABC from the GCB subtypes of diffuse large  B-cell lymphoma, which before gene expression studies had been considered one disease entity. Encouragingly, many of the glycopeptides driving the segregation belong to proteins previously characterized as segregators in a deep proteome study of these subtypes (S. J. Deeb et al MCP 2012 PMID 22442255). This conforms to the high correlation that we observed between the expression level of the glycosites and their corresponding proteins. Detailed examination of glycosites and glycoprotein expression levels uncovered, amongst other interesting findings, enrichment of transcription  factor binding motifs, including known NF-kappa-B related ones. Thus, enrichment of a class of post-translationally modified peptides can classify cancer types as well as reveal cancer specific mechanistic  changes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines from which we generated the super-SILAC mix were labeled with heavy amino acids by growing them in RPMI medium containing 13C615N2 – Lysine (Lys8) and 13C6 15N4 – Arginine (Arg10) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) instead of the natural amino acids and supplemented with 20% dialyzed fetal bovine serum. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to assess the level of incorporation of the heavy amino acids after at least 6 passages. Almost complete incorporation was achieved in the 6 cell lines from which we generated the super-SILAC mix (Ramos, Mutu, BL-41, U2932, L428, DB), as less than 1% of tryptic peptides contained unlabeled arginine or lysine and less than 0.3% of identified peptides showed evidence of Arg to Pro conversion (3). The super-SILAC mix was generated by mixing equal amounts of the heavy lysates from the 6 cell lines.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.2.6.20) was used to analyze mass spectrometric raw data. We searched the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot database (81,213 entries, release 2012_07) by the Andromeda search engine incorporated in the MaxQuant framework (20, 21). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and deamidation in H218O were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was required for proteins and peptides. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. A minimum of seven amino acids per identified peptide were required and two miscleavages were allowed. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 6 ppm and for the fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm. Mass accuracy of the precursor ions was improved by time-dependent recalibration algorithms of MaxQuant. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to match identifications across different replicates. Quantification of SILAC pairs was performed by MaxQuant with standard settings with a minimum ratio count of 2. We analyzed the MaxQuant output data with the Perseus tools, which are also available in the MaxQuant environment.

### Publication Abstract
Global analysis of lymphoma genome integrity and transcriptomes tremendously advanced our understanding of their biology. Technological advances in mass spectrometry-based proteomics promise to complete the picture by allowing the global quantification of proteins and their post-translational modifications. Here we use N-glyco FASP, a recently developed mass spectrometric approach using lectin-enrichment, in conjunction with a super-SILAC approach to quantify N-linked glycoproteins in lymphoma cells. From patient-derived diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines, we mapped 2383 glycosites on 1321 protein groups, which were highly enriched for cell membrane proteins. This N-glyco subproteome alone allowed the segregation of the ABC from the GCB subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which before gene expression studies had been considered one disease entity. Encouragingly, many of the glycopeptides driving the segregation belong to proteins previously characterized as segregators in a deep proteome study of these subtypes (S. J. Deeb et al. MCP 2012 PMID 22442255). This conforms to the high correlation that we observed between the expression level of the glycosites and their corresponding proteins. Detailed examination of glycosites and glycoprotein expression levels uncovered, among other interesting findings, enrichment of transcription factor binding motifs, including known NF-kappa-B related ones. Thus, enrichment of a class of post-translationally modified peptides can classify cancer types as well as reveal cancer specific mechanistic changes.

### Keywords
Glycoproteome, Diffuse large b-cell lymphoma, N-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


