### Accession
PXD037035

### Title
Towards mycotoxin degradation in wheat

### Description
Across Canada, infections associated with Fusarium have a devastating impact on the agricultural sector. For example, Fusarium head blight (FHB) costs the Canadian grain industry over $1.5 billion annually in diminished export and domestic sales. For Ontario’s most productive and lucrative crops infection by Fusarium spp., leads to losses of over $200 million annually through yield reduction in corn (i.e., stalk and ear rot), cereals (i.e., FHB), and soybeans (i.e., root rot and sudden death syndrome). Additionally, mycotoxin production by Fusarium spp. (e.g., deoxynivalenol [DON]) has severe consequences for the livestock and poultry industries through consumption of contaminated feed, as well as concerns for human health upon consumption of contaminated processed grains. Current management strategies against FHB rely on fungicide application at heading, which reduces infection but does not limit the accumulation of dangerous mycotoxins within the grains. Moreover, such fungicide applications substantially increase the economic cost to growers, raise public concerns over chemical exposure, and contribute to the development of antimicrobial resistance. The critical role of Fusarium fungal pathogens and their toxins in the health of crops, livestock, and humans underscores the need for innovative strategies to better understand mechanisms of disease and identify novel management strategies to limit the incidence of infection and to critically, reduce the accumulation of mycotoxins within infected grains

### Sample Protocol
One inoculated spike from each sample was removed from its head and homogenized using steel beads in a tissue homogenizer in the presence of 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) with protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC). The samples were transferred from the steel beads into new low-protein binding polypropylene tubes. Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) was added to the solution to a final concentration of 2% and the samples were water bath sonicated for 1 minute. The samples were reduced using 10mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 95°C for 10 min at 800 rpm, then incubated with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were centrifuged at 16,200 rpm and the supernatant was transferred to a new microfuge tube. Acetone was added to a final concentration of 80% and samples were stored at -20°C overnight.  Samples were centrifuged at 13,500 rpm and 4°C for 10 minutes and the supernatant was removed. The pellet was washed with 80% acetone twice and then allowed to dry. The dried pellet was reconstituted in 8M urea/40mM HEPES. The protein concentrations were measured using bovine serum albumin (BSA) assays. 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample in a ratio of 3:1 and the samples were normalized to 100 mg of protein, which was digested overnight with a mixture of LysC and trypsin proteases. Digestion was stopped the following day with the addition of 20% acetonitrile/ 6% trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were desalted and purified using three layers of C18 filters in Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips . The purified samples were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until use for further processing. The Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labels were slowly brought to room temperature, after which anhydrous acetonitrile was added to a concentration of 25 μg/μL of each label. The dried peptides were resuspended in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and the protein concentration of each sample was measured. The samples were normalized to set a baseline for the lowest protein concentration among them all. Equal protein masses were combined to form an internal standard to run between the labeled tests. The samples were labeled with a ratio of mass label: mass peptide. The labeled peptides were combined into their appropriate groupings with one sample from each label mass per collective sample. The collective samples were dried and stored at -20°C until mass-spectrometry analysis. The samples were resuspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and 0.5% acetic acid . and analyzed on a Orbitrap Exploris 240 hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an in-line 75-μm by 50-cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2-μm C18 reverse-phase silica beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separated peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer with a linear gradient of 3% to 20% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) over a 3-h gradient, followed by a wash with 100% buffer B with a 250 nL/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer switched between one full scan and MS/MS scans of abundant peaks. Full scans (m/z 400 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry raw data files was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). The search was completed using the incorporated Andromeda search engine against the reference Triticum aestivium proteome (103673 sequences; 13 May 2021) from Uniprot . The following parameters were included: trypsin enzyme specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, fixed modifications, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications, including, methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins and split by taxonomic ID. Peptide spectral matches were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false-discovery (FDR) of 1% with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs were enabled; the MaxLFQ algorithm used a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deoxynivalenol, Wheat, Fusarium head blight

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E. Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E. Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


