### Accession
PXD034113

### Title
4-HNE modification of human recombinant Dicer

### Description
We used mass spectrometry analysis (nanoLC-MS/MS) to map 4-HNE-modified residues of human Dicer exposed in vitro to 4-HNE in a concentration-dependent maner

### Sample Protocol
The identification of 4-HNE posttranslational modification of Dicer was performed by incubating recombinant human Dicer with 4-HNE 100μM and 300μM for 60min and untreted enzyme was used as control. Samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE and bands were treted with DTT (10mM)and iodoacetamide (55mM) previous to in-gel trypsin digestion using an enzyme:substrate ratio o 1:20 w/w as previously described (Lima A et al (2021) Journal of Proteomics. 244, 104276 DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2021.104276). The resulting peptides were analyzed on a nano-HPLC UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled on line to an hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus,Thermo). Peptides were separated on a reverse phase nano-column (PepMap TM RSLC C18, 2 um particle, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. For peptide elution an isocratic step of 1%B for 15 min was followed by a gradient from 1% to 55% B over 75 min (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Three replicates (1 ug of total protein each) were run for each condition. Mass analysis was carried out in a data dependent mode. Acquisition of MS scans in a range of m/z from 200 to 2000 (resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z) was followed by MS/MS analysis of the 12 most intense ions in each segment(resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z). A dynamic exclusion time was set at 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Modified peptide identificaion was performed using PatternLab for Proteomics software(Carvalho PC et al Nat Protoc. 2016 (1):102-17. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2015.133.; Santos MDM et al .Nat Protoc. 2022 Apr 11. doi:10.1038/s41596-022-00690-x). A target decoyed database was generated from Spodoptera frugiperda proteome downloaded from Uniprot (May 2, 2019) including most common proteomics contaminants and hDicer sequence. Search parameters were set as follows: proteolytic enzyme: trypsin with full specificity and 3 missed cleavages allowed; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine,carbamidomethylation of cysteines and 4-HNE modifications: +156.1150 on cysteine, histidine, and lysine (Michael addition) and +138.1044 Da on lysines (Schiff base); tolerance from the measured precursor: 40 ppm. Peptide spectrum matches were further filtered to reach a FDR <1% at the protein level and less than 10 ppm for the mass tolerance of precursor.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
4-hne, Lc-ms/ms, Human dicer

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, IIBCE and Institut Pasteur de Montevideo

### Submitter
Alejandro Leyva

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, IIBCE and Institut Pasteur de Montevideo


