### Accession
PXD024103

### Title
Global ubiquitinome profiling identify Nedd4 as aregulator of Profilin 1 and actin remodeling in  neural crest cells

### Description
We utilized quantitative analyses of the proteome, transcriptome, and ubiquitinome to study how ubiquitination and NEDD4 control neural crest cell survival and stem-cell-like properties.  We report 276 novel NEDD4 targets in neural crest cells and show that loss of NEDD4 leads to a striking global reduction in specific ubiquitin lysine linkages.

### Sample Protocol
Immortalized neural crest cell line NCU10K, were grown in DMEM minus arginine and lysine (Thermo Scientific). For heavy isotope labeled media, DMEM was supplemented with L-Lysine-13C6 15N2-HCl (K8, 100ug/mL final) and L-Arginine-13C6 15N4 (R10, 12.5ug/mL final). For light isotope labelled media L-Lysine-2HCl and L-Arginine-HCl were used at the above concentrations. All media contained 10% dialysed fetal calf serum. Incorporation of heavy amino acids surpassed 98% after 6 cell doublings and arginine to proline conversion was less than 2%. siRNA transfections were performed using RNAimax (Life Technology) and Nedd4 Stealth siRNA or low GC control siRNA for 48hrs before harvesting. For each siRNA condition the cells were washed with PBS prior to addition in 10mL lysis buffer containing 20mM HEPES at pH 8.0, 8M urea, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM β-glycerophosphate. The same 10mL of lysis buffer were used to lysed 10 plates of each condition (approximately 1x107 cells in total).  Samples were sonicated and the lysate was then cleared by centrifugation at 20,000xg for 15min at 15°C and transferred to a fresh tube. Protein concentration was estimated using the EZQ fluorescence-based protein assay (Life Technologies) and 5mg of each lysate (ie 5mg K8R10 Nedd4 siRNA and 5mg K0R0 control siRNA) was combined in a fresh 50mL tube (final volume ~8mL).  Proteins were reduced with 4.5mM DTT for 1hr at room temp and alkylated with 10mM for 15min at room temp.  The sample was then diluted to 2M urea with 20mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested overnight at room temperature with trypsin-TPCK (1:31 w/w) (Worthington). Following digestion, samples were acidified with formic acid (Sigma) and desalted using a 360mg C18 Sep-Pak Classic cartridge (Waters). Desalted samples were dried in vacuum concentrator. The dried peptides were resuspended in 1.8 ml of 2% MeCN, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and the peptides were subject to off-line basic RP fractionation as previously described (PMID: 24051958) with minor differences. Eighty basic RP fractions were collected, and the fractions were pooled using non-contiguous pooling strategy into eight total fractions. The fractions were dried to completeness as described above. These dried peptides mixtures were resuspended in 1.5mL of 50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl and left at 4°C for ~2hr with occasional mild vortexing. Fifty μL of each fraction were kept as “total” protein for MS analysis and the rest were subject to ubiquitin remnant affinity purification using PTMScan® ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology). Ubiquitin Antibody cross-linking was carried out as described (PMID: 22505724) and the procedure was based on the kits instructions and recommendations as described before (PMID: 24051958).   All final peptides were desalted using 2 layers C18 StageTip prior to MS analysis. The resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online with a RSLC nano uHPLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded on a 100μm, 2cm nanoviper pepmap100 trap column in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 15μl/minute. Peptides were eluted and separated at a flow rate of 300μl/minute on a Thermo RSLC nanocolumn 75μm x 50cm , pepmap100 C18, 3μm 100Å pore size, using 60 minutes  linear gradient 2% to 24% acetonitrile  for pre-enrichment samples and 30 minutes gradient for enriched peptides. The eluent was nebulised and ionised using the Thermo nano electrospray source with a distal coated fused silica emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) with a capillary voltage of 1.7-2.1 kV. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70 000 resolution (m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 3 × 106 target value with maximum injection time of 120ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 60 ms 17 500 resolution and AGC target of 1 × 105 counts. 2.5 Da isolation width was chosen. Underfill ratio was at 10% and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy 27% and subjected to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 and searched against the mouse UniprotKB database (version 2013_09 containing 75,952 entries) combined with known laboratory contaminants provided by MaxQuant. For the search parameters, enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with the maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. Variable modifications included were oxidized methionine, Gly-Gly modified lysines, and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was fixed. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%; the minimum peptide length was set to 7 and the filter-labeled amino acid, peptide requantification and match between runs functions were enabled.  All other search parameters used the default settings. All eight fractions from biological replicate experiments were searched together using the experiment template to define them as separate experiments with eight fractions each. Pre-enrichment fractions (total) were searched separately to ubiquitin remnant enriched fractions.  The match between runs function was enabled in both cases.  Ubiquitination site identification and quantification information were obtained from the MaxQuant Gly-Gly sites and evidence tables. Protein group identification and quantification was obtained from the proteinGroups table.  Contaminants and reversed database hits were removed prior to data processing.  Significant changes in pre-enrichment protein abundance were determined using Perseus and based on significance B with a Benjamini-Hochberg corrected FDR <5%.  For evaluating diglycine peptide assignments, any peptide with a ubiquitin remnant remnant on a C-terminal lysine that had a better than 50% localization probability was excluded.  Identification and quantification of protein groups from the “total” samples was obtained from the proteinGroups table.  The normalised H/L values for both “total” and ubiquitin remnant enriched datasets are reported (log transformed to base 2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Nedd4, Ubiquitin remnant enrichment, Neural crest

### Affiliations
Centre for Cancer Biology, University of South Australia and SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia
Technion

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Quenten Schwarz
Centre for Cancer Biology, University of South Australia and SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia


