### Accession
PXD018870

### Title
Proteomic identification of RIPK2 interactome

### Description
Identification of proteins associated with RIPK2 via immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS)

### Sample Protocol
For the interactome analysis, cells were cultured in 150-mm dishes until reaching the confluency of ~50% and transfected with 15 µg of indicated plasmids for 48 h. Cells were harvested, washed by DPBS for twice, lysed with 500 µL cold Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, #87787) supplemented with 1× Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, #78440), incubated on a shaker for 15 min at 4°C, and centrifuged at 14,000 ×g at 4°C. Protein concentrations in the supernatants were measured using the Pierce 660nm protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, #22662) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For each sample, 500 µL of 2 mg/mL protein solution was pre-cleared by incubating with 60 µL of 50% immobilized protein A/G gel slurry (Thermo Scientific, #20423) for 2 h at 4°C. Pre-cleared protein solution was transferred and incubated with 3 µg anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma Aldrich, F1804) or IgG (Millipore, #12-371) overnight at 4°C. The next day, 60 µL of 50% immobilized protein A/G gel slurry was added to each sample, followed by incubation on a vertical shaker for 2 h at 4°C. After washing beads with IP washing buffer (20mM Tris pH7.5, 100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% Tween) buffer for five times, bound proteins were eluted with 50 µL of 2× Laemmli sample buffer containing 5% β-mercaptoethanol by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Eluted proteins were analyzed by gel-enhanced liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS) essentially as we previously described35,41. Briefly, eluted proteins were briefly resolved by short-range sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Protein-containing gel sections were excised and cut into small gel particles. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), and digested with trypsin (1:50, w/w) for 16 h in gel. Tryptic peptides were extracted, dried down in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), and reconstituted with 25 µL 0.2% formic acid. Using an EASY-nLC 1200 ultraperformance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), 10 µL peptide solution was loaded onto a 2-cm trap column (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 50-cm analytical column (Thermo Scientific) heated to 55°C, using a 60-min gradient of 3-33% B in 45 min, 33-100% B in 5 min, and 100% B in 10 min at the flow rate of 250 nL/min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Resolved peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). With an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. In MS scans, internal mass calibration was performed using EASY-IC. The full scan was performed in 120,000 resolution at m/z 400 Th, with an ion packet setting of 4×105 for automatic gain control and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each MS1 scan (m/z 375-1650) was followed by MS scans (isolation window 1.6 Th) with a fixed scan cycle time of 3 s. Peptide ions with charge state of 2-7 were automatically selected for MS/MS fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at the collision energy of 35%. The fragment ions were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, using 30,000 resolution, 5×104 automatic gain control, and 54 milli-second maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data (20 RAW files) were searched against the Uniprot_Human database (released on 03/30/2018, containing 93,316 sequences) using the Andromeda algorithm37 in the MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) environment38. The searching parameters were set as follows: trypsin/P as the protease; oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; up to two missed cleavage; minimal peptide length as 7; mass tolerance for MS1 was 4.5 ppm for main search and for MS2 was 20 ppm; identification of second peptides enabled; LFQ quantification enabled, and match-between-runs within 0.7 min were enabled. A stringent 1% FDR was used to filter PSM, peptide, and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Despite progress in prostate cancer (PC) therapeutics, distant metastasis remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality from PC. Thus, there is growing recognition that preventing or delaying PC metastasis holds great potential for substantially improving patient outcomes. Here we show receptor-interacting protein kinase 2 (RIPK2) is a clinically actionable target for inhibiting PC metastasis. RIPK2 is amplified/gained in ~65% of lethal metastatic castration-resistant PC. Its overexpression is associated with disease progression and poor prognosis, and its genetic knockout substantially reduces PC metastasis. Multi-level proteomics analyses reveal that RIPK2 strongly regulates the stability and activity of c-Myc (a driver of metastasis), largely via binding to and activating mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 7 (MKK7), which we identify as a direct c-Myc-S62 kinase. RIPK2 inhibition by preclinical and clinical drugs inactivates the noncanonical RIPK2/MKK7/c-Myc pathway and effectively impairs PC metastatic outgrowth. These results support targeting RIPK2 signaling to extend metastasis-free and overall survival.

### Keywords
Ripk2, Ip-ms, Interactome, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, CA 90048


