### Accession
PXD020508

### Title
Proteome of bovine granulosa cells and extracellular vesicles from follicular fluid

### Description
The follicular fluid (FF) fills the interior of ovarian antral follicle and provides the microenvironment for oocyte growth and acquisition of its competence to ovulate and latter support early embryo development. The FF is derived from both blood plasma and secretion of different types of follicular cells. It contains also extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes, small membrane-coated EVs with 30-150 nm in diameter, which participate in cell-to cell communication and signaling by transferring their cargo of different types of RNAs, proteins and lipids into the oocyte or follicular cells. To date most studies have focused on studying the ffEVs miRNAs cargo and showing that miRNAs can influence oocyte competence and further embryo development. However, ffEVs protein cargo, which could have a direct contribution after being uptake by the oocyte or follicular cells have been less studies.

### Sample Protocol
Small antral bovine follicles of 3-6 mm in diameter, usually used for in vitro embryo production were used to obtained follicular fluid (FF) Exosome-like EVs isolated from FF (ffEVs) had an average size of 53.6+23.3 nm and were positive for well-known exosomal markers (CD81, CD9, different members of Annexins and Heat schock proteins families). Proteome analysis of ffEVs and granulosa cells (GC) were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LTQ Velos Orbitrap, thermofisher) after fractionation of total proteins (80 µg)on SDS-PAGE (fractionation into 10 bands). Peptides were obtained after DTT reduction, iodoacetamide alkylation, digestion with bovine trypsin, extraction with formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Protein data identification was performed using Mascot search engine version 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) combined to Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), against the mammal section of the non-redundant NCBI database (download July 2018). The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Identified proteins were subjected to Scaffold v4.8.4 software (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA) for validation.

### Publication Abstract
Follicular fluid (FF) fills the interior portion of the ovarian antral follicle and provides a suitable microenvironment for the growth of the enclosed oocyte through molecular factors that originate from plasma and the secretions of follicular cells. FF contains extracellular nanovesicles (ffEVs), including 30-100-nm membrane-coated exosomes, which carry different types of RNA, proteins, and lipids and directly influence oocyte competence to develop embryo. In the present study, we aimed to characterize the protein cargo of EVs from the FF of 3-6-mm follicles and uncover the origins of ffEVs by assessing expression levels of corresponding mRNAs in bovine follicular cells and oocyte and cell proteomes. Isolated exosome-like ffEVs were 53.6 + 23.3 nm in size and could be internalized by cumulus-oocyte complex. Proteomes of ffEVs and granulosa cells (GC) were assessed using nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry after the gel fractionation of total proteins. In total, 460 protein isoforms corresponding to 322 unique proteins were identified in ffEVs; among them, 190 were also identified via GC. Gene Ontology terms related to the ribosome, protein and RNA folding, molecular transport, endocytosis, signal transduction, complement and coagulation cascades, apoptosis, and developmental biology pathways, including PI3K-Akt signaling, were significantly enriched features of ffEV proteins. FfEVs contain numerous ribosome and RNA-binding proteins, which may serve to compact different RNAs to regulate gene expression and RNA degradation, and might transfer ribosomal constituents to the oocyte. Majority of genes encoding ffEV proteins expressed at different levels in follicular cells and oocyte, corroborating with numerous proteins, which were reported in bovine oocyte and cumulus cells in other studies thus indicating possible origin of ffEV proteins. The limited abundance of several mRNAs within follicular cells indicated that corresponding ffEV proteins likely originated from circulating exosomes released by other tissues. Analysis of bovine ffEV transcriptome revealed that mRNAs present in ffEV accounted for only 18.3% of detected ffEV proteins. In conclusion, our study revealed numerous proteins within ffEVs, which originated from follicular and other cells. These proteins are likely involved in the maintenance of follicular homeostasis and may affect oocyte competence.

### Keywords
Bovine, Granulosa cells, Exosomes

### Affiliations
INRAE
Centre INRAE Val de Loire UMR physiologie de la Reproduction et des comportements

### Submitter
Valerie LABAS

### Lab Head
Dr Svetlana UZBEKOVA
Centre INRAE Val de Loire UMR physiologie de la Reproduction et des comportements


