### Accession
PXD005551

### Title
Rho-kinase inhibitor Y-27632 and hypoxia synergistically enhance chondrocytic phenotype and change the S100 protein profile in human chondrosarcoma cells

### Description
Different kinds of cell-based therapies and tissue engineering applications need in vitro cultured differentiated chondrocytes. However, articular chondrocytes are slowly dividing cells, which in culture tend to lose their cell type-specific phenotype and ability to produce structurally and functionally correct cartilage tissue. Here we show that Y-27632 treatment at hypoxia enhances efficiently chondrocyte-specific extracellular matrix production on chondrocytic cells.  The effects of the long-term Y-27632 exposure to human chondrosarcoma 2/8 cell phenotype maintenance and extracellular matrix production were studied at normoxia and at 5% low oxygen atmosphere. The Y-27632 treatment at normoxia induced ACAN and COL2A1 gene up-regulation and minor increase of sulfated glycosaminoglycans (sGAGs), while type II collagen expression was not significantly up-regulated. The most efficient expression of ACAN and COL2A1 was achieved when the Y-27632 treatment was performed at hypoxia. The production of sGAGs increased by 65.8%, and the ELISA analysis revealed over 6 times up-regulation on type II collagen expression. The Y-27632 induced up-regulation of S100-A1 and S100-B proteins, and also affected the expression of several other S100 protein family members, such as S100-A4, S100-A6, S100-A13 and S100-A16. The up-regulation of S100-A1 and S100-B proteins is suggested to enhance the chondrocytic phenotype of the cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins where extracted in 1% Sodium deoxycholate, tryptically deigested and cleand up on Oasis HLB cartrigdes (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Raw data where imported into PrognesisQI (Nonlinear Dynamics), HDMSe spectras where searched against the curated H.sapiens subset from Uniprot. Quantitated proteins where then imported into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Bioinformatics).

### Publication Abstract
Articular chondrocytes are slowly dividing cells that tend to lose their cell type-specific phenotype and ability to produce structurally and functionally correct cartilage tissue when cultured. Thus, culture conditions, which enhance the maintenance of chondrocyte phenotype would be very useful for cartilage research. Here we show that Rho-kinase inhibition by Y-27632 under hypoxic conditions efficiently maintains and even enhances chondrocyte-specific extracellular matrix production by chondrocytic cells. The effects of long-term Y-27632 exposure to human chondrosarcoma 2/8 cell phenotype maintenance and extracellular matrix production were studied at normoxia and at a 5% low oxygen atmosphere. Y-27632 treatment at normoxia induced ACAN and COL2A1 gene up-regulation and a minor increase of sulfated glycosaminoglycans (sGAGs), while type II collagen expression was not significantly up-regulated. A further increase in expression of ACAN and COL2A1 was achieved with Y-27632 treatment and hypoxia. The production of sGAGs increased by 65.8%, and ELISA analysis revealed a 6-fold up-regulation of type II collagen. Y-27632 also induced the up-regulation of S100-A1 and S100-B proteins and modified the expression of several other S100 protein family members, such as S100-A4, S100-A6, S100-A13 and S100-A16. The up-regulation of S100-A1 and S100-B proteins is suggested to enhance the chondrocytic phenotype of these cells.

### Keywords
Human, Lc/ms, Chondrosarcoma

### Affiliations
Departement of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå University, SWEDEN
Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC),
Deptartment of Chemistry, Umeå University

### Submitter
Joakim Bygdell

### Lab Head
Dr Mikko Lammi
Departement of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå University, SWEDEN


