### Accession
PXD004566

### Title
Membrane-bound electron transport systems of an anammox bacterium: a complexome analysis

### Description
Electron transport, or oxidative phosphorylation, is one of the hallmarks of life. To this end, prokaryotes evolved a vast variety of protein complexes, only a small part of which have been discovered and studied.  These protein complexes allow them to occupy virtually every ecological niche on Earth. Here, we applied the advanced method of proteomics-based complexome profiling to get a better understanding of the electron transport systems of the anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing (anammox) bacteria, the N2-producing key players of the global nitrogen cycle. By this method nearly all respiratory complexes that were previously predicted from genome analysis to be involved in energy and cell carbon fixation were validated. More importantly, new and unexpected ones were discovered. We believe that complexome profiling in concert with (meta)genomics offers great opportunities to expand our knowledge on bacterial respiratory processes at a rapid and massive pace, in particular in new and thus far poorly investigated non-model and environmentally-relevant species.

### Sample Protocol
Kuenenia stuttgartiensis was grown as planktonic cells in a 10 l membrane reactor25. The cell pellet of 1 l of cell culture (OD600  1.2) was resuspended in 7 ml of sample buffer containing 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), 0.75 M 6-aminocaproic acid, 10% (w/v) glycerol. This and all next steps were performed at 4 °C unless specified otherwise. Cells were disrupted by three passages through a French pressure cell operated at 138 MPa at room temperature. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (4,500  g, 15 min) and the supernatant was subjected to an ultracentrifugation step (184,000  g, 1 h). The clear red supernatant comprising the soluble proteins was discarded and the pellet containing the membrane fraction was washed three times by subsequent dilution in sample buffer and ultracentrifugation to yield a colourless supernatant. The pellet was resuspended in 7 ml sample buffer. To dissolve membranes, β-laurylmaltoside was added to the sample in a protein to detergent ratio of approximately 1:6 (w/w), and this mixture was incubated on a rotator for one hour. Protein quantification was performed using the 2-D Quant Kit according to the product manual (GE Healthcare, USA), with bovine serum albumin as standard.  BNE of membrane protein complexes was performed as described by59,60, using pre-casted 4-16% and 3-12% linear polyacrylamide gradient gels (Invitrogen, USA). Prior to loading, 1 μl of sample additive (0.75 M 6-aminocaproic acid, 5% Serva Blue G) was added to 40 µg membrane protein sample. Gels were run at room temperature at 100 V until the migration front reached the end of the gel. Cathode and anode buffers were prepared according to the supplier’s protocol (Invitrogen, USA). All gels were routinely stained with a ready-to-use Colloidal Coomassie Blue Stain (Severn Biotech Ltd., USA) and destained with demineralised water. After electrophoresis, BNE gel lanes were analysed in two ways. (1) Gel lanes were assembled onto an SDS-PAGE gel and separated by electrophoresis in the second dimension (2DE) after which proteins of interest were identified by MALDI-TOF MS (Supplementary Methods). (2) Gel lanes were cut into 65 or 66 equally sized slices. After in-gel tryptic digestion of the slices, each of these was subjected to proteolytical analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to on-line tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files from LC-MS/MS runs were processed using the MaxQuant software with default settings for FTMS full MS scans and ion-trap MS/MS scans data processing72. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using ‘match between runs’ in a 5-min time window. Database searches of the MS/MS data against the RefSeq K. stuttgartiensis fasta protein sequence database allowed for a 6 ppm precursor mass error and 0.5 Da fragment ion mass error. For validation purposes, a maximum false discovery rate of 1% was allowed, both at the peptide and protein levels. Only razor and unique peptides were used for label-free protein quantitation. Protein abundance values were calculated as intensity-based absolute quantitation (iBAQ) values. Output from MaxQuant was further processed manually to obtain relative abundance profiles for identified proteins. For visualisation and clustering purposes, profiles were normalised, i.e. scaled between 0 and 1. To identify proteins that co-migrated in the BNE gels, normalised protein abundance profiles were subjected to hierarchical clustering analysis based on Pearson’s uncentred correlation as distance metric (complete linkage) with optimised tree leaf order, thereby using the MeV software package73. Hydrazine synthase (kuste2859-61) and ATPase-I (kuste3787-96) subunits were used to validate correct profiling

### Publication Abstract
Electron transport, or oxidative phosphorylation, is one of the hallmarks of life. To this end, prokaryotes evolved a vast variety of protein complexes, only a small part of which have been discovered and studied. These protein complexes allow them to occupy virtually every ecological niche on Earth. Here, we applied the method of proteomics-based complexome profiling to get a better understanding of the electron transport systems of the anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing (anammox) bacteria, the N2-producing key players of the global nitrogen cycle. By this method nearly all respiratory complexes that were previously predicted from genome analysis to be involved in energy and cell carbon fixation were validated. More importantly, new and unexpected ones were discovered. We believe that complexome profiling in concert with (meta)genomics offers great opportunities to expand our knowledge on bacterial respiratory processes at a rapid and massive pace, in particular in new and thus far poorly investigated non-model and environmentally-relevant species.

### Keywords
Complexome profiling, Anammox, Electron transport system, Membrane protein complexes

### Affiliations
Radboudumc
Radboud Proteomics Center, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Alain J van Gool
Radboud Proteomics Center, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc


