### Accession
PXD018364

### Title
Single or combined dietary supply of Psidium guajava and Phyllanthus amarus extracts differentially modulate immune responses and liver proteome in striped catfish (Pangasianodon hyphophthalmus)

### Description
Guava Psidium guajava L (Pg) and bhumi amla Phyllanthus amarus Schum. et Thonn (Pa) are well-known plants in traditional medicine. However, the capacity of these plants for improving the immune system of aquatic species has received less attention so far. This study aimed to investigate the effects of single supply or mixture of Pg and Pa extracts on immune responses, disease resistance and liver proteome profiles in striped catfish Pangasianodon hypophthalmus. Fish were fed diets including basal diet 0% or one of three doses of each plant extract, either alone or in mixture, 0.08, 0.2 or 0.5% Pg, Pa or mixture (Pg:Pa, v/v) for 6 weeks. The immune parameters (respiratory burst activity (RBA); nitric oxide synthase (NOS), total immunoglobulin, lysozyme and complement activities) were examined at W3, W6 post-feeding, and after challenge test. The growth parameters and the challenge test with Edwardsiella ictaluri were done at W6. The liver proteome profiles were analysed in W6 at 0.08% and 0.5% of each extract. The results showed that extract-based diets significantly improved growth parameters in the Pg0.2 group compared to control. The cellular immune responses in spleen and the humoral immune responses in plasma were significantly improved in a dose and time-dependent manner. Diets supplemented with single Pg and Pa extracts, and to lesser extent to combined extracts, could significantly decrease the mortality of striped catfish following bacterial infection compared to control. The proteomic results indicated that some pathways related to immune responses, antioxidant and lipid metabolism were enriched in liver at W6. Several proteins (i.e., CD8B, HSP90AA1, HSP90AB1, PDIA3, CASP8, TUBA1C, CCKAR, GNAS, GRIN2D, PLCG1, PRKCA, SLC25A5, VDAC2, ACTN4, GNAI2, LCK, CARD9, NLRP12, and NLRP3) were synergistically upregulated in mixture of Pg and Pa-based diets compared to control and single dietary treatments. Taken together, the results revealed that single Pg and Pa extracts at 0.2 and 0.5% and their mixture at 0.08 and 0.5% have the potential to modulate the immune mechanisms and disease resistance of striped catfish. Moreover, the combination of Pg and Pa in diets suggested positive synergistic effects liver proteome profile related to immune system processes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on liver samples at low (0.08%) and high (0.5%) doses of each kind of plant extract in W6. Three fish from the same tank were pooled and tanks were considered as independent biological replicates. Briefly, samples were ground to powder and the powder was dissolved in lysis buffer [8 M urea and 40 mM tris-HCL or triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; pH 8.5) supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid to a final concentration of 10 mM, and the suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 1 min prior to centrifugation at 25,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) and alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteolysis was performed with 0.5 µg of trypsin and allowed to continue overnight at 37°C. Each sample was dried under vacuum using a Savant Speedvac Concentrator.  • LC-IMS (ion mobility separation)-QTOF-MS analysis (HDMSE) Peptide separation using nanoUPLC Before peptide separation, the samples were dissolved in 20 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN). The peptide mixture was separated by reverse phase chromatography on a NanoACQUITY UPLC MClass system (Waters, MA, USA) working with MassLynx V4.1 (Waters, MA, USA) software. 200 ng of digested proteins were injected on a trap C18, 100 Å 5 µm, 180 µm × 20 mm column (Waters, MA, USA) and desalted using isocratic conditions with a flow rate of 15 µL/min using a 99% formic acid and 1% (v/v) ACN buffer for 3 min. The peptide mixture was subjected to reverse phase chromatography on a C18, 100 Å 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 150 mm column (Waters, MA, USA) PepMap for 120 min at 35°C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a two part linear gradient from 1% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 35% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and from 35% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 85% (v/v) ) ACN, 0.1% formic acid. The column was re-equilibrated to initial conditions after washing for 10 min at 85% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For online LC-MS analysis, the nanoUPLC was coupled to the mass spectrometer through a nano-electrospray ionisation (nanoESI) source emitter. IMS-HDMSE (ion mobility separation-high definition enhanced) analyses were performed on a SYNAPT G2-Si high definition mass spectrometer (Waters, MA, USA) equipped with a NanoLockSpray dual electrospray ion source (Waters, MA, USA). Precut fused silica PicoTipR emitters for nanoelectrospray, outer diameter: 360 µm; inner diameter: 20 µm; 10 µm tip; 2.5 inches length (Waters) were used for samples and precut fused silica TicoTipR emitters for nanoelectrospray, outer diameters: 360 µm; inner diameter: 20 µm; 2.5 inches length (Waters, MA, USA) were used for the lock mass solution. The eluent was sprayed at a spray voltage of 2.4 kV with a sampling cone voltage of 25 V and a source offset of 30 V. The source temperature was set to 80°C. The HDMSE method in resolution mode was used to collect data from 15 min after injection to 106 min. This method acquires MSE in positive and resolution mode over the m/z range from 50 to 2000 with a scan time of 1 sec. with a collision energy ramp starting from ion mobility bin 20 (20 eV) to 110 (45 eV). The collision energy in the transfer cell for low-energy MS mode was set to 4 eV. For the post-acquisition lock mass correction of the data in the MS method, the doubly charged monoisotopic ion of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B was used at 100 fmol/µL using the reference sprayer of the nanoESI source with a frequency of 30 s at 0.5 µL/min into the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
ESI-QTOF data processing  HDMSE data were processed with Progenesis QI (Nonlinear DYNAMICS, Waters) software using a Uniprot Pangasius sequence protein database (193970 entries). Propionamide as the fixed cysteine modification, oxidation as the variable methionine modification, and trypsin as the digestion enzyme were selected and one miss cleavage was allowed. Three biological and three technical replicates were used for each sample. The non-conflicting method was used as the relative quantification method. To identify statistically significant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), the t-tests were adopted and proteins with at least 1.2-fold change ratio and a p-value < 0.05. Bioinformatics analysis The functional background annotation analyses for all the identified proteins were mapped with Gene Ontology (GO) terms (http://geneontology.org/). The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were also subjected to the functional categorisation of the GO Terms tool, applying the hypergeometric statistical test with correction by the Bonferroni method, considering p-value < 0.05 as significant. At least five proteins in each GO term focusing on immune system processes were considered as the interaction network. The enrichment analysis of statistically significant DEPs for the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway was performed using the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID) Bioinformatics Resource 6.8 (Huang, Sherman, Lempicki, 2009) and STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes) software (v.11.0) (http://string-db.org). At least three proteins related to the immune system in each KEGG with a requisite minimum confidence score of 0.4 were considered to be a significantly enriched pathway.

### Publication Abstract
Guava <i>Psidium guajava</i> L (Pg) and bhumi amla <i>Phyllanthus amarus</i> Schum. et Thonn (Pa) are well-known plants in traditional medicine. However, the capacity of these plants for improving the immune system of aquatic species has received less attention so far. This study aimed to investigate the effects of single supply or mixture of Pg and Pa extracts on immune responses, disease resistance and liver proteome profiles in striped catfish <i>Pangasianodon hypophthalmus</i>. Fish were fed diets including basal diet 0% or one of three doses of each plant extract, either alone or in mixture, 0.08, 0.2, or 0.5% Pg, Pa or mixture (Pg:Pa, v/v) for 6 weeks. The immune parameters (respiratory burst activity (RBA); nitric oxide synthase (NOS), total immunoglobulin, lysozyme, and complement activities) were examined at W3, W6 post-feeding, and after challenge test. The growth parameters and the challenge test with <i>Edwardsiella ictaluri</i> were done at W6. The liver proteome profiles were analyzed in W6 at 0.08 and 0.5% of each extract. The results showed that extract-based diets significantly improved growth parameters in the Pg0.2 group compared to control. The cellular immune responses in spleen and the humoral immune responses in plasma were significantly improved in a dose and time-dependent manner. Diets supplemented with single Pg and Pa extracts, and to lesser extent to combined extracts, could significantly decrease the mortality of striped catfish following bacterial infection compared to control. The proteomic results indicated that some pathways related to immune responses, antioxidant and lipid metabolism were enriched in liver at W6. Several proteins (i.e., CD8B, HSP90AA1, HSP90AB1, PDIA3, CASP8, TUBA1C, CCKAR, GNAS, GRIN2D, PLCG1, PRKCA, SLC25A5, VDAC2, ACTN4, GNAI2, LCK, CARD9, NLRP12, and NLRP3) were synergistically upregulated in mixture of Pg and Pa-based diets compared to control and single dietary treatments. Taken together, the results revealed that single Pg and Pa extracts at 0.2 and 0.5% and their mixture at 0.08 and 0.5% have the potential to modulate the immune mechanisms and disease resistance of striped catfish. Moreover, the combination of Pg and Pa in diets suggested positive synergistic effects liver proteome profile related to immune system processes.

### Keywords
Liver proteome profile, Striped catfish., Psidium guajava l., Plant extract-based diets, Humoral immune response, Skin mucosal immune response, Phyllanthus amarus schum et thonn, Edwardsiella ictaluri

### Affiliations
Research Unit in Environmental and Evolutionary Biology  (URBE), Institute of Life, Earth & Environment, University of Namur (UNamur), 5000 Namur, Belgium
University of Namur

### Submitter
Valérie Cornet

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Kestemont
Research Unit in Environmental and Evolutionary Biology  (URBE), Institute of Life, Earth & Environment, University of Namur (UNamur), 5000 Namur, Belgium


