### Accession
PXD037086

### Title
Variation in mouse chemical signals is genetically controlled and environmentally modulated

### Description
Urine proteomes of the house mouse (Mus musculus musculus, M. m. domesticus, M. m. castaneus).

### Sample Protocol
All protein samples were cold-acetone precipitated and centrifuged at 14000 rcf for 10minutes at 0°C.  This was followed by a re-suspension of dried pellets in the digestion buffer (1% SDC, 100mM TEAB – pH=8.5). The protein concentration of each lysate was determined using the BCA assay kit (Fisher Scientific). Cysteines in 20μg of proteins were reduced with a final concentration of 5mM TCEP (60° C for 60 min) and blocked with10mM MMTS (i.e. S-methyl methanethiosulfonate, 10 min room temperature). Samples were cleaved with trypsin (1 ug of trypsin per sample) in 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on a Michrom C18 column. Nano Reversed phase columns were used (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size). Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo) with the same parameters as described in Kuntova, B., Stopkova, R. & Stopka, P. Transcriptomic and Proteomic Profiling Revealed High Proportions of Odorant Binding and Antimicrobial Defense Proteins in Olfactory Tissues of the House Mouse. Front Genet 9, 26, doi:10.3389/fgene.2018.00026 (2018).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were pre-processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.34) 65. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra mapping against our modified Uniprot Mus musculus database (downloaded on June, 2015), containing 44,900 entries. We modified our databases such that all MUP and OBP sequences were removed and instead of them we have added a complete list of MUPs from Ensembl database, and OBPs from NCBI (sensu - citation 85). Next we added some Tremble sequences that were missing in Uniprot, for example KLKs, BPIs, SPINKs, SCGB/ABPs, and LCNs. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds 98 and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The `match between runs` feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min). Quantifications were performed using the label-free algorithms 65 with a combination of unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In most mammals and particularly in mice, chemical communication relies on the detection of ethologically relevant fitness-related cues from other individuals. In mice, urine is the primary source of these signals, so we employed proteomics and metabolomics to identify key components of chemical signalling. We show that there is a correspondence between urinary volatiles and proteins in the representation of genetic background, sex and environment in two house mouse subspecies Mus musculus musculus and M. m. domesticus. We found that environment has a strong influence upon proteomic and metabolomic variation and that volatile mixtures better represent males while females have surprisingly more sex-biased proteins. Using machine learning and combined-omics techniques, we identified mixtures of metabolites and proteins that are associated with biological features.

### Keywords
Urine, Chemical communication, Wild animals, Olfactory, Lipocalin, Metabolome, House mouse, Captivity, Proteome, Volatiles

### Affiliations
Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec and Prague, Czech Republic
Department of Zoology, Charles University, Prague

### Submitter
Pavel Stopka

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Stopka
Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Vestec and Prague, Czech Republic


