### Accession
PXD005798

### Title
Quantitative chemical proteomic analysis of YnMyr-tagged proteins in HeLa cells infected with RV16

### Description
Rhinovirus causes the common cold and drives exacerbation in asthma and COPD, leading to substantial morbidity and healthcare cost. The single positive strand RNA genome of this non-enveloped virus is translated into a single polyprotein that is processed by virus 3C protease to form three structural capsid proteins VP0, VP1 and VP3, and other proteins required for viral life cycle completion. Capsid proteins assemble into the 5S capsid protomer, five of which form a 14S pentamer, and 12 pentamers then assemble to form the 150S icosahedral provirion into which the viral genome is incorporated. During the final step of viral maturation, VP0 is cleaved into VP2 and VP4. VP4 is encoded at the N-terminus of the viral polyprotein, and in many Picornaviruses is N-myristoylated by host cell N-myristoyltransferase (NMT). We have explored the impact of IMP-1088 (the first sub-nanomolar IC50 dual inhibitor of human N-myristoyl transferases HsNMT1 and HsNMT2) on HRV capsid myristoylation in cells. Global identification of proteins for which myristoylation is selectively inhibited by IMP-1088 was performed by quantitative chemical proteomic analysis of YnMyr-tagged proteins in HeLa cells infected with RV16 treated with 50 nM IMP-1088 or vehicle (DMSO). Proteins were subjected to ligation to AzRB, an azide capture reagent bearing a trypsin-cleavable linker and biotin dual label followed by affinity enrichment on Neutravidin beads, on-bead digestion with trypsin, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides, and data processing by label-free protein quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant. 60 N-myristoylated proteins were identified, including the RV16 polyprotein which responded to IMP-1088 inhibition, with no significant change in protein abundances across the whole proteome in the presence of inhibitor. The majority of viral capsid peptides identified in the pull-down mapped to the VP0 domain of the polyprotein, and the N-terminal YnMyr-tagged peptide was readily identified by MS/MS. These data provide the first direct evidence for HRV capsid myristoylation in human cells, and demonstrate that this lipid modification is highly susceptible to inhibition by a selective NMT inhibitor.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS-Based proteomics with enrichment of labeled proteins.  HeLa cells were metabolic labelled with alkyne-tagged myristate analogue YnMyr over a single-cycle 6-hour synchronous infection with human rhinovirus strain RV16. Cell were also treated with 50 nM IMP-1088 or DMSO. The cells were harvested using 1% Triton X-100, 0.2% SDS in PBS supplemented with 1x Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. Only low binding micro-centrifuge tubes (Eppendorf® Protein LoBind) were used. All solutions were prepared fresh. Protein concentrations were adjusted to 2 mg/mL by addition of lysis buffer (300 µL-600 µg). A click mixture was prepared by mixing 1 µL capture reagent AzRB (10 mM in DMSO, final concentration 0.1 mM), 2 µL CuSO4 (50 mM in H2O, final concentration 1 mM), 2 µL tris(2 carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (50 mM in H2O, final concentration 1 mM) and 1 µL tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA) (10 mM in DMSO, final concentration 0.1 mM). The mixture (6 µL per 100 µL of lysate) was added to each protein lysate and the reaction mixture was vortexed at room temperature for 1 h, then quenched by the addition of EDTA (10 mM final concentration). Subsequently, proteins were precipitated by addition of methanol, chloroform and ultrapure water (2:0.5:1 volume relative to the sample volume). Precipitates were isolated by centrifugation (14,000 x g, 10 min, RT) and washed twice with cold methanol. The pellets were air-dried and samples were re-suspended in 2% SDS/10 mM DTT in PBS (10 mg/mL). Once dissolved, the samples were diluted to 0.2% SDS by addition of PBS to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL. The samples were then added to 30 µL of pre-washed (0.2% SDS in PBS, 3 X 500 µL) NeutrAvidin® Agarose resin and gently vortex mixed for 2 hours at room temperature. The beads were pelleted (3,000 x g, 3 min) and the supernatant was removed. The beads were sequentially washed with 1% SDS in PBS (3 X 500 µL), 4M Urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (2 X 500 µL), and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (2 X 500 µL). For each wash step the beads were gently vortexed for 2 min followed by pelleting in a microcentrifuge (3,000 x g, 1 min). The beads were re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (50 µL), DL-dithiothreitol (5 µL, 100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and the beads were incubated at 55°C for 30 minutes in a shaker. The beads were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (2 X 500 µL) and re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (50 µL). Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (5 µL, 100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark). The beads were washed as before. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 3 µL, 0.2 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the beads and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight in a shaker. The beads were pelleted and the supernatant collected. The beads were washed with 60 μL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and then with 1.5% trifluoroacetic acid in ultrapure water (60 µL) with gentle shaking for 10 minutes each time. The peptide solutions were stage-tipped according to a published protocol. The peptides were eluted from the sorbent (SDB-XC poly(styrenedivinylbenzene copolymer, from 3M) with 79% acetonitrile in water, dried in a Savant SPD1010 SpeedVac® Concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Sample preparation for MS-based proteomics for the whole proteome. Protein lysates (30 μg) were precipitated using the system MeOH:CHCl3:H2O described above. The pellet was washed with 10% water in methanol (200 μL X 2) and centrifuge at maximum speed and 16 °C for 10 minutes. The pellet was dissolved in 5 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (48 μL) and the solution incubated at 55°C for 30 minutes. Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (2.4 µL, 100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark). Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 5 µL, 0.2 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the solutions and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight in a shaker. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (100 μL 0.75% trifluoroacetic acid in ultrapure water). The peptide solutions were stage-tipped according to a published protocol. The peptides were eluted from the sorbent (SDB-XC poly(styrenedivinylbenzene copolymer, from 3M) with 79% acetonitrile in water, dried in a Savant SPD1010 SpeedVac® Concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
nLC-MS/MS analysis. The analysis was performed using an EASY-Spray™ Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Easy nLC-1000 was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17 500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102. Proteomics data analysis. The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 using the built-in Andromeda search engine and the built-in label-free quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the human reference (with isoforms) proteome plus RV16 polyprotein (Uniprot, accessed April 2016). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. ‘Trypsin/P’ was chosen as digestion mode enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The ‘match between run’ (time window 0.7 min) option was selected. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ were chosen for protein quantification. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Processed data were further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.0.9, Microsoft Office Excel 2010 and GraphPad Prism version 5.03. MS data were further processed with PEAKS7.5, which performs de novo peptide sequencing prior to database searches, in order to improve the accuracy of the results. The software also searches for common PTMs (PEAKS PTM) and point mutations (SPIDER). The data were searched against the same human reference (with isoforms) proteome plus RV-16 polyprotein that were used in MaxQuant analyses. Trypsin (specific, up to three missed cleavages allowed) was selected for database searches, and no enzyme was chosen in de novo searches. The maximal mass error was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.01 Da for product ions. Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as well as the lipid-derived adduct (+206.17 Da) to any amino acid at peptide N-terminus were set as variable modifications. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set as three. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and minimum of 1 unique peptide per protein was required.

### Publication Abstract
Rhinoviruses (RVs) are the pathogens most often responsible for the common cold, and are a frequent cause of exacerbations in asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cystic fibrosis. Here we report the discovery of IMP-1088, a picomolar dual inhibitor of the human N-myristoyltransferases NMT1 and NMT2, and use it to demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition of host-cell N-myristoylation rapidly and completely prevents rhinoviral replication without inducing cytotoxicity. The identification of cooperative binding between weak-binding fragments led to rapid inhibitor optimization through fragment reconstruction, structure-guided fragment linking and conformational control over linker geometry. We show that inhibition of the co-translational myristoylation of a specific virus-encoded protein (VP0) by IMP-1088 potently blocks a key step in viral capsid assembly, to deliver a low nanomolar antiviral activity against multiple RV strains, poliovirus and foot and-mouth disease virus, and protection of cells against virus-induced killing, highlighting the potential of host myristoylation as a drug target in picornaviral infections.

### Keywords
Hela, Nmt inhibition, Proteomics, Rv16, Myristoylation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK
CNIO

### Submitter
Julia Morales Sanfrutos

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK


