### Accession
PXD017391

### Title
Macrophage development and activation involve coordinated intron retention in key inflammatory regulators

### Description
Monocytes and macrophages are essential components of the innate immune system. Herein, we report that intron retention (IR) plays an important role in the development and function of these cells. Using mRNA sequencing, bioinformatics analyses and RT-qPCR validation, we identified differential IR and altered expression of key genes involved in macrophage development and function, both in vitro and in vivo. We demonstrate that decreased IR in nuclear-detained mRNA is coupled to increased expression of genes encoding regulators of macrophage transcription, phagocytosis and inflammatory signalling, including ID2, IRF7, ENG and LAT. We further show that this dynamic IR program persists during the polarisation of resting macrophages into activated macrophages. In the presence of proinflammatory stimuli, intron-retaining CXCL2 and NFKBIZ transcripts in macrophages are rapidly spliced, leading to timely expression of these key inflammatory regulators by macrophages. Our study provides novel insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling vital regulators of the innate immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation using SDB-RPS StageTips Prior to lysis, cells on 10 cm tissue culture dishes were washed once in PBS at room temperature and then lysed by addition of 1 mL of lysis buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and scraping the cells at room temperature. Lysates were immediately heated to 95oC for 10 min. The lysate was sonicated using a QSonica Q800R2 with 30 s on time, 30 s off time, for 10 min total sonication time using 20% amplitude at room temperature. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatant was retained and protein concentration determined by BCA assay (Thermo). Protein digestion and peptide clean-up was performed as described previously (Harney et al., J Proteom Res, 2019). Briefly, 20 µg protein lysate was made up to a total volume of 25 µl in SDC buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and heated to 95°C for 10 minutes to denature, reduce and alkylate proteins. Once cooled to room temperature and diluted 4-fold with 75 µl of water. Trypsin was added (from 1 mg/ml stock solution in 50 mM acetic acid) to digest proteins at 1:20 ratio (protease:protein, μg/μg) and digested at 37°C for 16 h. An equal volume (100 μL) of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA was added to the digested peptides and vortexed. SDB-RPS StageTips were generated by punching double-stacked SDB-RPS discs (Sigma, Cat#66886-U) with an 18-gauge needle and mounted in 200 µl tips (Eppendorf). For clean-up utilising the Spin96, each tip was wetted with 100 μL of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 100 μL of 0.1% TFA in H2O and 30% methanol/1% TFA with centrifugation for each at 1,000 x g for 3 min. Each StageTip was then loaded with the equivalent of ~20 μg peptide in 100 μL of the entire lower aqueous phase. The peptides were washed twice with 100 ul of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA, which was followed by one wash with 100 μl of 0.2% TFA in water. To elute, 100 μL of 5% ammonium hydroxide/80% acetonitrile was added to each tip and centrifuged as above for 5 min into a unskirted PCR plate. Samples in the PCR plate were dried using a GeneVac EZ-2 using the ammonia setting at 35oC for 1 h. Dried peptides were resuspended in 60 μL of 5% formic acid and stored at 4°C until analysed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra Using a Thermo Fisher RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 50 cm x 75 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 140 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient. RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.6.3.4), and the MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy and proteins were filtered such that they must have >2 razor and unique peptides. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained both the human UniProt database downloaded on the 14th August 2018. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. We used the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment (Cox et al., 2014a; Cox & Mann, 2008). Maxquant output was processed and statistical tests performed using the R software package (version 3.4.3) and processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 10.0.2).

### Publication Abstract
Monocytes and macrophages are essential components of the innate immune system. Herein, we report that intron retention (IR) plays an important role in the development and function of these cells. Using Illumina mRNA sequencing, Nanopore direct cDNA sequencing and proteomics analysis, we identify IR events that affect the expression of key genes/proteins involved in macrophage development and function. We demonstrate that decreased IR in nuclear-detained mRNA is coupled with increased expression of genes encoding regulators of macrophage transcription, phagocytosis and inflammatory signalling, including ID2, IRF7, ENG and LAT. We further show that this dynamic IR program persists during the polarisation of resting macrophages into activated macrophages. In the presence of proinflammatory stimuli, intron-retaining CXCL2 and NFKBIZ transcripts are rapidly spliced, enabling timely expression of these key inflammatory regulators by macrophages. Our study provides novel insights into the molecular factors controlling vital regulators of the innate immune response.

### Keywords
Human, Monocyte, Macrophage

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Mark Larance
University of Sydney


