### Accession
PXD014550

### Title
The secretome of the rumen fluke, Calicophoron daubneyi

### Description
Helminth parasites secrete molecules in soluble form (i.e the secretome) or packaged into extracellular vesicles (EVs) as a means of exporting effector molecules into the host microenvironment. Once released, the parasite-derived molecules can trigger a range of biological effects including modulation of host immunity. While the secretome and molecular cargo of EVs have been characterised in many parasites, little is known about the molecules released by the rumen fluke, Calicophoron daubneyi – an emerging infection of livestock in Western Europe.  Here we used a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to characterise the secretome of the infective newly-excysted juvenile (NEJ) stage and adult flukes. We also profile the proteome of two sub-populations of EVs (termed 15K and 120K EVs) released by the adult flukes.

### Sample Protocol
Total C. daubneyi EV proteins were run on 4-12% Nupage Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) and secretions and subjected to in-gel trypsin digest.  Soluble secretions, from NEJs and adult flukes were digested with trypsin in solution. The resulting peptides were analysed in a nanoESI QqTOF mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the LIMS12524_20171212 C. daubneyi transcriptome database (version 1.0, 48899 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme strict trypsin. The transcript data can be accessed via the European Nucleotide Archive (www.ebi.ac.uk/ena) under accession number PRJEB28150. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, dioxidation of methionine and acetyl of the N-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Secretome, Extracellular vesicle, Calicophoron daubneyi

### Affiliations
Queens University Belfast
Institute for Global Food Security School of Biological Sciences Queen's University Belfast 19 Chlorine Gardens Belfast, BT9 5DL

### Submitter
Mark Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Mark W. Robinson
Institute for Global Food Security School of Biological Sciences Queen's University Belfast 19 Chlorine Gardens Belfast, BT9 5DL


