### Accession
PXD019679

### Title
GHB analogs confer neuroprotection through specific interaction with the CaMKII  hub domain

### Description
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha (CaMK2A) is an emerging drug target incerebral ischemia for which limited therapeutic options exist. Here we show that small-molecule analogs of the brain metabolite gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) afford neuroprotection via interaction specifically with the CaMK2A hub domain. Identification of CaMK2A as the GHB analog target was achieved by homogenate photoaffinity labeling followed by quantitative proteomics

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 µm inner diameter) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid for 35 min with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. All experiments were performed in the data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically isolate and fragment Top10 multiply-charged precursors according to their intensities. Former target ions were dynamically for 40 sec excluded and all experiments were acquired using positive polarity mode. Full scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and the mass range was set to m/z 350-1400. Full scan ion target value was 3E6 allowing a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragment scans was acquired with optimal setting for parallel acquisition using 1.3 m/z isolation width and normalized collision energy of 28. Ion target value for HCD fragment scans were set to 1e5 with a maximum fill time of 45 ms and analyzed with 60,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software (v. 1.5.5.1) and searched against the rat and mouse UniProt databases (downloaded 13.03.2017). In addition, the default contaminant protein database was included and any hits to this were excluded from further analysis. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification; phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, oxidation of methionine, pyro-glutamate formation from glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications . Proteins were quantified using the LFQ algorithm. Further data analysis was performed using Perseus (v. 1.5.6.0, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich), Microsoft Office Excel and GraphPad Prism (v. 7.0). After database searching using MaxQuant, the protein group file was processed using Perseus: Hits only identified by site or from the reverse database were excluded. Data were then exported to GraphPad Prism and non-linear regression was performed for all proteins using the “One site–Fit logIC50” function. Best-fit values for Top and the R2 values were plotted against each other to identify proteins with competitive dose-dependence behaviour.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Photoaffinity labeling, Rat, Qexactive hf, Brain homogenate, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen (Denmark)
University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ulrike Leurs

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen (Denmark)


