### Accession
PXD040953

### Title
UBR5 Forms Ligand-Dependent Complexes on Chromatin to Regulate Nuclear Hormone Receptor Stability

### Description
Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) are ligand-binding transcription factors that are widely targeted therapeutically. Hormone binding triggers NR activation and their subsequent proteasomal degradation through unknown ligand-dependent ubiquitin ligase machinery. NR degradation is therapeutically relevant. Efficacy of all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia requires degradation of the oncogenic fusion between the Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein (PML) with the Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA). Here we use CRISPR-based screens to identify the HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase UBR5 as a ligase for PML-RARA and RARA and observe an agonist-dependent association between RARA and UBR5, which occurs directly on chromatin to regulate transcription. We present the cryo-EM structure of full-length human UBR5 and identify a Leu-X-X-Leu-Leu (LxxLL) binding motif that associates with a conserved degron in RARA. A high-resolution crystal structure of the RARA ligand binding domain in complex with this LxxLL motif shows how UBR5 binding is mutually exclusive with nuclear co-activator engagement. We demonstrate that UBR5 utilizes this conserved degron to additionally regulate hormone dependent protein stability for the glucocorticoid, progesterone, and vitamin D receptors. Our work establishes UBR5-driven NR degradation as an integral regulator of transcriptional signaling by nuclear hormones.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) before snap freezing in liquid nitrogen.   Cells were lysed by addition of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and homogenization by bead beating (BioSpec) for three repeats of 30 seconds at 2400. Bradford assay was used to determine the final protein concentration in the clarified cell lysate. 50 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described 60 and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 h at RT. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 followed by digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 h at 37 °C. Sample digests were acidified with formic acid to a pH of 2-3 prior to desalting using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum-centrifuged and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis. Data were collected using a TimsTOF Pro2 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoElute LC pump (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray source. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase C18 column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µM, IonOpticks, Australia) containing an integrated captive spray emitter. Peptides were separated using a 50 min gradient of 2 - 30% buffer B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min and column temperature maintained at 50 ºC. DDA was performed in Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode to determine effective ion mobility windows for downstream diaPASEF data collection 61. The ddaPASEF parameters included: 100% duty cycle using accumulation and ramp times of 50 ms each, 1 TIMS-MS scan and 10 PASEF ramps per acquisition cycle. The TIMS-MS survey scan was acquired between 100 – 1700 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2. Precursors with 1 – 5 charges were selected and those that reached an intensity threshold of 20,000 arbitrary units were actively excluded for 0.4 min. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 m/z for m/z <700 and 3 m/z for m/z >800, with the m/z between 700-800 m/z being interpolated linearly. The TIMS elution voltages were calibrated linearly with three points (Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix Ions; 622, 922, 1,222 m/z) to determine the reduced ion mobility coefficients (1/K0). To perform diaPASEF, the precursor distribution in the DDA m/z-ion mobility plane was used to design an acquisition scheme for DIA data collection which included two windows in each 50 ms diaPASEF scan. Data was acquired using sixteen of these 25 Da precursor double window scans (creating 32 windows) which covered the diagonal scan line for doubly and triply charged precursors, with singly charged precursors able to be excluded by their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane. These precursor isolation windows were defined between 400 - 1200 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2.

### Data Protocol
The diaPASEF raw file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides was performed using library free analysis in DIA-NN 1.8 62. Library free mode performs an in silico digestion of a given protein sequence database alongside deep learning-based predictions to extract the DIA precursor data into a collection of MS2 spectra. The search results are then used to generate a spectral library which is then employed for the targeted analysis of the DIA data searched against a Swissprot human database (January 2021). Database search criteria largely followed the default settings for directDIA including: tryptic with two missed cleavages, carbomidomethylation of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine and precursor Q-value (FDR) cut-off of 0.01. Precursor quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) with RT-dependent cross run normalization. Proteins with missing values in any of the treatments and with poor quality data were excluded from further analysis (summed abundance across channels of <100 and mean number of precursors used for quantification <2). Protein abundances were scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework 63 and statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework 64.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Chromatin, Ubr5, Hormones, Nuclear receptors

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


