### Accession
PXD019086

### Title
Deep learning the collisional cross sections of the peptide universe from a million experimental values

### Description
The size and shape of peptide ions in the gas phase are an under-explored dimension for mass spectrometry-based proteomics. To explore the nature and utility of the entire peptide collisional cross section (CCS) space, we measure more than a million data points from whole-proteome digests of five organisms with trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) and parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF). The scale and precision (CV <1%) of our data is sufficient to train a recurrent neural network that accurately predicts CCS values solely based on the peptide sequence.  Cross section predictions for the synthetic ProteomeTools library validate the model within a 1.3% median relative error (R > 0.99). Hydrophobicity, position of prolines and histidines are main determinants of the cross sections in addition to sequence-specific interactions. CCS values can now be predicted for any peptide and organism, forming a basis for advanced proteomics workflows that make full use of the additional information.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were suspended in lysis buffer with chloroacetamide (PreOmics, Germany) to simultaneously lyse cells, reduce protein disulfide bonds and alkylate cysteine side chains as previously described. The samples were boiled at 95°C for 10 min and subsequently sonicated at maximum power (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium). Protelytic digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C by adding either i) equal amounts of LysC and trypsin, ii) LysC, or iii) LysN in a 1:100 enzyme:protein (wt/wt) ratio. The resulting peptides were de-salted and purified via solid phase extraction on styrenedivinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) sorbent according to our ‘in-StageTip’ protocol (PreOmics). The dried eluates were reconstituted in water with 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for further analysis.   LC-MS was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik timsTOF Pro, Germany) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonik Captive Spray).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0, which extracts four-dimensional isotope patterns (‘features’) and associated MS/MS spectra. The built-in search engine Andromeda was used to match observed fragment ions to theoretical peptide fragment ion masses derived from in silico digests of a reference proteome and a list of 245 potential contaminants using the appropriate digestion rules for each proteolytic enzyme (trypsin, LysC or LysN). We allowed a maximum of two missing values and required a minimum sequence length of 7 amino acids while limiting the maximum peptide mass to 4,600 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were included in the search as variable modifications. Reference proteomes for each organism including isoforms were accessed from UniProt (H. sapiens: 91,618 entries, 2016/05; E. coli: xx,xxx entries, 2019/01; C. elegans: xx,xxx entries, 2019/01; S. cerevisiae: xx,xxx entries, 2019/01; D. melanogaster: xx,xxx entries, 2019/01). They synthetic peptide library (ProteomeTools) was searched against the human reference proteome. The maximum mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 35 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. False discovery rates were controlled at 1% on both the peptide spectrum match and protein level with a target-decoy approach. The analyses were performed separately for each organism and each set of synthetic peptides (proteotypic set, SRM atlas and missing gene set).

### Publication Abstract
The size and shape of peptide ions in the gas phase are an under-explored dimension for mass spectrometry-based proteomics. To investigate the nature and utility of the peptide collisional cross section (CCS) space, we measure more than a million data points from whole-proteome digests of five organisms with trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) and parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF). The scale and precision (CV&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;1%) of our data is sufficient to train a deep recurrent neural network that accurately predicts CCS values solely based on the peptide sequence. Cross section predictions for the synthetic ProteomeTools peptides validate the model within a 1.4% median relative error (R&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.99). Hydrophobicity, proportion of prolines and position of histidines are main determinants of the cross sections in addition to sequence-specific interactions. CCS values can now be predicted for any peptide and organism, forming a basis for advanced proteomics workflows that make full use of the additional information.

### Keywords
Deep learning, Ccs, Ion mobility, Technical, Tims

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction  Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18  82152 Martinsried   Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction  Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry  Am Klopferspitz 18  82152 Martinsried   Germany


