### Accession
PXD019973

### Title
The gut bacterium Extibacter muris produces secondary bile acids and influences liver physiology in gnotobiotic mice - Proteomics results

### Description
In this study, mice were colonized from birth on with the minimal microbiota Oligo-MM with or without the addition of Extibacter muris. Extibacter muris is known to metabolize cholic acid to deoxycholic acid via 7α-dehydroxylation. The impact of Extibacter muris colonization on the liver proteome of mice under different diets was investigated using untargeted proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from mouse livers and TMT-10-plex labeling was used for protein quantification. The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and the UniprotKB reference proteome of Mus musculus (6th March 2019). For this purpose, an iterative workflow was applied. Obtained fold changes were Log2-transformed and median-normalized before calculation of p-values, which were adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg. These steps were conducted with R-3.5.0.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Extibacter muris</i> is a newly described mouse gut bacterium which metabolizes cholic acid (CA) to deoxycholic acid (DCA) via 7&#x3b1;-dehydroxylation. Although bile acids influence metabolic and inflammatory responses, few <i>in vivo</i> models exist for studying their metabolism and impact on the host. Mice were colonized from birth with the simplified community Oligo-MM<sup>12</sup> with or without <i>E. muris</i>. As the metabolism of bile acids is known to affect lipid homeostasis, mice were fed either a low- or high-fat diet for eight weeks before sampling and analyses targeting the gut and liver. Multiple Oligo-MM<sup>12</sup> strains were capable of deconjugating primary bile acids <i>in vitro. E. muris</i> produced DCA from CA either as pure compound or in mouse bile. This production was inducible by CA <i>in vitro</i>. Ursodeoxycholic, chenodeoxycholic, and &#x3b2;-muricholic acid were not metabolized under the conditions tested. All gnotobiotic mice were stably colonized with <i>E. muris</i>, which showed higher relative abundances after HF diet feeding. The presence of <i>E. muris</i> had minor, diet-dependent effects on Oligo-MM<sup>12</sup> communities. The secondary bile acids DCA and surprisingly LCA and their taurine conjugates were detected exclusively in <i>E. muris</i>-colonized mice. <i>E. muris</i> colonization did not influence body weight, white adipose tissue mass, liver histopathology, hepatic aspartate aminotransferase, or blood levels of cholesterol, insulin, and paralytic peptide (PP). However, proteomics revealed shifts in hepatic pathways involved in amino acid, glucose, lipid, energy, and drug metabolism in <i>E. muris</i>-colonized mice. Liver fatty acid composition was substantially altered by dietary fat but not by <i>E. muris.</i>In summary, <i>E. muris</i> stably colonized the gut of mice harboring a simplified community and produced secondary bile acids, which affected proteomes in the liver. This new gnotobiotic mouse model can now be used to study the pathophysiological role of secondary bile acids <i>in vivo</i>.

### Keywords
Extibacter muris, Mouse, Liver, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, UFZ, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research, Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Isabel Karkossa

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, UFZ, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research, Leipzig, Germany


