### Accession
PXD023048

### Title
iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis of dentate gyrus in temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis

### Description
Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most frequent type of focal epilepsy in adults, typically resistant to pharmacological treatment and mostly present with cognitive impairment and psychiatric comorbidities. The most common neuropathological hallmark in TLE patients is hippocampal sclerosis(HS). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms involved remain poorly characterized. Dentate gyrus(DG), one specific hippocampal subarea, structural and functional changes imply a key involvement of the DG in the development of TLE. In this study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) -based quantitative proteomic technique was performed to analysis of hippocampal DG obtained from patients with TLE-HS compared to control samples obtained from the autopsy. Our proteomic data identified 5583 proteins, of which 82 proteins were up-regulated and 90 proteins were down-regulated. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that differential expressed proteins enriched in “synaptic vesicle”, “mitochondrion”, “cell-cell adhesion”, “regulation of synaptic plasticity”, “ATP binding” and “Oxidative phosphorylation”. Protein-protein interaction network analysis found a pivotal module of 10 proteins that relate to “Oxidative phosphorylation”. This study is the first to investigate proteomic alterations in DG region of TLE-HS patients, and pave the way to better understanding of epileptogenesis mechanisms and future therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
The study was carried out on 7 TLE patients subjected to standard hippocampectomy at the Department of Neurosurgery of Xiangya Hospital. And all patients went through comprehensive medical history, physical examination, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalograph(EEG). Preoperative MRI and routine postoperative histopathologic examination of resected tissue confirmed HS. Written informed consent was obtained from all enrolled participants. The study was conducted following the guideline for the research involving humans, and approved by the Ethics Committee of Central South University, Xiangya School of Medicine and the affiliated Xiangya Hospital.Hippocampal samples of control group were obtained from autopsied patients of Xiangya School of Medicine, and exclusion criteria were patients with neuropsychiatric disorders and abnormities in the central nervous system(CNS) based on clinical history or histological examination. The resected brain tissues were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80˚C. Immunohistochemical staining against NeuN (Merck-Millipore, MAB377, 1 : 1000) was performed in brain slices, and for Nissl staining, brain slices were placed under agitation in cresyl violet staining solution. Staining results as localization reference, experienced pathologist therefore separated the DG from the rest of the hippocampus by microdissection . Quantitative 8-plex iTRAQ proteomic analysis was carried out on eight independent protein samples. Total proteins were extracted with iTRAQ lysis buffer, processed of disulfide bond cleavage and reductive alkylation of proteins with DTT and iodoacetamide, and then the proteins were hydrolyzed by trypsin. The pooled samples were labeled using the iTRAQ kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems Sciex). The iTRAQ-labeled samples were mixed and resuspended in buffer A(2% acetonitrile, pH 10) and eluted with a 2% to 95% linear gradient of buffer B (90% acetonitrile, pH 10) over 90 min with a flow rate of 1 mL/min.  The samples were separated into 20 fractions on a C18 column with HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Tandem mass spectra were searched for computational analysis in Homo sapiens protein database using the Proteome Discoverer software. The Sequest algorithm was used to search with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. An FDR of less than 1% and with at least 2 unique peptides were used in identifying and quantifying proteins. The analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) model was hired for further adjusting for age. The protein threshold was set to achieve 95% confidence, P value and fold change cut-offs were used to classify as up-regulated protein (p<0.01 and fold-change>2) or down-regulated protein (p<0.01 and fold-change<0.5). Volcano plot and hierarchical cluster analysis were performed with the software R (Version: 3.5.1).

### Data Protocol
DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8(https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) was used to conduct enrichment analysis of DEPs and module proteins, and the underlying mechanism was identified in the context of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways and gene ontology (GO) terms, which consists of cellular components(CC), molecular functions(MF) and biological processes(BP). p value <0.05 and gene count ≥2.0 were set as the threshold of significance. Protein-protein interaction(PPI) network was constructed using STRING(https://string-db.org/). Based on the STRING database, the interaction network was then visualized by Cytoscape software 3.0. Moreover, Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) app in Cytoscape was utilized to screen the entire PPI network for hub genes modules, with degree cutoff ≥2, node score cut-off ≥0.2, K-Core ≥2 and Max Depth = 100.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dentate gyrus, Quantitative proteomics, Hippocampal sclerosis, Temporal lobe epilepsy, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University 
Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University

### Submitter
Hongyu Long

### Lab Head
Dr Hongyu Long
Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University


