### Accession
PXD001773

### Title
Urine proteome analysis in the differential diagnostics of respiratory tract pathology in newbornes under intensive care

### Description
To investigate the possibility of using modern mass spectrometric methods for forecasting, early diagnosis of the causes of respiratory diseases, as well as monitoring the effectiveness of treatment of newborns with very low and extremely low birth weight infants. Results: Based on the analysis of literature data and the results of their own research into the application of modern mass spectrometric methods for early diagnosis of the causes of respiratory disease in preterm infants developed the design of the proteomic analysis of urine of infants revealed characteristic differences of proteome urine of newborn children with respiratory disorders of various origins

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, urine samples (1 mL) were concentrated up to 50 µl using Vivaspin 4, 10 kDa, PES, tube ("Sartogosm", Russian Federation) at 1000 g for 1 h at 40C and resuspended in reduction buffer containing 0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 2.5 mM EDTA, 8 M urea up to normalized total protein concentration (Bradford Protein Kit, Bio-Rad) of 10 mg/mL. After reduction (dithiothreitol, 0.1 M, 4 h, 370C) and alkylation (iodoacetamide, 0.05 M, room temperature, 15 min in darkness) preparation steps, proteins were precipitated by addition of 10 volumes of acetone containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and overnight incubation at –200C. After 2 steps of washing in 96% ethanol of the sediment (12000 g, 10 min, 40C) and drying at 450C, proteins were resuspended in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (1 mg/mL) and digested with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, USA) (enzyme/protein 1:100, 6 h, 370C)

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the Max Quant software, version 1.1.1.2 [19, 20]. For MS/MS peak list file construction, up to top 6 peaks per 100 Da window were included for database searching. The generated peak lists were searched against the concatenated forward and reverse version of the international protein index (IPI) human database (version 3.82; released 06.04.2011; 92104 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications for the database search. The initial mass tolerance for full scans was 7 ppm and 0.5 kDa for MS/MS.  The cutoff false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was set to 0.01. The minimal peptide score was 24. We required at least two peptide identifications per protein, of which at least one peptide had to be unique to the protein group. Label free analysis was performed in MaxQuant for protein quantitation. This included quantification of peptides recognized on the basis of mass and retention time but identified in other LC MS/MS runs (“match between the runs” option in MaxQuant)

### Publication Abstract
A serious problem during intensive care and nursing of premature infants is the invasiveness of many examination methods. Urine is an excellent source of potential biomarkers due to the safety of the collection procedure. The purpose of this study was to determine the features specific for the urine proteome of preterm newborns and their changes under respiratory pathologies of infectious and non-infectious origin. The urine proteome of 37 preterm neonates with respiratory diseases and 10 full-term newborns as a control group were investigated using the LC-MS/MS method. The total number of identified proteins and unique peptides was 813 and 3672 respectively. In order to further specify the defined infant-specific dataset these proteins were compared with urine proteome of healthy adults (11 men and 11 pregnant women) resulting in 94 proteins found only in infants. Pairwise analysis performed for label-free proteomic data revealed 36 proteins which reliably distinguished newborns with respiratory disorders of infectious genesis from those with non-infectious pathologies, including: proteins involved in cell adhesion (CDH-2,-5,-11, NCAM1, TRY1, DSG2), metabolism (LAMP1, AGRN, TPP1, GPX3, APOD, CUBN, IDH1), regulation of enzymatic activity (SERPINA4, VASN, GAPDH), inflammatory and stress response (CD55, CD 93, NGAL, HP, TNFR, LCN2, AGT, S100P, SERPINA1/C1/B1/F1).

### Keywords
Urine, Very low birth weight, Preterm newborn, Neonatal intensive care, Proteome, Respiratory tract disorders

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics and Metabolomics in Reproduction V. I. Kulakov Research Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Perinatology, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia
Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology

### Submitter
Vladimir Naumov

### Lab Head
Dr Starodubtseva Nataliia Leonidovna
Laboratory of Proteomics and Metabolomics in Reproduction V. I. Kulakov Research Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Perinatology, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia


