### Accession
PXD027642

### Title
human embryo proteome reprogramming by endometrial extracellular vesicles

### Description
- Endometrial sEV protein cargo are hormonally regulated – EP treated sEVs are enriched in key players of embryo implantation  - Endometrial sEVs are taken up by recipient trophectoderm cells - Endometrial EP-sEVs (or secretory phase sEVs) promote trophectoderm cell invasion via MAPK signalling pathway  - Invasion-related proteins are enriched on Tsc cell surface following EP-sEV treatment

### Sample Protocol
Global mass spectrometry-based proteomics of Ishikawa cells or derived sEVs, or trophectoderm treated cells,  (10 g in 50 L) was performed as previously described(4) using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method(5). Briefly, samples were solubilised in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, incubated at 95 °C for 5 mins and cooled. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 25 °C followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM DTT. Magnetic beads were prepared by mixing SpeedBeads™ magnetic carboxylate modified particles (65152105050250, 45152105050250, Cytiva) at 1:1 (v:v) ratio and washing twice with 200 µL MS-water. Magnetic beads were reconstituted to a final concentration of 100 µg/µl. Magnetic beads were added to the samples at 10:1 beads-to-protein ratio and 100% ethanol (EA043, ChemSupply) added for a final concentration of 50% ethanol (v/v). Protein-bound magnetic beads were washed three times with 200 µl of 80% ethanol and reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio for 16 h at 37 °C with constant shaking (1000 rpm). The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid (pH ~1-2) and centrifuged at 20,000g for 1 min. The peptide digests were frozen at -80°C and dried by vacuum centrifugation (Savant SPD121P, Thermo Scientific), reconstituted in 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid, and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay (23290, Thermo Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instruction.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda(11) to perform peptide identification and quantification as described(6). Database search was with the Andromeda search engine against the Human-only (UniProt #74,823 entries) canonical sequence database (Jan 2020) with a contaminants database was employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term) and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Differential search parameters included: TMT tags on peptide N terminus / lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification; for phosphoproteome analysis Phospho (STY) was employed; for biotin surface proteome analysis additional Thioacyl (DSP) (C(3)H(4)OS)) was employed.  Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine using trypsin protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. Where applicable ‘match between run algorithm’ in MaxQuant(12) and label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein group or phosphorylation site tables were imported into Perseus (v1.4.0.2) for analysis, with contaminants and reverse peptides removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Embryo, Reprogramming, Proteome, Endometrium, Trophectomderm

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute


