### Accession
PXD035420

### Title
Substrate spectrum of PPM1D in the cellular response to DNA double strand breaks

### Description
PPM1D (also known as WIP1) is a p53-regulated protein phosphatase that modulates the DNA damage response (DDR) by dephosphorylation of DDR proteins. Amplification of PPM1D gene or gain-of-function mutations are commonly found in cancer. Here, we employed chemical inhibition of PPM1D and quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to identify the substrates of PPM1D upon induction of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) by topoisomerase II poison etoposide. We identified 73 putative PPM1D substrates that are involved in DNA repair, regulation of transcription and RNA processing. One third of DSB-induced S/TQ phosphorylation sites are dephosphorylated by PPM1D, demonstrating that PPM1D only partially counteracts ATM/ATR/DNA-PK signaling. PPM1D-targeted phosphorylation sites are found in a specific amino acid sequence motif that is characterized by glutamic acid residues, high intrinsic disorder and poor evolutionary conservation. We identified a functionally uncharacterized protein Kanadaptin as ATM and PPM1D substrate upon DSB induction. We propose that PPM1D plays a role during the response to DSBs formation by regulating the phosphorylation of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins in intrinsically disordered regions.

### Sample Protocol
PPM1D Phosphoproteome Cells were pre-treated with GSK2830371 (Selleckchem) for 1.5 hours and subsequently treated with 10 µM etoposide for 1 hour. Cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium flouride. NaCl was added to a final concentration of 500 mM and lysates were briefly sonicated to release the chromatin-bound proteins. Subsequently, lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16000×g for 15 min and protein concentrations were estimated using QuickStart Bradford Protein assay (BioRad). Proteins were precipitated in 4-fold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (Nielsen et al, 2008). Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O) were incubated with 10 mg of TiO2 spheres (GL sciences) for 1 hour. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). The eluates were concentrated to remove NH4OH and peptides were fractionated in 6 fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described. Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in 05/2016 using Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
PPM1D is a p53-regulated protein phosphatase that modulates the DNA damage response (DDR) and is frequently altered in cancer. Here, we employed chemical inhibition of PPM1D and quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to identify the substrates of PPM1D upon induction of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by etoposide. We identified 73 putative PPM1D substrates that are involved in DNA repair, regulation of transcription, and RNA processing. One-third of DSB-induced S/TQ phosphorylation sites are dephosphorylated by PPM1D, demonstrating that PPM1D only partially counteracts ATM/ATR/DNA-PK signaling. PPM1D-targeted phosphorylation sites are found in a specific amino acid sequence motif that is characterized by glutamic acid residues, high intrinsic disorder, and poor evolutionary conservation. We identified a functionally uncharacterized protein Kanadaptin as ATM and PPM1D substrate upon DSB induction. We propose that PPM1D plays a role during the response to DSBs by regulating the phosphorylation of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins in intrinsically disordered regions.

### Keywords
Dna damage, Wip1, Atm, Ppm1d, Double strand breaks, Kanadaptin

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


