### Accession
PXD018265

### Title
The ShcA adapter protein cooperates with LPP to mediate adhesion dynamics and invadopodia formation

### Description
ShcA and Lipoma Preferred Partner (LPP) are mediators of TGFβ-induced breast cancer cell migration and invasion. Reduced expression of either protein results in diminished breast cancer lung metastasis. Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy reveals that TGFβ enhances the assembly and disassembly rates of paxillincontaining adhesions in a ShcA-dependent manner through the phosphorylation of specific ShcA tyrosine residues (Y239/Y240/Y313). Using a BioID proximity labeling approach, we show that ShcA exists in a complex with a variety of actin cytoskeletal proteins, including paxillin and LPP. Consistent with a functional interaction between ShcA and LPP, TGFβ-induced LPP localization to adhesions depends on ShcA. Once localized to cellular adhesions, LPP is required to mediate TGFβ-induced cell migration and adhesion dynamics. Mutations that impair LPP localization to adhesions (mLIM1) or interaction with the actin cytoskeleton via α-actinin (ΔABD) abrogate migratory responses to TGFβ. Live-cell TIRF microscopy reveals that ShcA clustering at the cell membrane precedes LPP recruitment. We hypothesize that ShcA promotes the formation of small, dynamic adhesions in the presence of TGFβ by acting as a nucleator of focal complex formation. Finally, we define a previously unknown function for ShcA in the formation of invadopodia, a process that also requires LPP. Our data reveals that ShcA controls the formation and function of two key cellular structures required for breast cancer metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
MMTV/MT cells were starved overnight and subsequently treated with 50 μM biotin supplemented 10% FBS/DMEM growth media for 24 h. Two 15 cm plates of cells at 70% confluency were used per pull-down sample. The next day, cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS, and centrifuged at 250 x g for 5 mins. Cells collected from each 15 cm plate were lysed with 700 μL RIPA lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 U benzonase, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate for 1 h on ice. Cells were vortexed every 15 mins for 10 s. Lysates were sonicated at 50% amplitude 2 times for 10 s on ice. Lysates were centrifuged at maximum speed for 30 mins at 4°C. Pierce Avidin agarose beads (30 μL bead volume per pulldown; Cat. no.: 20219, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used on supernatants from the centrifuged lysates (6% by volume of the supernatant was used as input control). Samples were rotated end-over-end for 3 h at 4°C. Afterwards, beads were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 1 min at 4°C and washed with RIPA buffer three times. For immunoblots: both input and pull-down samples were incubated with protein loading dye for 10 mins at 95°C. Elution for MS: following the wash with RIPA buffer, samples were washed twice with LIGHT buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 using HPLC grade water) and eluted with 150 μL 50 mM H3PO4 (pH 1.5-2) on ice for 10 mins. Supernatants were collected. This was repeated two more times and all three elutions were pooled and kept in -80°C until mass spectrometry analysis. Three technical replicates per condition were used for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Each BioID experiment was performed in triplicate, on different days and using cells from successive passages. In order to distinguish background from bona fide protein associations, Myc-BirA (no biotin) and Myc-ShcA-WT-BirA (no biotin) were used as controls to perform SAINT analyses (48,116). Peptide identification was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data dependent acquisition of mass spectra was performed using Xcalibur (v. 3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scan mass spectra (350 to 1800 m/z) were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 using a maximum injection time of 50 ms and automatic gain control target of 4e5. The quadrupole analyzer allowed for the isolation of selected ions in a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with 35% energy. The resulting fragments were detected by the linear ion trap at a rapid scan rate. Dynamic exclusion of previously fragmented peptides was set for a period of 20 seconds and a tolerance of 10 ppm. All MS/MS peak lists were generated using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with default parameters. MGF sample files were analyzed using Mascot (v. 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK). The software was programmed to search against Uniprot Mus musculus database (November 2014, 84646 entries) assuming trypsin digestion. Searches were carried out with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Two mis-cleavages were allowed. Validation of the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was carried out using Scaffold software (v. 4.7.5; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Criteria for protein identifications were fixed at greater than 99% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1% and required at least 1 peptide to be identified. The Protein Prophet algorithm was used to assign peptide and protein probabilities (117,118). For proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone, the principle of parsimony was applied. After being exported from Scaffold, spectral counts were formatted according to SAINT algorithm guidelines (48,49). For each prey, the SAINT express statistical analyses were carried out by using the maximal spectral count value from Myc-BirA (no biotin) or Myc-ShcA-WT-BirA (no biotin) as controls. Proteins with a SAINT score ≥0.9 were deemed genuine interactors.

### Publication Abstract
SHC adaptor protein (SHCA) and lipoma-preferred partner (LPP) mediate transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;)-induced breast cancer cell migration and invasion. Reduced expression of either protein diminishes breast cancer lung metastasis, but the reason for this effect is unclear. Here, using total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy, we found that TGF&#x3b2; enhanced the assembly and disassembly rates of paxillin-containing adhesions in an SHCA-dependent manner through the phosphorylation of the specific SHCA tyrosine residues Tyr-239, Tyr-240, and Tyr-313. Using a BioID proximity labeling approach, we show that SHCA exists in a complex with a variety of actin cytoskeletal proteins, including paxillin and LPP. Consistent with a functional interaction between SHCA and LPP, TGF&#x3b2;-induced LPP localization to cellular adhesions depended on SHCA. Once localized to the adhesions, LPP was required for TGF&#x3b2;-induced increases in cell migration and adhesion dynamics. Mutations that impaired LPP localization to adhesions (mLIM1) or impeded interactions with the actin cytoskeleton via &#x3b1;-actinin (&#x394;ABD) abrogated migratory responses to TGF&#x3b2;. Live-cell TIRF microscopy revealed that SHCA clustering at the cell membrane preceded LPP recruitment. We therefore hypothesize that, in the presence of TGF&#x3b2;, SHCA promotes the formation of small, dynamic adhesions by acting as a nucleator of focal complex formation. Finally, we defined a previously unknown function for SHCA in the formation of invadopodia, a process that also required LPP. Our results reveal that SHCA controls the formation and function of adhesions and invadopodia, two key cellular structures required for breast cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Adaptor, Shca, Adhesion, Invasion

### Affiliations
CRC quebec
Department of Physiology, McGill University, Advanced BioImaging Facility (ABIF), McGill University

### Submitter
Kevin Jacquet

### Lab Head
Dr Claire M. Brown
Department of Physiology, McGill University, Advanced BioImaging Facility (ABIF), McGill University


