### Accession
PXD025796

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Samples Labeled with Multiplex iqPIR Cross-Linkers

### Description
The isobaric quantitative protein interaction reporter (iqPIR) has now been extended to six channels, enabling quantitation of cross-links from six different samples simultaneously.  To analyze data for such cross-linkers, the two-channel mode of quantitative analysis was extended to accommodate any number of channels with defined isotope peak offsets.  The HeLa 1:1:1:1:1 data was used for the development of the quantitation method of the 6-plex iqPIR.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 106 cells into 150 mm culture dishes with 20 ml of DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Valley Biomedical) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Fisher Scientific). Cells were harvested with 5 mL of PBS 1× with 5 mM EDTA for 3 min, at 37 °C. Cells were washed once with a solution containing 1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2 and twice with PBS 1×, pelleted each time by centrifugation at 300 × g for 3 min. HeLa cells from six different confluent 150 mm culture dishes were crosslinked individually with each of the six isobaric iqPIR crosslinkers (808, 812, 816, 818, 822, and 826). Briefly, 10 mM of each crosslinker in 500 μL of crosslinker buffer (170 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.0) was added to each culture dish and the reaction happened for 30 min, in room temperature with constant shaking. The crosslinked cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 300 × g for 3 min and washed 3 times with PBS 1×. This was followed by LC-MS analysis and data analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol is described by Keller et al., 2021 (in preparation).

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has emerged as a useful technique for interrogating protein structures and interactions. When combined with quantitative proteomics strategies, protein conformational and interaction dynamics can be probed. Quantitative XL-MS has been demonstrated with the use of stable isotopes incorporated metabolically or into the cross-linker molecules. Isotope-labeled cross-linkers have primarily utilized deuterium and rely on MS1-based quantitation of precursor ion extracted ion chromatograms. Recently the development and application of isobaric quantitative protein interaction reporter (iqPIR) cross-linkers were reported, which utilize <sup>13</sup>C and <sup>15</sup>N isotope labels. Quantitation is accomplished using relative fragment ion isotope abundances in tandem mass spectra. Here we describe the synthesis and initial evaluation of a multiplexed set of iqPIR molecules, allowing for up to six cross-linked samples to be quantified simultaneously. To analyze data for such cross-linkers, the two-channel mode of iqPIR quantitative analysis was adapted to accommodate any number of channels with defined ion isotope peak mass offsets. The summed ion peak intensities in the overlapping channel isotope envelopes are apportioned among the channels to minimize the difference with respect to the predicted ion isotope envelopes. The result is accurate and reproducible relative quantitation enabling direct comparison among six differentially labeled cross-linked samples. The approach described here is generally extensible for the iqPIR strategy, accommodating future iqPIR reagent design, and enables large-scale <i>in vivo</i> quantitative XL-MS investigation of the interactome.

### Keywords
Multiplex iqpir, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry, Quantitative analysis

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington, Genome Sciences, Bruce Lab.

### Submitter
Helisa Wippel

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
University of Washington, Genome Sciences, Bruce Lab.


