### Accession
PXD026412

### Title
FIRST DETECTION OF SARS-COV-2 PROTEINS IN WASTEWATER SAMPLES BY MASS SPECTROMETRY

### Description
On March 12, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 as a global pandemic. COVID-19 is produced by a novel β-coronavirus known as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [1]. Several studies have detected SARS-CoV-2 RNA in urine, feces, and other biofluids from both symptomatic and asymptomatic people with COVID-19 [2], suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 RNA could be detected in human wastewater [3]. Thus, wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) is now used as an approach to monitor COVID-19 prevalence in many different places around the world [4-10] . Reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) is the most common SARS-CoV-2 detection method in WBE, but there are other methods for viral biomolecule detection that could work as well. The aim of this study was to evaluate the presence of SARS-CoV-2 proteins in untreated wastewater (WW) influents collected from six wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), from Durham Region, Ontario, Canada, using a LC-MS/MS-based proteomics approach. We identified many SARS-CoV-2 proteins in these wastewater samples, with peptides from pp1ab being the most consistently detected and with consistent abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Precipitation and Digestion Twenty-four, 24-hour composite influent samples from each of the three wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) from Durham Region (Ontario, Canada) were obtained over the course of 15 weeks – for a total of 171 samples across all sampling times and locations. Wastewaters from 4 municipalities are treated by these three WWTPs, although the boundaries of the wastewater catchments do necessarily correspond to a single municipality. The WWTP and municipalities were related as follows:  WWTP1 – Whitby (population = 135,556); and WWTP2 – Oshawa (population = 170,071. In the present study, all the samples were collected as “fresh” (unpasteurized) 24-hr composite samples. We added 50 mL of acetone (4 °C) to 50 mL of the wastewater and stored overnight at -20 °C to precipitate proteins from the liquid phase. The samples were then centrifuged for 15 min at 4000 rpm. After centrifugation, we carefully removed and discarded the supernatant, and the pellet was transferred to a low-retention 1.5 mL micro-centrifuge tube, and then left in the fume hood for 60 minutes to allow any remaining acetone to evaporate. We then re-suspended the pellet in 50 L of a 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) (CAS number 15715-58-9 1.0M solution, Sigma-Aldrich) and continued to reduce, alkylate, and digest the proteins in the sample into peptides using a previously described method [35]. LC-MS/MS Peptide Analysis Peptides were identified with an Agilent 1260 Infinity Binary Pump HPLC coupled to a quadrupole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer (Agilent 6545 LC-QTOF). The samples were loaded onto the separation column (Agilent ZORBAX 300SB-C18, Micro Bore Rapid Resolution 1.0 x 50 mm 3.5-Micron) and eluted with a 50-minute gradient (Solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in 95:5 water: acetonitrile; Solvent B = 0.1% formic acid in 95:5 acetonitrile: water; 0-2 mins 2% Solvent B; 2-22 mins 40% Solvent B; 22-27 mins 60% Solvent B; 27-32 mins 85% Solvent B; 32-50 mins 2% Solvent B.). The column was kept at 40 °C, with a flow rate set at 0.100 L/min, and the autosampler compartment was kept at 6 °C. Auto MSMS analysis was performed and after peptides were identified by database search, the m/z and retention time of each was added to an inclusion list for targeted MS/MS analysis. Specific instrumental settings and acquisition method details are provided in the supplemental materials.

### Data Protocol
Database search and analysis of identified proteins. For the viral protein identification, peptide spectral data was extracted, filtered, and searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot SARS-CoV-2 database (downloaded September 2020). The database contained fourteen SARS-CoV-2 proteins. The search was set in Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench (Agilent G2721AA/G2733AA) using an automated workflow to search for peptide sequence matches. Protein hits were initially filtered using peptide score > 5, and %SPI > 60%. The complete data base (Table S1) was initially validated using a less stringent filter, but we validated those results with a stronger one with a FDR <1% (Table S2).

### Publication Abstract
The recent COVID-19 pandemic overwhelmed the health system worldwide, and there was a need to track outbreaks and try to use this information as an early warning system. Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) enabled detection of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in wastewater treatment plant influents. Until now, the most used technique for this detection has been the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)-based quantification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA. This study proposes a mass spectrometry (MS)-based method that detected specific SARS-CoV-2 proteins in wastewater, 5 and 6 days ahead of the case data for two municipalities. We identified unique peptides of eight proteins related to the SARS-CoV-2 virus and COVID-19 infection. We detected the nonstructural protein (NSP) pp1ab (transcribed after host cell infection) most frequently in all of the samples. As a result, we suspect that in the active cases of COVID-19, the pp1ab protein is present in high abundance in the urine and feces and that this protein could be used as an alternative biomarker. These data were collected before mass vaccination occurred in the population.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry, Covid-19, Proteomics, Wastewater

### Affiliations
Ontario Tech University
Aquatic Omics Lab, Science department, Ontario Tech University

### Submitter
Denina Simmons

### Lab Head
Dr Denina Simmons
Aquatic Omics Lab, Science department, Ontario Tech University


