### Accession
PXD032748

### Title
Comparative proteomic of Trypanosoma cruzi strains

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease, is a genetically diverse with TcI being the most widespread lineage in the Americas.  The protein expression dynamics allows unravel the  biological phenomena of pathogens such as disease development and evolution.  A large number of studies have shown a direct relationship between genetic variability and the biological characteristics of T. cruzi. However, much remains to be explored regarding the impact of gene expression on the development and evolution of Chagas disease.  Two-dimensional (2D) electrophoresis and mass-spectrometry were employed to characterize the global protein expression patterns of epimastigotes from four distinct TcI strains, which display different growth kinetics. Biological differences were identified and confirmed throug metabolic and morphometric assays. Statistical tests (parametric or non-parametric test, as appropriate for the experiment) were used to assess the significance of the observed differences. The Ascending hierarchical classification analysis shows two clusters, that were congruent with their growth kinetics.  The proteins expressed in one or the other cluster were identified by mass spectrometry. These proteins were evaluated by independent biological assays, which showed that the parasite’s metabolic activity and morphology is significantly different between the two clusters.  We conclude that the protein expression patterns displayed by epimastigotes from fast/slow growth TcI strains are correlated with various biological parameters, including intensity of metabolic activity, metabolic fuel usage and resistance to oxidative stress, as well as morphological characteristics, such as length of the flagellum.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (50 μg) were labeled with 200 pmol of Cy3 or Cy5, and Cy2 was used as an internal calibrator. For each gel, Immobiline DryStrip strips 24 cm, pH 3–10 NL were used. Isoelectric focusing was carried out using the IEF system (IPGphor, Pharmacia Biotech, Amersham Biosciences). Gels were scanned in a Typhon 9400-Variables Mode Imager, using Image Quant software. Images from stained gels were analysed using the Samespots software v6 (Non-linear Dynamics, UK), and variant proteins were analyzed. Protein spots were excised from preparative 2D gels and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion. Tryptic digestion of in-gel proteins was performed according to the Shevchenko modified protocol (Wilm et al. 1996). Digested proteins were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in formic acid (0.1%, buffer A), separated and analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All spectra were searched against the Trypanosoma cruzi taxonomy from UniProtKB database (https://www.uniprot.org/, release 2014_04) using the Proteome Discoverer software v 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot v 2.4 algorithm (http://www.matrixscience.com/) with trypsin enzyme specificity and one trypsin missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed cystein modification and oxidation was set as variable methionine modification for searches. A peptide mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were allowed for identification (filter: mascot p<0.01, 1 peptide/protein and protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease, is a genetically and phenotypically diverse species, divided into 5 main phylogenetic lineages (TcI to TcVI). TcI is the most widespread lineage in the Americas. Proteomics is a suitable tool to study the global protein expression dynamics in pathogens. Previous proteomic studies have revealed a link between (i) the genetic variability; (ii) the protein expression; and (iii) the biological characteristics of T. cruzi. Here, two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) and mass spectrometry were used to characterize the overall protein expression profiles of epimastigotes from four distinct TcI strains displaying different growth kinetics. Ascending hierarchical clustering analysis based on the global 2DE protein expression profiles grouped the strains under study into two clusters that were congruent with their fast or slow growth kinetics. A subset of proteins differentially expressed by the strains in each group were identified by mass spectrometry. Biological differences between the two groups, including use of glucose as an energy source, flagellum length, and metabolic activity, were predicted by proteomic analysis and confirmed by metabolic tests and microscopic measurements performed on the epimastigotes of each strain. Our results show that protein expression profiles are correlated with parasite phenotypes, which may in turn influence the parasite's virulence and transmission capacity.

### Keywords
Chagas disease, Growth kinetics

### Affiliations
Centro de Investigación para la Salud en América Latina, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Alfredo Costales Cordero
Centro de Investigación para la Salud en América Latina, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador


