### Accession
PXD033233

### Title
The novel role of hnRNP UL1 in rDNA transcription and rDNA repair in human cell nucleoli

### Description
hnRNP UL1 plays an important function in cell nuclei, where it is recruited to DNA damage sites and is involved in the repair of DNA double strand breaks. Furthermore, this protein is known as a transcriptional repressor of RNA polymerase II genes. In the present study, we have shown that hnRNP UL1 is also localized in the nucleoli. Revealing its function, we figured out that hnRNP UL1 stimulates rDNA gene transcription and may be involved in the transport of the proteins between the nucleolus and the nucleoplasm. Moreover, we observed that cells with hnRNP UL1 silencing are more sensitive to DNA damage, suggesting its role in rDNA repair pathways and nucleolar genome integrity. Indeed, we confirmed that hnRNP UL1 interacts with yH2A.X, RPA32, XRCC1, and Chk1 in cell nucleoli, suggesting its involvement in repairing of DNA damages.

### Sample Protocol
hnRNP UL1-interacting proteins were immunoprecipitated from  HEK293 cell lines with FLAG-hnRNP UL1 expression (HEK UL1 OE) using μMACS™ Epitope Tag Protein Isolation Kits (MACS molecular), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After IP, proteins were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) as follows: 100 μl of immunoprecipitated proteins were precipitated by adding of 50% TCA to the final concentration of 10% and Tween 20 to a final concentration of 0.5%. The mixture was incubated on ice for 30 min, followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 4,000 rpm at 4°C. Next, the pellet was washed once with cold 10% TCA and twice with cold 90% acetone, each time centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 rpm at 4°C. After last centrifugation, the supernatant was removed, and the pellet was air dried at room temperature. Protein pellets were subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ul of 0.1 ug/ul trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were applied in equal volumes of 20 ul to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch. A blank run ensuring absence of cross-contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.7, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.7) against the database of human protein deposited in Swissprot (version 03_2020, 20,443 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration. The rest of search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); instrument, HCD. The Decoy Mascot functionality was used for keeping FDR for peptide identifications below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
hnRNP UL1 plays an important role in cell nuclei, where it is recruited to DNA damage sites and is involved in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Furthermore, this protein is known as a transcriptional repressor of RNA polymerase II genes. In the present study, we have shown that hnRNP UL1 is also localized in the nucleoli of human cells. Upon investigating its function, we found that hnRNP UL1 stimulates ribosomal DNA (rDNA) gene transcription. Moreover, we observed that cells with hnRNP UL1 silencing exhibited increased sensitivity to DNA damage. We also showed that hnRNP UL1 interacts with &#x3b3;H2A.X, RPA32, XRCC1, and Chk1 in cell nucleoli, suggesting its involvement in the repair of rDNA damage.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Nucleolus

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Department of Gene Expression, Laboratory of RNA Processing, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and Center for Advanced Technology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Marlena Cichocka
Department of Gene Expression, Laboratory of RNA Processing, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and Center for Advanced Technology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poland


