### Accession
PXD001539

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of human pancreatic beta cells

### Description
Outline: using label-free alternate-scanning LC-MS/MS, we compared the proteomic architecture of core functional pathways in pancreatic beta cells of human origin. Results: we quantified the relative molar abundance of 707 proteins mainly composed of functional pathways of metabolism, protein synthesis and cytoskeleton.

### Sample Protocol
Beta cell isolation Rats were housed according to the Belgian animal welfare regulations. Animal killing was kept to the strict minimum, after proper CO2-anesthesia. Use of animal cells and tissues was approved by the Commissie Proefdiergebruik (CPG) of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), for a project entitled "in vitro and in vivo markers for beta cell death and function” (CPG approval ID 07-274-3). Rat beta and islet non-beta cells consisted of ≥ 95% endocrine cells and < 2% exocrine cells. Beta cell preparations consisted of 90% insulin+, 3% glucagon+, 1% somatostatin+ and 2% pancreatic polypeptide+ cells; alpha cells contained 2% insulin+, 94% glucagon+, 1% somatostatin+ and 2% pancreatic polypeptide+ cells, as previously described (10;12). Human beta cells were used for research after approval by the Ethical Committee of the Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (B.U.N. 143201213515 and B.U.N.14320109289). They were obtained by dissociation of islet-enriched human pancreas fractions, followed by FACS-sorting according to cell size, granularity and zinc content, to an average insulin-positive purity of 60 ± 6 % (range: 53-68%). Protein extraction and trypsinization Cells were washed 3 times with PBS (4°C) and soluble protein was extracted in 50 µl 0.5% (w/v) RapiGest detergent in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA.) in the presence of Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switserland) and bovine DNAse II (Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany, 2 µg/mL) solution, followed by centrifugation (10,000 x g, 10 min) to remove cellular debris. 25 µl protein extract was reduced with 2.5 µl 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 60 min, followed by 3 subsequent washes with 400 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 µl 100 mM DTT using a 5 KDa cut-off membrane filter. This step removes protease inhibitors and most of reduced insulin molecules. Proteins were denatured by heating at 80 °C for 15 min, followed by 30 min at 60°C after addition of 2.5 µl 100 mM DTT and another 30 min at ambient temperature in the dark after addition of 2.5 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsinization was carried out overnight at 37°C (1:25 w/w trypsin ratio) in final volume of 100 µl. Finally, RapiGest detergent was removed by acidifying digest to pH = 2 with trifluoroacetic acid and incubation for 15 min at 37°C. LC-MS configuration Nanoscale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed with a NanoAcquity system (Waters). Samples were loaded on to a Symmetry C18 5 μm, 2 cm×180 μm trap column (Waters) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min prior to separation on a Bridged Ethyl Hybrid C18 1.7 μm, 25 cm×75 μm analytical reversed-phase column (Waters) by application of a 90 min gradient from 1% ACN and 0.1% formic acid to 40% ACN and 0.1% formic acid at a column flow rate of 0.25 μl/min. The column temperature was maintained at 35ºC. Analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt G2 Q-TOF (quadrupole time-of-flight) mass spectrometer (Waters) equipped with a nanolockspray source (Waters) fitted with a pico-tip emitter (New Objective) operated at a capillary voltage of approximately 3 kV. For all measurements, the mass spectrometer was operated in v-mode with a typical resolution of at least 20,000 full width at half maximum. All analyses were performed in positive mode ESI. The time-of-flight analyzer of the mass spectrometer was externally calibrated with a NaI mixture from m/z 50 to 1990. The collision gas used was argon, maintained at a constant pressure of 2.0×10−3 mbar (1 bar=100 kPa) in the collision cell. The lock mass, [Glu1]fibrinopeptide B, was delivered from the auxiliary pump of the NanoAcquity system with a concentration of 100 fmol/μl at 0.5 μl/min to the reference sprayer of the nanolockspray source. The data were post-acquisition lock-mass corrected using the monoisotopic mass of the doubly charged precursor of [Glu1]fibrinopeptide B, delivered through the reference sprayer, which was sampled every 120 s. Accurate mass precursor and fragment ion LC-MS data were collected in data independent, alternate scanning (LC-MSE) mode of acquisition (13;14)

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data processing and protein identification Continuum LC-MS data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER v2.5 (Waters Corporation). Protein identifications were obtained by searching databases of Rattus norvegicus databases (v15.12, 7,449 entries) and Homo Sapiens release 2011_11, 20335 entries). Sequence information of Alcohol dehydrogenase Saccharomyces cerevisiae was added to the databases to afford the ability to normalize the data sets and to estimate amounts and concentration [11] and that of known contaminant proteins (e.g. serum albumin Bos taurus and trypsin Sus scrofa). A decoy was generated on the fly with every database search experiment conducted to estimate the protein false positive rate of identification [43]. Data independent scanning protein identifications were accepted when more than three fragment ions per peptide, seven fragment ions per protein and more than 2 peptides per protein were identified, in at least one technical replicate per sample. Protein quantitation was only reported when the protein was detected in at least 2 out of 3 technical replicate of at least one biological replicate. Typical search criteria used for protein identification included automatic peptide and fragment ion tolerance settings (approximately 10 and 25 ppm, respectively), 1 allowed missed cleavage, fixed carbamidomethyl-cysteine modification and variable methionine oxidation. Raw data were expressed as ‘relative molar amount units’ calculated by dividing the determined molar amount for a given protein by the summed determined amount for all identified proteins as this accounts for both technical and biological variations (10;14;15).

### Publication Abstract
Data set description: This data set is composed by label-free alternate-scanning LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis human and Wistar rat pancreatic islet endocrine cells. The mass spectrometry data of the human and rat pancreatic beta cells and the resulting proteome search output from ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER (PLGS) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [1] via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD001539 (human) and PXD001816 (rat). From these mass spectrometry data, 'relative molar amount units' between cell types and across species were calculated. Biological relevance: These data provide a quantitative view on the unfractionated proteomes of human and rat beta and alpha cells. It is likely biased towards the proteins with higher molar abundance, relating to core functional pathways, but also includes several proteins with an islet-enriched expression. The quality of the cell preps is state-of-the-art, and the label-free quantitation is both precise and accurate, allowing detailed quantitative analysis.

### Keywords
Human, Islet beta cell, Biomarker, Lcmse, Proteomics, Diabetes, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer.
University Clinic Heidelberg.
German Cancer Research Center.
Im Neuenheimer Feld 581
Heidelberg, Germany.
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam

### Submitter
Gertjan Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr J.M.F.G. Aerts
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam


