### Accession
PXD039758

### Title
Quantitative proteomic study of total protein TMT labeling in 18 pig liver samples

### Description
Based on the work flow of quantitative proteomic analysis combined with TMT labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), this study carried out quantitative proteomic analysis on the liver tissues of Tibetan pigs and Yorkshire pigs in Shannan (about 4000 m), Linzhi (about 3000 m) and Jiuzhaigou (about 1500 m), and compared the differences of protein mass spectra between the liver of living pigs at three altitudes.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction: Take out the sample from - 80 ℃, weigh a proper amount of tissue sample into a liquid nitrogen precooled mortar, and add liquid nitrogen to fully grind it to powder. The samples in each group were added with 4 times the volume of powder cracking buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor), and then ultrasonically cracked. At 4 ℃, 12000 g was centrifuged for 10 min, the cell fragments were removed, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined using BCA kit. 2. Pancreatic enzymolysis: take the same amount of sample protein for enzymolysis, add appropriate amount of standard protein, and adjust the volume to the same with the lysate. Slowly add the final concentration of 20% TCA, swirl and mix, and precipitate at 4 ℃ for 2h. 4500g, centrifuge for 5min, discard the supernatant, wash and precipitate with precooled acetone for 2-3 times. After drying and sedimentation, add TEAB with a final concentration of 200 mM, break up the sedimentation by ultrasound, add trypsin in the ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m), and digest it overnight. Add dithiothreitol (DTT) to make its final concentration 5 mM, and reduce it at 56 ℃ for 30 minutes. After that, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to make its final concentration 11 mM, and incubated in dark at room temperature for 15 minutes. 3. TMT labeling: The peptide segment hydrolyzed by trypsin is desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and then freeze-dried in vacuum. Dissolve the peptide segment with 0.5 M TEAB and label the peptide segment according to the operating instructions of TMT kit. The simple operation is as follows: dissolve the labeled reagent with acetonitrile after thawing, incubate it at room temperature for 2 hours after mixing with the peptide segment, desalt the labeled peptide segment after mixing, and freeze dry it in vacuum. 4. HPLC grading: peptide segments were graded by high pH reverse phase HPLC, and the chromatographic column was Agilent 300Extend C18 (5 μ M particle size, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm long). The operation is as follows: the grading gradient of the peptide segment is 8% - 32% acetonitrile, pH 9, 60 components are separated in 60 minutes, and then the peptide segment is combined into 9 components. The combined components are subject to vacuum freeze-drying and subsequent operation. 5. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis: The peptide segment is dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A and separated by EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid phase system. Mobile phase A is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; Mobile phase B is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0-40 min, 6%~22% B; 40-54 min，22%~32%B； 54-57 min，32%~80%B； 57-60 min, 80% B, flow rate maintained at 500nL/min. The peptide segment is separated by the ultra-high performance liquid phase system and then injected into the NSI ion source for ionization and then into Q Active ™  HF-X mass spectrometry. The voltage of the ion source is set at 2.1 kV, and the parent ion of the peptide segment and its secondary fragments are detected and analyzed using high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of primary mass spectrometry is set to 350 - 1600 m/z, and the scanning resolution is set to 120000; The scanning range of the secondary mass spectrometry is set at a fixed starting point of 100 m/z, and the secondary scanning resolution is set at 30000. The data acquisition mode uses the data-dependent scanning (DDA) program, that is, after the first scan, the first 20 peptide parent ions with the highest signal intensity are selected to enter the HCD collision pool in turn to use 28% of the fragmentation energy for fragmentation, and the secondary mass spectrometry analysis is also carried out in turn. In order to improve the effective utilization of mass spectrometry, the automatic gain control (AGC) is set to 1E5, the signal threshold is set to 8.3E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time is set to 60 ms, and the dynamic elimination time of tandem mass spectrometry scanning is set to 30 s to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.

### Data Protocol
The secondary mass spectrometry data of this experiment were retrieved by Maxquant (v1.6.15.0). The database was Blast_Sus_scrofa_9823_PR_20201216.fasta (49792 sequences), and an inverse library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. The digestion mode was set as Trypsin/P. The number of missed cut sites was set as 2. The minimum peptide length was set as 7 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modification was set as 5. Mass error tolerance was set at 20 ppm for the primary parent ion and 4.5 ppm for the Main search, and 20 ppm for the secondary fragment ion. The cysteine alkylated Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as the fixed modification, and the variable modification was the oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N terminus of the protein, and demethylation Amidation (NQ). The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the FDR for both protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.The subcellular localization of identified proteins is predicted by WOLF PSORT (http://wolfpsort.seq.cbrc.jp/) with default settings.Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of the identified proteins were obtained from the UniProt-Gene Ontology Annotation database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA). The identified protein IDs were first converted to UniProt IDs and then mapped to GO IDs. Identified proteins in the UniProt-GOA database that were not matched with annotations were processed using InterProScan software for GO annotation based on protein sequence matching methods. For GO enrichment analysis, a two-tailed Fisher exact test was used to test the enrichment of the identified modified proteins for all proteins in the species database, and GO terms with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.The pathways involved in the identified proteins were annotated by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. By annotating the KEGG database descriptions of proteins using the online KAAS service tool and mapping the enriched KEGG pathways based on the annotation information from the online KEGG mapping tool.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, the differences in protein profiles between the livers of Shannan Tibetan pigs (SNT), Linzhi Tibetan pigs (LZT) and Jiuzhaigou Tibetan pigs (JZT) were comparatively analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry-labeling quantitative proteomics. A total of 6804 proteins were identified: 6471 were quantified and 1095 were screened as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Bioinformatics analysis results show that, compared with JZT livers, up-regulated DEPs in SNT and LZT livers mainly promoted hepatic detoxification through steroid hormone biosynthesis and participated in lipid metabolism to maintain body energy homeostasis, immune response and immune regulation, while down-regulated DEPs were mainly involved in lipid metabolism and immune regulation. Three proteases closely related to hepatic fatty acid oxidation were down-regulated in enzymatic activity, indicating higher levels of lipid oxidation in SNT and LZT livers than in JZT livers. Down-regulation of the expression of ten immunoglobulins suggests that JZT are more susceptible to autoimmune diseases. It is highly likely that these differences in lipid metabolism and immune-related proteins are in response to the ecological environment at different altitudes, and the findings contribute to the understanding of the potential molecular link between Tibetan pig livers and the environment.

### Keywords
Tibetan pig; liver; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
18139299932
Institute of Tibet Plateau Ecology, Tibet Agriculture and Animal Husbandry University, Linzhi 860000, China; The Provincial and Ministerial Co-founded Collaborative Innovation Center for R & D in Tibet Characteristic Agricultural and Animal Husbandry Resources, Linzhi 860000, China; Meat Processing Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, School of Food and Biological Engineering, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610106, China.

### Submitter
新萍 常

### Lab Head
Dr Fang Geng
Institute of Tibet Plateau Ecology, Tibet Agriculture and Animal Husbandry University, Linzhi 860000, China; The Provincial and Ministerial Co-founded Collaborative Innovation Center for R & D in Tibet Characteristic Agricultural and Animal Husbandry Resources, Linzhi 860000, China; Meat Processing Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, School of Food and Biological Engineering, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610106, China.


