### Accession
PXD037491

### Title
Optimization of Higher-Energy Collisional Dissociation Fragmentation Energies for Intact Protein-level Tandem Mass Tag Labeling

### Description
Isobaric chemical tag labeling (e.g., iTRAQ and TMT) is a commonly used approach in quantitative proteomics research. Typically, peptides are covalently labeled with isobaric chemical tags, and quantification is enabled through detection of low-mass reporter ions generated after MS2 fragmentation. Recently, we have introduced and optimized a platform for intact protein-level TMT labeling that demonstrated >90% labeling efficiency in complex sample with top-down proteomics. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) is a commonly utilized fragmentation method for peptide-level isobaric chemical tag labeling because it produces accurate reporter ion intensities and avoids the loss of low mass ions. HCD energies have been optimized for peptide-level isobaric chemical tag labeling; however, fragmentation energies have not been systematically evaluated for TMT-labeled intact proteins for both protein identification and quantitation. In this study, we report a systematic evaluation of normalized HCD fragmentation energies on TMT-labeled HeLa lysate with top-down proteomics. Our results suggested that reporter ions often require higher collisional energy for higher ion intensities while most of intact proteins fragment when normalized HCD energies are between 30% and 50%. We further demonstrated that a stepped HCD fragmentation scheme with energies between 30 and 50% resulted in the optimized quantitation and identification for TMT-labeled intact HeLa protein lysate by providing average reporter ion intensity as > 3.60 E4 and average PrSM as > 1000 PrSM counts with high confidence.

### Sample Protocol
<100 kDa HeLa cell lysate was prepared through 100 kDa MWCO and labeled with TMTzero with optimized conditions, followed by quenching by hydroxylamine. Then sample was centrifuged to remove any possible precipitation. 5ug TMT-labeled intact proteins were separated by a nanoRPLC through C2 column, then analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
An in-house python package (https://github.com/YantingGuo95/TMT-reporter-ion-extraction.git)was utilized to extract reporter ion peaks. TopPIC Suite was used for proteoform search against human protein database (UniProt, 2020-07-11, 20368 species). MASH Suite and ProSight Lite were used for manual interpretation and spectrum presentation.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric chemical tag labeling (e.g., TMT) is a commonly used approach in quantitative proteomics, and quantification is enabled through detection of low-mass reporter ions generated after MS2 fragmentation. Recently, we have introduced and optimized an intact protein-level TMT labeling platform that demonstrated &gt;90% labeling efficiency in complex samples with top-down proteomics. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) is commonly utilized for isobaric tag-labeled peptide fragmentation because it produces accurate reporter ion intensities and avoids loss of low mass ions. HCD energies have been optimized for isobaric tag labeled-peptides but have not been systematically evaluated for isobaric tag-labeled intact proteins. In this study, we report a systematic evaluation of normalized HCD fragmentation energies (NCEs) on TMT-labeled HeLa cell lysate using top-down proteomics. Our results suggested that reporter ions often result in higher ion intensities at higher NCEs. Optimal fragmentation of intact proteins for identification, however, required relatively lower NCE. We further demonstrated that a stepped NCE scheme with energies from 30% to 50% resulted in optimal quantification and identification of TMT-labeled HeLa proteins. These parameters resulted in an average reporter ion intensity of &#x223c;4E4 and average proteoform spectrum matches (PrSMs) of &gt;1000 per RPLC-MS/MS run with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff.

### Keywords
Protein-level tmt labeling; top-down proteomics; quantitative proteomics; hcd

### Affiliations
University of Oklahoma

### Submitter
Yanting Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Si Wu
University of Oklahoma


