### Accession
PXD013480

### Title
WDFY2 restrains matrix metalloproteinase secretion and cell invasion by controlling VAMP3-dependent recycling

### Description
The endosomal FYVE- and WD40-domain-containing protein WDFY2 has been assigned a function as tumor suppressor, but its functional mechanism has remained elusive. Here we have used confocal, widefield and super-resolution fluorescence microscopy to show that WDFY2 localizes to the base of retromer-containing endosomal tubules by a mechanism that involves recognition of highly curved membranes enriched in phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PtdIns3P) by the WDFY2 FYVE domain. Affinity purification and mass spectrometry identified the v-SNARE VAMP3 as an interaction partner of WDFY2, and cellular knockout of WDFY2 caused a strong redistribution of VAMP3 into small vesicles near the plasma membrane. This was accompanied by VAMP3-dependent increased secretion of the matrix metalloproteinase MT1-MMP and enhanced degradation of extracellular matrix, and increased cell invasion. WDFY2 is frequently lost in metastatic cancers, most predominantly in ovarian and prostate cancer. We propose that WDFY2 acts as a tumor suppressor by serving as a gatekeeper for VAMP3 recycling.

### Sample Protocol
hTERT-RPE1 cell lines stably expressing GFP or GFP-WDFY2 were cultured in 10 cm dishes up to 80 % confluence, were washed twice in PBS and then lysed in lysisbuffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 m NaCl, 0,25 % Triton X100, 1 mM DTT, 50 µM ZnCl2, 5 mM NaPPi, 20 mM NaF, 1x of phosphatase inhibitor 3 (S/T), phosphatase inhibitor 2 (Y) and protease inhibitor mix). Following centrifugation (15 min at 13,000g), cleared lysates were incubated with GFP-trap magnetic beads (ChromoTek) for 4 hours (rotating at 4 °C). Beads were subsequently washed thrice in lysis buffer and thrice in PBS.  Beads containing bound proteins reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56C followed by alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide in final volume of 100 µl for 1 hour at room temperature. The samples were digested over night with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) at 37C, using 1.8 µg trypsin. Reaction was quenched by adding 1 % trifluoracetic acid to the mixture. Peptides were cleaned for mass spectrometry by STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore)49.  All experiments were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Sunnyvale CA, USA) connected to a quadrupole – Orbitrap (QExactive) mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon/Thermo). For liquid chromatography separation we used an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA, USA) capillary of 25 cm bed length. The flow rate used was 0.3 μL/min, and the solvent gradient was 5 % B to 40 % B in 120 minutes, then 40-80 % B in 20 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 2 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid, whereas solvent B was aqueous 90 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1,750) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 ions in the quadruple). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense multiply-charged ions, up to ten, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the HCD cell using high-energy collision dissociation at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution at the Orbitrap cell. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds. General mass spectrometry conditions were: electrospray voltage, 2.0 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature of 250oC, heated column at 35oC, normalized HCD collision energy 25 %. Ion selection threshold was set to 1e5 counts. Isolation width of 3.0 Da was used.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 for protein identification50.  Parameters were set as follow: protein N-acetylation, methionine oxidation and pyroglutamate conversion of Glu and Gln as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was set with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. The Uniprot human database was used (downloaded august 2013). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates. We performed LFQ quantification without option match between runs and iBAQ quantification of proteins. Perseus software was used to perform filtering, imputation of missing values from a normal distribution, and permutation-based FDR corrected t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells secrete matrix metalloproteinases to remodel the extracellular matrix, which enables them to overcome tissue barriers and form metastases. The membrane-bound matrix metalloproteinase MT1-MMP (MMP14) is internalized by endocytosis and recycled in endosomal compartments. It is largely unknown how endosomal sorting and recycling of MT1-MMP are controlled. Here, we show that the endosomal protein WDFY2 controls the recycling of MT1-MMP. WDFY2 localizes to endosomal tubules by binding to membranes enriched in phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PtdIns3P). We identify the v-SNARE VAMP3 as an interaction partner of WDFY2. WDFY2 knockout causes a strong redistribution of VAMP3 into small vesicles near the plasma membrane. This is accompanied by increased, VAMP3-dependent secretion of MT1-MMP, enhanced degradation of extracellular matrix, and increased cell invasion. WDFY2 is frequently lost in metastatic cancers, most predominantly in ovarian and prostate cancer. We propose that WDFY2 acts as a tumor suppressor by serving as a gatekeeper for VAMP3 recycling.

### Keywords
Cell invasion, Wdfy2, Ptdins3p, Recycling, Vamp3, Endosome

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


