### Accession
PXD022090

### Title
the raw MS/MS data(Piglets testis LC-MS/MS analysis)

### Description
1α,25(OH)2VD3 is the most active form of VD3 in animals and it plays an important role in regulating mineral metabolism but also reproduction and immunity. Testes are the main reproductive organs of male mammals. In order to study the effect of 1α,25(OH)2VD3 on early testicular development, 140 weaned 21-day old piglets were selected. The piglets were randomly divided into four groups and were fed a commercial diet supplemented with 0, 1, 2 and 4 μg.kg-1 of 1α,25(OH)2VD3, provided as 1α,25(OH)2VD3-glycosides, 60 days after the start of the experiment, at piglet age 82 days, testes were harvested. The morphology and histology of early testicular development were assessed. In addition, the proteomic TMT/iTRAQ labeling technique was used to analyze the protein profile of the testes in each group. Western blotting was used to verify the target of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs). The results showed that of the identified 132715 peptides, 122755 were specific peptides. 7852 proteins, of which 6573 proteins contain quantitative information. Screening for DAPs was focused on proteins closely related to the regulation of the testicular development such as steroid hormone synthesis, steroid biosynthesis, peroxisome and fatty acid metabolism pathways. These results also indicate that 1α,25(OH)2VD3 is involved in the regulation of early testicular development in piglets. At the same time, these findings provide valuable information for the proteins involved in the regulation of testicular development, and help to better understand the mechanisms of 1α,25(OH)2VD3 in regulating the development of piglets’ testes. Significance: The early development of the testes of breeding boars is closely related to their lifetime fertility. Our research identifies potential signaling pathways and differentially abundant proteins associated with testicular development. These findings indicate that plants containing 1α,25(OH)2VD3-glycosides used as a nutritional ingredient may help early testicular development in breeding boars and reveal the regulatory mechanism of 1α,25(OH)2VD3 on testicular development.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 Protein Extraction The whole testis was cut into small pieces with surgical scissors, and the samples were grinded by liquid nitrogen into a cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 g at 4℃ for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2.6 Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the extracted testicular protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and was added at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion immediately after the overnight digestion. 2.7 TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The samples of the four treatments S1, S2, S3, and S4 were labeled with TMT isobaric labels 126, 127, 128, and 129, respectively. The TMT labeling procedure was carried out three times for the biological replicates. 2.8 HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 2.9 LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL min-1 on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
2.10 Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Proteome Sus scrofa database (https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/9823) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. 2.11 Bioinformatics Methods Gene Ontology (GO) annotation analysis of the differentially abundant proteins was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) and molecular function (MF). We performed statistics on the distribution of DAPs in GO secondary annotations of each group. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used to annotate protein pathways. All DAPs database accessions or sequences were searched against the STRING database (version 10.5) for protein-protein interactions (PPI). Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric known as “confidence score” to define interaction confidence. In this study, we used all interactions with a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”. We visualized the interaction networks of DAPs in each group. In order to clearly show the protein-protein interaction (PPI), we selected the top 50 proteins with the closest interaction and plotted the PPI network of the three comparison groups S2/S1, S3/S1, and S4/S1.

### Publication Abstract
1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub> is the most active form of VD3 in animals. It plays an important role in regulating mineral metabolism but also in reproduction. Testes are the main reproductive organs of male mammals. Our research aims to reveal the effect of 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub>-glycosides on development of early testes in piglets. 140 weaned 21-day old piglets were selected. The piglets were randomly divided into four groups and were fed a commercial diet supplemented with 0, 1, 2 and 4&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/kg of 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub>, provided as 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub>-glycosides. Sixty days after the start of the experiment, at piglet age 82&#xa0;days, testes were harvested. The morphology and histology of early testicular development were assessed. In addition, the proteomic TMT/iTRAQ labelling technique was used to analyse the protein profile of the testes in each group. Western blotting was applied to verify the target of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs). The analysis of morphology and histology of testes showed that a certain concentration of 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub>-glycosides had a positive and significant effect on testicular development. And the results of proteomics analysis showed that of the identified 132,715 peptides, 122,755 were unique peptides. 7852 proteins, of which 6573 proteins contain quantitative information. Screening for DAPs focused on proteins closely related to the regulation of testicular development such as steroid hormone synthesis, steroid biosynthesis, peroxisome and fatty acid metabolism pathways. These results indicated that 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub> is involved in the regulation of early testicular development in piglets. At the same time, these findings provide valuable information for the proteins involved in the regulation of testicular development, and help to better understand the mechanisms of 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>VD<sub>3</sub> in regulating the development of piglets' testes.

### Keywords
1α, 25(oh)2vd3-glycosides;piglet testes development;proteomics;tmt/itraq labeling;differentially abundant proteins

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, No.1 Shizishan Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan 430070, China National Engineering and Technology Research Center For Livestock; The Breeding Swine Quality Supervision and Testing Center, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China
College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, No.1 Shizishan Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan 430070, China
National Engineering and Technology Research Center For Livestock; The Breeding Swine Quality Supervision and Testing Center, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
wanghong liu

### Lab Head
Dr Wanghong Liu
College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, No.1 Shizishan Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan 430070, China National Engineering and Technology Research Center For Livestock; The Breeding Swine Quality Supervision and Testing Center, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China


