### Accession
PXD040902

### Title
Determination of protein monoclonal-antibody epitopes by a combination of  structural proteomics methods.

### Description
We use a combination of multiple structural proteomics techniques (differential photo-reactive surface modification, HDX, crosslinking and epitope excision/extraction) for the determination of the protein antigen epitopes for monoclonal antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
Free protein antigen (p24) and antigen-antibody (p24-MabE) complexes (Grifols) were crosslinked with the hetero-bifunctional crosslinking reagent SDA (Thermo).  Antigen-antibody complexes were crosslinked with DSS long-distance crosslinking reagent (Creative Molecules).The crosslinked proteins were enzymatically digested with trypsin and the resulting digests were analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap QE+ mass spectrometer (Thermo).  Photo-reactive surface modification data were extracted from the crosslinking datasets as dead-end modifications with hydrolyzed SDA reagent or intra-peptide SDA crosslinks.

### Data Protocol
Differentially modified residues were determined using label free quantitation analysis with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo).  Crosslinked residues were identified using XlinkX node of the Proteome Discoverer and DXMSMS Match.  Epitope extraction/excision was performed using MabE antibodies immobilized on Dynabeads M-270 Epoxy (Thermo).  Intact protein and bottom-up differential hydrogen-deuterium exchange analysis (HDX) was performed by using LC-MS on a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex), data were processed using MS Studio.

### Publication Abstract
Structural proteomics techniques are useful for the determination of protein interaction interfaces. Each technique provides orthogonal structural information on the structure and the location of protein interaction sites. Here, we have characterized a monoclonal antibody epitope for a protein antigen by a combination of differential photoreactive surface modification (SM), cross-linking (CL), differential hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX), and epitope extraction/excision. We found that experimental data from different approaches agree with each other in determining the epitope of the monoclonal antibody on the protein antigens using the HIV-1 p24-mAb E complex as an illustrative example. A combination of these multiple structural proteomics approaches results in a detailed picture of the interaction of the proteins and increases confidence in the determination of the final structure of the protein interaction interface. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD040902.

### Keywords
Surface modification, Crosslinking, Limited proteolysis, Hdx

### Affiliations
Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada3Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
SCPC, LDI, JGH, McGill University

### Submitter
Evgeniy Petrotchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Borchers
Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada3Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


