### Accession
PXD023602

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals that a syntenin-deficient microenvironment educates AML for aggressiveness

### Description
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is characterized by the clonal expansion of immature myeloblasts originating from leukemic stem cells (LSCs) niched within the bone marrow. Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC) and tumor-stroma interactions play a prominent role in the evolution of this disease. BMSC-mediated protection of leukemic cells involves several mechanisms, including interactions between adhesion molecules, the secretion of cytokines/chemokines and the release of extracellular vesicles produced by the surrounding non-haemopoietic BM cells. Recent studies even suggest that autophagy in the tumor stroma is associated with leukemia progression, survival and resistance. Thus, it seems widely evident that the microenvironment profile affects the prognosis and influences the efficacy of anti-cancer therapies. Yet, although widely explored, the crosstalk between leukemic and stromal cells remains poorly understood. Syntenin (directing endocytosed SDC and receptor cargo back to cell surfaces and/or to endosomal intraluminal vesicles and exosomes) is known to coordinate inter-cellular communications. Using syntenin-knockout mice, we aimed to clarify the role of environmental-syntenin in the progression of AML, a disease in which the role of (tumor/host) syntenin was not yet investigated. To address the role of host-syntenin in AML, I extensively used the mouse FLB1 AML-like model (generous gift of O. Herault, Tours).  Strikingly, FLB1 cells show a marked gain in aggressiveness when serially transplanted a syntenin-KO host. This aggressive behavior is cell-autonomous, as not reversed by back transplantation into WT hosts. Moreover, ‘aggressive’ FLB1 blasts, raised by education in a syntenin-negative in vivo background, are able to survive and grow in vitro in the absence of stroma, suggesting the cell-autonomous activation of survival pathways. Surprisingly, this gain of aggressiveness is not accompanied by a noticeable morphotypic or transcriptomic signature. However using quantitative proteomics we highlighted altered mRNA translational control. Aggressive FLB1 show a significant up-regulation of several factors, but most marked for EEF1A2, previously shown to have pro-oncogenic activities in various cancers..Globally, these findings are also consistent with the emerging notion that altered mRNA translational control is a critical factor in cancer development and progression.

### Sample Protocol
FLB1 cells, isolated after 4 rounds of serial transplantation from five WT and KO mice for each condition, were sorted by flow cytometry (BDFACs ARIA III) using CD45.1 and CD45.2 antibodies. Two million of CD45.1+ cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and analyzed by mass spectrometry as described below. Equal amounts of protein (i.e. around 100µg) were aliquoted and adjusted to 100 µl using 100 mM TEAB. Proteins were reduced using TCEP and then alkylated using iodoacetamide as mentioned in the TMT mass tag labelling instructions (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were precipitated using six volumes of cold acetone at -20°C overnight. The pellet was then suspended in 100 mM TEAB and digested with 2.5µg Trypsin (overnight at 37°C, Promega). Peptides were labelled with TMT reagents as described in the TMT labelling instructions (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, samples were transferred to TMT reagents reconstituted using 40ul of anhydrous acetonitrile and then incubated at room temperature for one hour. Five biological replicates for both conditions, i.e.  PWT and PKO FLB1, were distributed in the ten TMT channels. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 15 min. Labelled peptides were mixed, and dried to remove organic solvent prior to clean-up via Sep-Pak (50 mg C18 SepPak; Waters). Labeled peptide mixtures were separated in 80 fractions via high-pH reversed phase chromatography (Waters; Xbridge C18 analytical column) and concatenated into thirteen fractions. Samples were dried and stored at −80 °C prior to LC-MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were reconstituted in 4% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to being analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) online with an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 μm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate and 40°C and using a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 180 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 60 min. An EASY-Spray nanosource was used for peptide ionization (2 200 V, 275°C). The mass spectrometer was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS1, MS2 for peptide identification and multinotch-MS3 for protein abundance measurements. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS1 spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 375-1500 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 200 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0x10E5 with a 50 ms maximum injection time. The more abundant precursor ions were selected for MS2 (Top speed 3 seconds) and collision induced dissociation fragmentation at 35% was performed and analysed in the linear ion trap using the “Inject Ions for All Available Parallelizable time” option with a maximum injection time of 105 ms and an AGC target of 1.0x10E5. For Multi-Notch MS3, the top 10 precursor ions from each MS2 scan were fragmented by HCD followed by orbitrap analysis (Resolution = 60 000; First mass = 100 m/z; AGQ target = 250000; MaxIT = 86ms, 100-500 m/z). Charge state screening was enabled to include precursors with 2 and 7 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60s.

### Data Protocol
- Database search and relative quantification. Relative TMT intensity-based quantification was processed using the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.3.4. Raw data were searched against the mouse database, extracted from UniProt on the 9th of December 2019 and containing 20379 entries (reviewed) supplemented with known contaminants. Searches were performed with default parameters trypsin enzymatic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, and three variable modifications allowed per peptide. Searches were performed with variable methionine oxidation (+15.99491), static cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146), and static TMT modifications on lysine and the peptide N-termini (+229.16293). The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. TMT reporter intensities were corrected for isotope impurities according to the lot used.

### Publication Abstract
The crosstalk between cancer and stromal cells plays a critical role in tumor progression. Syntenin is a small scaffold protein involved in the regulation of intercellular communication that is emerging as a target for cancer therapy. Here, we show that certain aggressive forms of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) reduce the expression of syntenin in bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC). Stromal syntenin deficiency, in turn, generates a pro-tumoral microenvironment. From serial transplantations in mice and co-culture experiments, we conclude that syntenin-deficient BMSC stimulate AML aggressiveness by promoting AML cell survival and protein synthesis. This pro-tumoral activity is supported by increased expression of endoglin, a classical marker of BMSC, which in trans stimulates AML translational activity. In short, our study reveals a vicious signaling loop potentially at the heart of AML-stroma crosstalk and unsuspected tumor-suppressive effects of syntenin that need to be&#xa0;considered during systemic targeting of syntenin in cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Bone microenvironment, Host-syntenin, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-msms, Stromal cells autophagy, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Proteomics, CRCM, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin, Pascale Zimmerman
Marseille Proteomics, CRCM, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes


