### Accession
PXD005758

### Title
A method for spatially and temporally resolved protein network interrogation in living cells

### Description
Cells operate through protein interaction networks organized in space and in time, but current methods to interrogate such biology typically resolve only one of these dimensions. Here, we describe a method to resolve both dimensions simultaneously using proximity labeling mediated by engineered ascorbic acid peroxidase (APEX). APEX has been used to label organelle proteomes with high temporal resolution, but its spatial resolution is generally thought to be limited because of its larger labeling radius. We describe an analytical pipeline, based on quantitative proteomics using spatial references, which overcomes this barrier. As proof-of-principle, we apply the methodology to interrogate protein interaction networks of G protein coupled receptors both temporally and spatially. Using this approach, we identify known binding partners as well as novel receptor regulators. Validating the methodology as a discovery tool, we demonstrate that two of these components drive ubiquitin-linked down-regulation of opioid receptors.

### Sample Protocol
For the experiments the GPCRs, B2AR and DOR, were fused with the APEX, engineered peroxidase. The receptors were activated with agonist and biotinyltion reaction was performed for 30 seconds at different timepoints after agonist treatment (0, 1, 3, 10, 30 min). Following cell lysis biotinylated proteins were enriched using streptavidin. The biotinylated proteins were digested with trypsin and prepared for MS analysis. The samples were measured by DDA either on an Orbitrap Elite or Orbitrap Fusion MS.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins was performed using Maxquant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proximity biotinylation, Gpcr, Apex, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Molecular & Cellular Pharmacology UCSF, San Francisco, CA

### Submitter
Ruth Huttenhain

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Huttenhain
Department of Molecular & Cellular Pharmacology UCSF, San Francisco, CA


