### Accession
PXD030989

### Title
Alpha-1-antitrypsin binds to the glucocorticoid receptor with anti-inflammatory and anti-mycobacterial significance in macrophages

### Description
Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT), a serine protease inhibitor produced mainly by the liver, is the third most abundant protein in plasma.  Individuals who possess homozygous Z-AAT genotype have severe AAT deficiency and are at risk for early-onset emphysema, bronchiectasis, cirrhosis, panniculitis, and vasculitis.  While a canonical receptor for AAT has not been identified, AAT can be internalized into the cytoplasm and is known to affect gene regulation.  Since AAT has significant anti-inflammatory properties affecting many cell types including macrophages, we examined whether AAT binds the cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in macrophages.  We report the novel finding that AAT binds to GR in macrophages using several approaches, including co-immunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry, microscale thermophoresis, and in silico molecular modeling.  We further demonstrate that AAT induction of angiopoietin-like 4 protein and AAT inhibition of lipopolysaccharide-induced nuclear factor-kappa B activation and interleukin-8 production are mediated, in part, through AAT–GR interaction.  Furthermore, this interaction contributes to a host-protective role against Mycobacterium tuberculosis in macrophages.  The interaction of AAT and GR described in this study identifies a mechanism for the anti-inflammatory and host-protective properties of AAT.

### Sample Protocol
IP was performed as described above.  The bound immune complexes were eluted by heating in loading buffer, separated with 12% SDS-PAGE, and the gel stained with Coomassie.  The gel pieces were de-stained in 200 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% v/v acetonitrile for 15 minutes and washed with 200 µL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile.  Disulfide bonds in proteins were reduced by incubation in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 30 minutes and cysteine residues were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 45 minutes.  Gel pieces were subsequently washed with 100 µL of distilled water followed by the addition of 100 mL of acetonitrile and dried on SpeedVac (Savant ThermoFisher).  Then 100 ng of trypsin was added to each sample and allowed to rehydrate the gel plugs at 4°C for 45 minutes and then incubated at 37°C overnight.  The tryptic mixtures were acidified with formic acid up to a final concentration of 1%.  Peptides were extracted twice from the gel plugs using 1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile.  The collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant and dried on SpeedVac (Savant ThermoFisher).  Samples were desalted on Thermo Scientific Pierce C18 Tip.   Samples were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent nanoLC-2D system through a nanoelectrospray LC −MS interface.  An autosampler injected 8 μL of sample into a 10 μL loop.  To desalt the sample, the material was flushed out of the loop, loaded onto a trapping column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, dimensions 5×0.3 mm×5 μm), and washed with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 5 μL/minute for 5 minutes.  The analytical column was then switched on-line at 0.6 μL/minute over an in-house made 100 μm i.d. × 200 mm fused silica capillary packed with 4 μm 80 Å Synergi Hydro C18 resin (Phenomex; Torrance, CA).  After 10 minutes of sample loading, the flow rate was adjusted to 0.35 mL/minute, and each sample was run on a 90-minute linear gradient of 4–40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid to separate the peptides.  LC mobile phase solvents and sample dilutions used 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Buffer B) (Chromasolv LC–MS grade; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was performed using the instrument supplied Xcalibur™(version 2.1) software.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ionmode.  Each survey scan of m/z 400–2000 was followed by collisionassisted dissociation (CAD) MS/MS of the twenty most intense precursor ions.  Singly charged ions were excluded from CAD selection.  Doubly charged and higher ions were included.  Normalized collision energies were employed using helium as the collision gas.   MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into mascot generic format (mgf) files using a PAVA script (UCSF, MSF, San Francisco, CA).  These .mgf files were then independently searched against the human SwissProt database (13188 entries) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.6, Matrix Science).  Mass tolerances were +/- 10 ppm for MS peaks, and +/- 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions.  Trypsin specificity was used allowing for 1 missed cleavage.  Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were allowed as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl of Cys was set as a fixed modification.   Scaffold (version 4.8, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm.  Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Corticosteroids, Glucocorticoids, Transcriptional activator, Alpha-1-antitrypsin

### Affiliations
National Jewish Health
UC Denver 

### Submitter
Monika Dzieciatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Edward D. Chan1
National Jewish Health


