### Accession
PXD044912

### Title
A Cytotoxic T Cell Inspired Oncolytic Nanosystem Promotes Lytic Cell Death by Lipid Peroxidation And Elicits Antitumor Immune Responses

### Description
Lytic cell death triggers an antitumour immune response. However, cancer cells evade lytic cell death by several mechanisms. Moreover, a prolonged uncontrolled immune response conversely leads to T-cell exhaustion. Therefore, an oncolytic system capable of eliciting the immune response by dissolving cancer cells in a controlled manner is needed. Here, we establish a micro-scale cytotoxic T-cell-inspired oncolytic system (TIOs) to precisely lyse cancer cells by NIR-light-controlled lipid peroxidation. Our TIOs present antigen-based cell recognition, tumour-targeting and catalytic cell-lysis ability; thus, the TIOs induce oncolysis in vivo. We applied TIOs to antitumour therapies, which shows kinds of tumour models are cleared efficiently with negligible side-effects. Tumour regression is correlated with a T-cell based anti-tumour immune response and can be synergistic with anti-PD-1 therapy or STING activation. Our study provides new insights to design the oncolytic systems for antitumour immunity. Moreover, activation of STING can reverse T-cell exhaustion in oncolysis.

### Sample Protocol
Rapid isolation of native membrane proteins using the Plasma Membrane Protein Isolation and Cell Isolation Kit (Minute™) enables evaluation of membrane proteins on Raw 264.7 and TIOs. 5 x 107 cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (8.0 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated three times at 4 °C using a high-intensity sonicator (Scientz). Removing the debris by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. After that, the supernatants were collected and the membrane protein solution was obtained by gradient centrifugation according to the manufacturers instructions.

### Data Protocol
membrane proteins were identified by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis and the resulting LC-MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0)

### Publication Abstract
Lytic cell death triggers an antitumour immune response. However, cancer cells evade lytic cell death by several mechanisms. Moreover, a prolonged and uncontrolled immune response conversely leads to T-cell exhaustion. Therefore, an oncolytic system capable of eliciting an immune response by killing cancer cells in a controlled manner is needed. Here, we establish a micro-scale cytotoxic T-cell-inspired oncolytic system (TIOs) to precisely lyse cancer cells by NIR-light-controlled lipid peroxidation. Our TIOs present antigen-based cell recognition, tumour-targeting and catalytic cell-lysis ability; thus, the TIOs induce oncolysis in vivo. We apply TIOs to preclinical cancer models, showing anti-tumor activity with negligible side-effects. Tumour regression is correlated with a T-cell based anti-tumour immune response and TIOs also improve responses to anti-PD-1 therapy or STING activation. Our study provides insights to design oncolytic systems for antitumour immunity. Moreover, activation of STING can reverse T-cell exhaustion in oncolysis.

### Keywords
Mouse, Antitumor immune, Lipid peroxidation

### Affiliations
Institute for Advanced Research, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, P.R. China.

### Submitter
hao yin

### Lab Head
Dr hao yin
Institute for Advanced Research, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, P.R. China.


