### Accession
PXD011591

### Title
The ABCB7-like Transporter PexA in Rhodobacter capsulatus maintains proper Distribution of Reactive Sulfur Species

### Description
The mitochondrial ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters ABCB7 in humans, Atm1 in yeast and ATM3 in plants are highly conserved in their overall architecture and particularly in their glutathione binding pocket located within the transmembrane spanning domains. These transporters have attracted interest in the last two decades based on their proposed role in connecting the mitochondrial iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster assembly with its cytosolic Fe-S cluster assembly (CIA) counterpart. So far, the specific compound that is transported across the membrane remains unknown. In this report we characterized the ABCB7-like transporter Rcc02305 in Rhodobacter capsulatus, which shares 47% amino acid sequence identity to its mitochondrial counterpart. The constructed interposon mutant strain in R. capsulatus displayed increased levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species without a simultaneous accumulation of the cellular iron concentration. The inhibition of endogenous glutathione biosynthesis resulted in an increase of total glutathione levels in the mutant strain. Bioinformatic analysis of the amino acid sequence motifs revealed an aminotransferase class-V pyridoxal-5’-phosphate (PLP) binding site overlapping with the Walker A motif within the nucleotide binding domains of the transporter. The PLP cofactor is well characterized in L-cysteine desulfurases like IscS and NFS1 for its role in the formation of a protein-bound persulfide group. In this report, we present a model proposing that this ABC-transporter in R. capsulatus in its inward facing open conformation first produces a nucleophilic persulfide, which further reacts in a substitution reaction with a trapped GS(S)nG bound to the TMD resulting to a mixed glutathione polysulfide. In the next step, the release of the persulfide from the PLP binding site enables ATP to bind to the Walker A motif and the subsequent hydrolysis of ATP triggers a translocation of the mixed disulfide to the periplasm. We rename the ABCB7-like transporter Rcc02305 in R. capsulatus to PexA for PLP binding exporter.

### Sample Protocol
After vacuum drying the peptides were stored at -80 °C until measurement on a LC-MS/MS (Instrument type Q Exactive Plus combined with nano LC 1000 with a reverse phase C18 column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75µm x 150mm, C18, 2 µm, 100Å). The column was equilibrated with buffer A (3 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) and peptides separated by gradient elution as follows: 100 minutes from 0 to 30 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) with a flow of 300nl/min, 10 minutes up to 40 % B with a flow of 300nl/min, followed by washing for  9 min  at 80 % B with a flow of 500 nl/min, 5min 0 % B at a flow of 500 nl/min. Q Exactive Plus Full MS scan settings were: resolution 60,000, AGC target 3e6, maximum IT 100ms, scan range 150 to 1600mz. MS2 scan settings were: resolution 15,000, AGC target 2e5, loop count 15, isolation window 2 m/z, collision energy nce:30. Data dependent acquisition settings were: apex trigger on, charge exclusion 1,5-8,>8.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant version 1.4.1.2 combined with Andromeda search engine was used to annotate peptide sequences using UniProt Rhodobacter capsulatus (strain ATCC BAA-309 / NBRC 16581 / SB1003, (UniProt, RRID:SCR_002380)) data base (accessed from website 2018, published 2010). Protein were digested with trypsin, fixed modification was set as carbaminomethylation. Further settings were as followed: false discovery rate 1% with decoy mode, revert, score cutoff 25 for unmodifided peptides, for quantification unique and razor peptides were used, label free quantification was on, with allowed max 2 miscleavages.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters ABCB7 in humans, Atm1 in yeast and ATM3 in plants, are highly conserved in their overall architecture and particularly in their glutathione binding pocket located within the transmembrane spanning domains. These transporters have attracted interest in the last two decades based on their proposed role in connecting the mitochondrial iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster assembly with its cytosolic Fe-S cluster assembly (CIA) counterpart. So far, the specific compound that is transported across the membrane remains unknown. In this report we characterized the ABCB7-like transporter Rcc02305 in <i>Rhodobacter capsulatus</i>, which shares 47% amino acid sequence identity with its mitochondrial counterpart. The constructed interposon mutant strain in <i>R. capsulatus</i> displayed increased levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species without a simultaneous accumulation of the cellular iron levels. The inhibition of endogenous glutathione biosynthesis resulted in an increase of total glutathione levels in the mutant strain. Bioinformatic analysis of the amino acid sequence motifs revealed a potential aminotransferase class-V pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP) binding site that overlaps with the Walker A motif within the nucleotide binding domains of the transporter. PLP is a well characterized cofactor of L-cysteine desulfurases like IscS and NFS1 which has a role in the formation of a protein-bound persulfide group within these proteins. We therefore suggest renaming the ABCB7-like transporter Rcc02305 in <i>R. capsulatus</i> to PexA for PLP binding exporter. We further suggest that this ABC-transporter in <i>R. capsulatus</i> is involved in the formation and export of polysulfide species to the periplasm.

### Keywords
Polysulfide, Reactive oxygen species, Reactive sulfur species, Pyridoxal-5’-phosphate, Abcb7, Walker a motif, Abc transporter, Persulfide, Glutathione

### Affiliations
Università degli Studi di Milano Statale
Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany

### Submitter
Beata Siemiatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Leimkühler
Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Department of Molecular Enzymology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany


