### Accession
PXD038471

### Title
Chronic haloperidol treatment leads to an imbalance of synaptic excitation and inhibition of D1-MSN neurons pointing to a slow remodelling process

### Description
Schizophrenia is a chronic mental illness that is among the world’s top twenty causes of years lost to disability according to the global burden of disease 2019 (10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30925-9). Positive symptoms, including hallucinations and delusions in schizophrenia, often improved with conventional antipsychotic medication, which exerts its therapeutic effects mainly by antagonizing the dopamine D2 receptors. Haloperidol was one of the first antipsychotics to be approved by the FDA, and it is since then widely used for the treatment of psychotic disorders including schizophrenia.  Despite its high affinity for dopamine D2 receptors, it has been shown that haloperidol interacts with other receptors, such as dopamine D3 and D4 receptors, α-adrenergic receptor 1 and to some extent 5HT2A.  Dopaminergic dysfunction is known for decades to be involved in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, but only recently has the striatum been implicated in such devasting disorder. The dorsal striatum is a brain region involved in motor, cognitive and motivational functions, highly impacted by antipsychotic drugs. Particularly, it is well-recognized that chronic haloperidol administration has a tremendous impact on striatal synaptic plasticity, by changing the volume of dorsal striatum, the number of striatal neurons and  the synaptic morphology, both in humans and rodents.  Despite the overwhelming evidence correlating chronic haloperidol administration with striatum alterations, so far, the exact striatal synaptic mechanism by which haloperidol exerts its beneficial effects remains unclear. Although dopamine D2 receptor blockade can be achieved within hours after haloperidol administration, the onset of action is delayed by weeks. Thus, it is crucial to better understand the neuronal mechanism behind the delayed clinical effects of haloperidol to improve the treatment outcome. Using proteomic analysis and whole-cell patch-clamp recordings (Figure 1), we demonstrate for the first time a possible mechanism by which haloperidol may be contributing to its beneficial long-term therapeutic effect. Specifically, we demonstrate that modulation of D2-MSNs by chronic haloperidol administration leads to a slow remodeling of D1-neurons that may be responsible for its positive therapeutic effects.

### Sample Protocol
All animal procedures were approved by local authorities Direção Geral de Alimentação e Veterinária (DGAV) and performed in accordance with European Community Council Directives (2010/63/EU) and the Portuguese law DL Nº 113/2013 for the care and use of laboratory animals. Mice were group-housed under a 12 h light: 12 h dark cycle (8:00 AM, lights on; 8:00 PM, lights off) and an ambient temperature of 20-22 ⁰C with ad libitum access to food and water.  For the proteomics experiments healthy C57BL/6 mice were used. For electrophysiological recordings bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mice expressing eGFP under Drd2 promotor, were randomly assigned to haloperidol-treated group or control group. Haloperidol was dissolved in ethanol to a final concentration of 10mM and injected at 0.665mM in 0.13%HCL and 0.9% NaCl. At 11-weeks old, mice started receiving 100 µL of 0.9% NaCl by intraperitoneal (IP) injection. After 7 days of habituation, haloperidol (1mg/Kg) or vehicle was administered by IP injection for 30 consecutive days. Bodyweight was measured and used to calculate the required drug for each consecutive day.  Animals were weighed and anesthetized with 100 mg/kg i.p. of a solution containing Ketamine (87.5%) and Xylazine (12.5%) 24 hours after the last drug/vehicle administration. Brains were quickly removed and dissected, where the striatum were isolated and dissected bilaterally. The tissues were immediately added to TEAB 500 mM with phosphatases and proteases inhibitors and rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen. The samples were kept at −80C until further use. To each tissue sample, 850 μL of Tris buffer at 0.05 M and pH 7.4 with phosphatase and protease inhibitors were added. All the samples were homogenized on ice by ultrasonication (Vibra Cell 130 watts, Sonics) with a 2 mm probe for 30 seconds at 40% amplitude followed by 30 seconds at 50% both with on/off cycles of 1 sec. After, samples were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 5 minutes at 4 ̊C. The process was repeated and supernatants were joined and pellets discarded. A pooled sample of each experimental group was prepared and subjected to an ultracentrifugation obtaining 2 fractions: soluble fraction and membrane-enriched fraction. The pooled samples were submitted to ultracentrifugation in Optimal L-100XP (Beckman Coulter) with 90Ti rotor at 144,000 g for 1 hour at 4 ̊C. The ultracentrifugation pellets were dissolved in TEAB 0.5 M with the aid of ultrasonication (Vibra Cell 130 watts, Sonics) with a 2 mm probe with 30 seconds cycles at 40%−50% amplitude until complete dissolution.  Protein precipitation was performed to all samples using 6 times the sample volume of cold acetone. The protein pellets were resuspended in 2× Laemmli Sample Buffer (5% glycerol, 1.7% SDS, 100 mM DTT and bromophenol blue in 50 mM Tris buffer at pH 6.8) aided by ultrasonication at 40% amplitude for 2 minutes. The total protein content of all samples was assessed using the commercial kit 2-D Quant Kit, GE Healthcare. For the proteomics screening, 50 μg of protein from each individual sample and pooled fraction were used, to which the same amount of Green fluorescent Protein and Maltose-binding periplasmic protein (malE-GFP) was added to serve as an internal standard. All the samples were incubated at 95 ̊C for 5 minutes in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) and acrylamide was added as an alkylating agent (3% (v/v) final concentration). All samples were loaded into a SDS-PAGE precast gel (4–20% Mini-Protean Gel, Bio-Rad), and was run at 110V until the end of the gel in the case of the pooled samples, and partially for 15 minutes for individual samples. After SDS-PAGE, all gels were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Each lane was sliced into 6 fractions (pooled samples) and 3 fractions (individual samples) and the gel pieces were destained using a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by a washing step with water for 1050 rpm for 15 min). The gel pieces were dehydrated on Concentrador Plus and to each gel band, 75 μL of trypsin (0.01 μg/μL solution in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added and left for 15 min at 4°C to rehydrate. After this period 75 μL of buffer were added and in-gel digestion was performed overnight at room temperature in the dark. After digestion, peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequential addition of three solutions of increasing percentage of acetonitrile (30%, 50%, and 98%) in 1% formic acid (FA) and then subjected to solid-phase extraction with C18 sorbent in a 200 μL tip format (OMIX tip, Agilent Technologies).

### Data Protocol
The Triple TOF™ 5600 System (Sciex) was operated in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of each fraction of the pooled samples; followed by SWATH (Sequential Windowed data-independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra) acquisition of each sample. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a ChromXP C18CL reverse phase column (300 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 120Å, Eksigent). The chromatographic run of 65 minutes was performed at 5 μL/min with a 46 min step gradient from 2% ACN to 5% ACN with 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in the first 2 minutes followed by a linear gradient to 30% ACN with 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO until the minute 45 and an increase to 35% ACN with 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in the next minute, ending with a column wash and re-equilibration. The peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, Sciex). The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 counts per second (cps) – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 cps were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectrum was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, Sciex). The rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analyzed (Supplementary Table 1), in order to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of this batch of samples. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 250 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES) according to the window. Specific libraries of precursor masses and fragment ions were created by combining all files from the IDA experiments (including samples from striatum, hippocampus and PFC of the mice) and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The libraries were obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0.1, Sciex), with the following search parameters: Mus Musculus SwissProt database (release of April 2017) with the malE-GFP sequence, acrylamide alkylated cysteines as a fixed modification, and the gel-based special focus option. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot™ software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and positive identifications were considered if the identified proteins presented 95% confidence (5% local FDR) with at least one peptide hit with individual confidence above 95% local FDR. Relative quantification data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.2, Sciex), briefly peptides were selected from the library using the following criteria: (i) the unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis as estimated by the ProteinPilot™ software, and (ii) Peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from selection. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilot™ searches. Peptide’s retention time was adjusted by using the malE-GFP peptides. Up to 5 target fragment ions were automatically selected and the peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert et al. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least half the replicates per group were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein and normalized to the total intensity of the sample at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Striatal dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, a disorder characterized by positive symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions. Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic medication used in the treatment of schizophrenia that is known to antagonize dopamine D2 receptors, which are abundantly expressed in the striatum. However, haloperidol's delayed therapeutic effect also suggests a mechanism of action that may go beyond the acute blocking of D2 receptors. Here, we performed proteomic analysis of striatum brain tissue and found more than 400 proteins significantly altered after 30 days of chronic haloperidol treatment in mice, namely proteins involved in glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission. Cell-type specific electrophysiological recordings further revealed that haloperidol not only reduces the excitability of striatal medium spiny neurons expressing dopamine D2 receptors (D2-MSNs) but also affects D1-MSNs by increasing the ratio of inhibitory/excitatory synaptic transmission (I/E ratio) specifically onto D1-MSNs but not D2-MSNs. Therefore, we propose the slow remodeling of D1-MSNs as a mechanism mediating the delayed therapeutic effect of haloperidol over striatum circuits. Understanding how haloperidol exactly contributes to treating schizophrenia symptoms may help to improve therapeutic outcomes and elucidate the molecular underpinnings of this disorder.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Msn, Haloperidol

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of theUniversity of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of theUniversity of Coimbra


