### Accession
PXD017236

### Title
PD-1-targeted immunotherapy in NASH-triggered liver cancer induces pro-tumorigenic environment through CD8+PD-1+ T-cells

### Description
Immunotherapy has opened hitherto unknown possibilities to treat cancer. Whereas some cancer types (e.g. melanoma) can be efficiently treated, others lack measurable positive effects (e.g. PDAC). Moreover, stratification of responders/non-responders is only possible in some cancer types (e.g. melanoma). Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a dismal prognosis, limited treatment options and survival benefit, and represents a potential cancer entity for successful immunotherapy. Here, we investigated NASH-triggered HCC in the context PD-1-targeted immunotherapy. Using flow cytometry, single cell RNA sequencing, immunohistochemistry and mass spectrometric analyses, we found a progressive increase of CD8+PD-1+ effector T-cells with a unique profile of exhaustion and activation markers rising with murine and human NASH severity. Notably, late-stage HCC treatment with PD-1-targeted immunotherapy enhanced hepatic carcinogenesis in mice. Dissecting potential mechanisms of action during tumor-initiation and -progression we analyzed the effects of PD-1-targeted immunotherapy at HCC initiation. PD-1-targeted immunotherapy induced a pro-tumorigenic environment, enhanced necro-inflammation and increased NAFLD-activation score (NAS), leading to increased liver cancer incidence, tumor number and nodule size. In contrast, anti-CD8 or anti-CD8/anti-NK1.1 treatment reduced NAS and abrogated the development of liver cancer, thus identifying CD8+PD-1+ T-cells as drivers of liver cancer in NASH-triggered HCC. Increased apoptotic signaling, STAT3 phosphorylation and hepatic proliferation were detected in intra-tumoral liver tissue upon PD-1-targeted immunotherapy. In line, PD-1-/- mice challenged with a NASH diet displayed early onset of hepatocarcinogenesis, corroborating the pro-tumorigenic role of absent or reduced PD-1. Mechanistically PD-1-targeted immunotherapy mainly affected hepatic abundance of CD8+PD-1+ T-cells, instead of altering the quality of Tox+CXCR6+ expressing CD8+PD-1+TNF+CD39+Gzmb+ T-cells found in NASH livers, leading to an aggressive, pro-tumorigenic liver environment.  Single-cell mapping of human NASH-, borderline NASH- or unaffected livers corroborated our preclinical NASH results. Moreover, in human NASH livers a correlation of hepatic CD8+, PD-1+, TNF+ T-cells with fibrosis and NASH severity was observed. Accordingly, HCC patients with NASH etiology display a sharp increase in intra- and peri-tumoral CD8+ PD-1+ T-cells. In a cohort of 65 patients recruited across 6 centers in Germany and Austria, patients with NAFLD/NASH-driven HCC responded worse to PD-1-targeted immunotherapy by Nivolumab or Pembrolizumab compared to non-NAFLD patients. This resulted in significant reduced overall survival, in trends of faster disease progression and reduced progression free survival. Histological analysis of livers derived from HCC patients treated with PD-1-targeted immunotherapy displayed high levels of intra and peri-tumoral CD8+ PD-1+ T-cells and Ki67+ hepatocytes. Taken together, these data indicate that PD-1-targeted immunotherapy induces immune-related adverse effects in NAFLD/NASH-driven HCC through CD8+PD-1+ T-cells. Our data call for stratification of HCC patients subjected to PD-1-targeted immunotherapy, with NAFLD being a negative predictor.

### Sample Protocol
After FACS purification, cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and pelleted. Each cell pellets were resuspended in 50%(vol/vol) 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol in PBS pH 7.4 buffer and lysed into cellular lysates by repeated sonication, followed by six freeze-thaw cycles [29921600].

### Data Protocol
The acquired files were analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.7.0) and mouse UniProt Isoform fasta (Version: 2019-02-21, number of sequences 25,233) as a source for protein sequences. A 1% FDR was used for controlling false discovery at the peptide and protein level. Only protein detected with a minimum of two peptides were carried forward in analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) can have viral or non-viral causes<sup>1-5</sup>. Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is an important driver of HCC. Immunotherapy has been approved for treating HCC, but biomarker-based stratification of patients for optimal response to therapy is an unmet need<sup>6,7</sup>. Here we report the progressive accumulation of exhausted, unconventionally activated CD8<sup>+</sup>PD1<sup>+</sup> T cells in NASH-affected livers. In preclinical models of NASH-induced HCC, therapeutic immunotherapy targeted at programmed death-1 (PD1) expanded activated CD8<sup>+</sup>PD1<sup>+</sup> T cells within tumours but did not lead to tumour regression, which indicates that tumour immune surveillance was impaired. When given prophylactically, anti-PD1 treatment led to an increase in the incidence of NASH-HCC and in the number and size of tumour nodules, which correlated with increased hepatic CD8<sup>+</sup>PD1<sup>+</sup>CXCR6<sup>+</sup>, TOX<sup>+</sup>, and TNF<sup>+</sup> T cells. The increase in HCC triggered by anti-PD1 treatment was prevented by depletion of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells or TNF neutralization, suggesting that CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells help to induce NASH-HCC, rather than invigorating or executing immune surveillance. We found similar phenotypic and functional profiles in hepatic CD8<sup>+</sup>PD1<sup>+</sup> T cells from humans with NAFLD or NASH. A meta-analysis of three randomized phase III clinical trials that tested inhibitors of PDL1 (programmed death-ligand 1) or PD1 in more than 1,600 patients with advanced HCC revealed that immune therapy did not improve survival in patients with non-viral HCC. In two additional cohorts, patients with NASH-driven HCC who received anti-PD1 or anti-PDL1 treatment showed reduced overall survival compared to patients with other aetiologies. Collectively, these data show that non-viral HCC, and particularly NASH-HCC, might be less responsive to immunotherapy, probably owing to NASH-related aberrant T cell activation causing tissue damage that leads to impaired immune surveillance. Our data provide a rationale for stratification of patients with HCC according to underlying aetiology in studies of immunotherapy as a primary or adjuvant treatment.

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Nash, Cd8+pd1+

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Experimental Systems Immunology Laboratory, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology Laboratory, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.


