### Accession
PXD014947

### Title
Unravelling lactate-acetate conversion to butyrate by intestinal Anaerobutyricum and Anaerostipes species

### Description
Proteomics analysis was done to identify active gene clusters involved in butyrogenic pathway from Dl-lactate plus acetate.

### Sample Protocol
Anaerobutyricum soehngenii (NCBI tax ID 105843, formerly known as Eubacterium hallii) was grown in 450 ml modified YCFA medium supplemented with 80mM Dl-Lactate plus 30 mM acetate, 40mM sorbitol and 20mM sucrose in triplicates. Cells were harvested by SDS-DTT-Tris-Lysis buffer, and were disrupted using a French pressure cell (1500 psi) and were placed on ice immediately. The extracted proteins were denatured by heat treatment (95°C for 30 min). For each sample,  50 µg of protein electrophoresed on a 10% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gel for 40 min at 20mA. Staining was done using Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250 (2.5 g/L) (in 45% methanol and 10% glacial acetic acid) for 3 h and destained with 25% methanol and 10% glacial acetic acid in ultrapure water overnight. The gels were treated for reduction and alkylation using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM beta-mercaptoethanol (pH 8) and 20 mM acrylamide (pH 8). Each lane was cut into 3 even slices, which were further cut into small pieces of approximately 1–2 mm2. Trypsin digestion was performed by adding 50 μL of sequencing grade trypsin (5 ng/μL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated at room temperature overnight while shaking. The resulting tryptic peptide samples were desalted and concentrated using a LichroprepC18 μColumn and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS using a Proxeon Easy nanoLC and an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The d- and l-forms of lactate are important fermentation metabolites produced by intestinal bacteria but are found to negatively affect mucosal barrier function and human health. Both enantiomers of lactate can be converted with acetate into the presumed beneficial butyrate by a phylogenetically related group of anaerobes, including Anaerobutyricum and Anaerostipes spp. This is a low energy yielding process with a partially unknown pathway in Anaerobutyricum and Anaerostipes spp. and hence, we sought to address this via a comparative genomics, proteomics and physiology approach. We compared growth of Anaerobutyricum soehngenii on lactate with that on sucrose and sorbitol. Comparative proteomics revealed complete pathway of butyrate formation from sucrose, sorbitol and lactate. Notably, a gene cluster, lctABCDEF was abundantly expressed when grown on lactate. This gene cluster encodes a lactate dehydrogenase (lctD), electron transport proteins A and B (lctCB), nickel-dependent racemase (lctE), lactate permease (lctF) and short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (lctG). Investigation of available genomes of intestinal bacteria revealed this new gene cluster to be highly conserved in only Anaerobutyricum and Anaerostipes spp. Present study demonstrates that A. soehngenii and several related Anaerobutyricum and Anaerostipes spp. are highly adapted for a lifestyle involving lactate plus acetate utilization in the human intestinal tract.

### Keywords
Dl-lactate, Microbiota, Anaerobutyricum soehngenii, Anaerostipes, Butyrate

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Biochemistry, Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Mr Sjef Boeren
Biochemistry, Wageningen University


