### Accession
PXD040206

### Title
Exome Sequencing Links the SUMO Protease SENP7 with Fatal Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita, Early Respiratory Failure, and Neutropenia

### Description
SUMOylation involves the attachment of Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) proteins to specific lysine residues on thousands of substrates with various effects on protein function. Sentrin-specific proteases (SENPs) are proteins involved in the maturation and de-conjugation of SUMO. Specifically, SENP7 is responsible for processing polySUMO chains on targeted substrates including the heterochromatin protein HP1α. Here, we describe a large family with four affected subjects presenting with a spectrum of findings including congenital arthrogryposis, profound developmental delay, and neutropenia with recurrent infections. Exome sequencing identified a homozygous stop gain variant in SENP7 c.1474C>T; p.(Gln492*) as the probable etiology. Protein expression studies in patient fibroblasts showed significant protein dysregulation in total cell lysates and in the chromatin fraction.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin fractionation. All steps were performed on ice. Cells were grown in T175 flasks before washing with ice cold PBS and subsequent harvesting by trypsin. A fraction of cells was taken as input control sample and lysed in SNTBS buffer (2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl).  The remaining cells were lysed in buffer A (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCL, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 340 mM sucrose, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM N-Ethylmaleimide (Sigma-Aldrich, E3876) and protease inhibitor without EDTA (cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich, 11836170001). Lysate was supplemented with Triton X-100 to a final concentration of 0.1% and incubated on ice for 8 minutes. After centrifugation at 1300 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C, supernatant and pellet were separated. Supernatant was subsequently centrifuged at 20000 x g and collected as the cytoplasmic fraction. The pellet was washed twice in buffer A and subsequently lysed in buffer B (3 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, protease inhibitor without EDTA) on ice for 30 minutes. The lysate was centrifuged at 1700 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant (containing nucleoplasm fraction) and the pellet (containing chromatin) were separated. The chromatin fraction was washed twice in buffer B, lysed in SNTBS buffer and heated to 99°C for 10 minutes.  For the total lysate samples, cells were grown in T175 flasks and harvested by trypsin. A fraction of cells was taken as input control sample and lysed in SNTBS buffer. The remaining cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M Urea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). . The remaining cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M Urea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. The proteins were first digested with 1 µg Lys-C (Lysyl endopeptidase Mass Spectrometry, Fujifilm WAKO pure chemicals corporation) per 50 µg protein for 3 hours at room temperature. The samples were subsequently diluted 4 times in digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bi-carbonate (NH4HCO3, ABC) pH 8.0) and further digested with 1 µg trypsin per 50 µg protein overnight at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was stopped by acidifying the sample to <2.5 pH with 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The digested peptides were then desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reverse phase Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were retrieved from the stagetips with elution buffer (32.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), subsequently vacuum dried, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed with an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide samples were injected (1ul) onto a cartridge precolumn (300 μm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap, 5 um, 100 A, (100/0.1 water/formic acid (FA) v/v)  with a flow of 10 ul/min for 3 minutes (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm × 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 um, 120 A (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The gradient was run from 2% to 36% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 120 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼10 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The temperature of the nano-HPLC column was set to 50°C (Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a HCD collision energy at 30 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap, with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 400-1500, at an standard AGC target with maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction on the background ion m/z=445.12 was used. Precursors were dynamically excluded after n=1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s, and with a precursor range of 10 ppm. Charge states 2-5 were included.  For MS2 the scan range mode was set to automated, and the MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 at an normalized AGC target of 100% with a maximum fill time of 60 ms.  MaxQuant peptide search. For both the analysis of the total lysate samples and the chromatin fraction, four biological replicates per cell line were processed and analysed. All RAW data was analysed using MaxQuant software version 2.1.3.0 using search engine Andromeda (Tyanova, Temu, & Cox, 2016). For the chromatin search, the high and low molecular weight fraction belonging to one replicate were added together in MaxQuant, making it four replicates per group. The peptide search was performed against an in silico digested reference proteome for Homo sapiens obtained from Uniprot.org (September 12th 2022). For digestion Trypsin/P was selected, allowing two missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification, with a maximum of five modifications per peptide. Fast Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was enabled with a minimal ratio count of two, minimum number of neighbours being two and average number of neighbours being six. Match between runs was enabled with a time window of 0.7 minutes to 20 minutes, accepting to match unidentified features. A minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum of 4600 Da peptide mass was selected. For protein identification, the peptides and razor + unique peptides were set at one.   Perseus data analysis. For the identification of proteins in total lysate and chromatin samples of the patient cells, MaxQuant output table ‘protein groups’ was uploaded into Perseus version 1.6.14.0 and 2.0.7.0 (Tyanova, Temu, Sinitcyn, et al., 2016). First, potential incorrect identified proteins were filtered out by ‘only identified by site’, ‘reverse’ and ‘potential contaminant’. LFQ scores were then transformed to log2 scale and replicates of the same cell line were grouped together. Data were further filtered, requiring that the values should be valid and found in all four replicates within one group. Missing values were replaced by values from the total data matrix’s normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a down shift of 1.8. Control cell lines were then grouped together as biological replicates and Two-sample t-tests were performed. Targets were selected by having a -log10 p value of >1.3 (p <0.05) and a LFQ intensity difference of at least one on log2 scale.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Patient, Mutation, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
LUMC
CCB, LUMC, Netherlands

### Submitter
Nicolette Sophie Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C. O. Vertegaal
CCB, LUMC, Netherlands


