### Accession
PXD036447

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 Nsp6 damages Drosophila heart and mouse cardiomyocytes through MGA/MAX complex-mediated increased glycolysis

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 infection causes COVID-19, a severe acute respiratory disease associated with cardiovascular complications including long-term outcomes. The presence of virus in cardiac tissue of patients with COVID-19 suggests this is a direct, rather than secondary, effect of infection.Here, by expressing individual SARS-CoV-2 proteins in the Drosophila heart, we demonstrate interaction of virus Nsp6 with host proteins of the MGA/MAX complex (MGA, PCGF6 and TFDP1).

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, sample preparation, mass spectrometry and data analysis were carried out using established protocols. HEK 293T cells were cultured and maintained in DMEM medium (Corning cellgro) containing 10% fetal bovine serum and Penicillin-Streptomycin (10 units/ml). The SARS-CoV-2 Nsp6 cDNA fragment was codon-optimized and assembled into the pCMV6 vector for C-terminal tagging with mCherry (mCh)-FLAG.The FLAG-tag was used for affinity purification. The proteins thus pulled down, and trypsinized on the filter. Tryptic peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC analytical column and analyzed on a coupled Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was performed using Minora, an aligned AMRT (Accurate Mass and Retention Time) cluster quantification algorithm using extracted ion chromatograms. Protein abundance was measured by Hi3 method. Quantitation between samples was normalized by mCh abundance.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 infection causes COVID-19, a severe acute respiratory disease associated with cardiovascular complications including long-term outcomes. The presence of virus in cardiac tissue of patients with COVID-19 suggests this is a direct, rather than secondary, effect of infection. Here, by expressing individual SARS-CoV-2 proteins in the Drosophila heart, we demonstrate interaction of virus Nsp6 with host proteins of the MGA/MAX complex (MGA, PCGF6 and TFDP1). Complementing transcriptomic data from the fly heart reveal that this interaction blocks the antagonistic MGA/MAX complex, which shifts the balance towards MYC/MAX and activates glycolysis-with similar findings in mouse cardiomyocytes. Further, the Nsp6-induced glycolysis disrupts cardiac mitochondrial function, known to increase reactive oxygen species (ROS) in heart failure; this could explain COVID-19-associated cardiac pathology. Inhibiting the glycolysis pathway by 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) treatment attenuates the Nsp6-induced cardiac phenotype in flies and mice. These findings point to glycolysis as a potential pharmacological target for treating COVID-19-associated heart failure.

### Keywords
Human hek 293t cell line

### Affiliations
University of Maryland Baltimore
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, 21201 USA

### Submitter
Mehari Weldemariam

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen A. Kane
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, 21201 USA


