### Accession
PXD004631

### Title
Mitochondrial CaMKII phosphoproteome.

### Description
Mice overexpressing CaMKII in myocardial mitochondria have dilated cardiomyopathy that appears to be exclusively driven by metabolic defects that lead to reduced ATP production. Phosphoproteomics study of mitochondrial proteins supports the metabolomics data.

### Sample Protocol
Heart mitochondria were extracted and lysed by sonication in  lysis buffer consisting in 10 ml 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 tablet of protease inhibitors and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitor mixture. After centrifugation (20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C), the protein concentration of the supernatant was measured using the Bradford assay and ~150 µg of proteins for each condition were subjected to digestion. Protein reduction and alkylation were performed using a final concentration of 2 mM dithiothreitol and 4 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were first digested for 4 h at 37°C with Lys-C (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:100). The second digestion was performed over night at 37°C with trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:100) in 2 M Urea. The resulting peptides were chemically labeled using stable isotope dimethyl labeling. After protein digestion the mitochorndia of the mice treated with isoproterenol (mtCAMKII-ISO) were labeled as “Intermediate”, while the samples not treated (mtCaMKII) were labeled with “Light”. Sample were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and  ~300 µg of the peptide mixtures were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Ti4+-IMAC material. The mixtures of labeled samples were dried to completion and reconstituted in 80% ACN, 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto the Ti4+-IMAC columns. After washing with 50% ACN, 0.5% TFA, 200 mM NaCl and 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA consecutively, the phosphopeptides were eluted first with 10% ammonia and then with 80%ACN, 2% FA and were dried to completion in a vacuum centrifuge. After reconstitution in 10% FA, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide, the peptides were analyzed using nano flow reverse phase liquid chromatography on a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated on an in-house made 50 cm column, 75 µm inner diameter packed with 1.8 µm C18 resin (Agilent Zorbax SB-C18) at a constant temperature of 40°C, connected to the mass spectrometer through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The injected peptides were first trapped with a double fritted trapping column (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) at a pressure of 800 bar with 100% solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) before being chromatographically separated by a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 7% up to 30% in 170 min at a flow rate of 150 nl/min. Nanospray was achieved with an in-house pulled and gold coated fused silica capillary (360 µm outer diameter, 20 µm inner diameter, 10 µm tip inner diameter) and an applied voltage of 1.7 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. Up to ten most intense ions above the threshold of 500 counts were selected for fragmentation. For the fragmentation a decision tree method was used.

### Data Protocol
For the raw data files recorded by the mass spectrometer, peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a standardized workflow. Peak list was searched against a Swiss-Prot database (version 2.3.02, taxonomy Mus musculus, 32402 protein entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants, using Mascot (version 2.3.02 Matrix Science, London, UK). The database search was performed by using the following parameters: a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for the precursor masses and ±0.6 Da for CID/ETD fragment ions. Enzyme speciﬁcity was set to Trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed. Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, dimethyl labeling (L, I) of lysine residues and N termini,  and  phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were used as variable modifications. Percolator was used to ﬁlter the PSMs for <1% false discovery-rate. Phosphorylation sites were localized by applying phosphoRS (pRS) (v2.0). Double dimethyl labeling was used as quantification method with a mass precision of 2 ppm for consecutive precursor mass scans. A retention time tolerance of 0.5 min was used to account for the potential retention time shifts due to deuterium. To further filter for high quality data we used the following parameters: high confidence peptide spectrum matches, minimal Mascot score of 20, minimal peptide length of 6 only unique rank 1 peptide and the search rank 1 peptide.  The phosphopeptides that showed an on/off situation in the mtCaMKII-ISO or in the mtCaMKII were manually quantified by giving them an arbitrary value of 100 or 0.01 for extreme up- or down-regulation, which corresponds to the maximum allowed fold change in the used Proteome Discoverer settings.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the clear association between myocardial injury, heart failure and depressed myocardial energetics, little is known about upstream signals responsible for remodeling myocardial metabolism after pathological stress. Here, we report increased mitochondrial calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII) activation and left ventricular dilation in mice one week after myocardial infarction (MI) surgery. By contrast, mice with genetic mitochondrial CaMKII inhibition are protected from left ventricular dilation and dysfunction after MI. Mice with myocardial and mitochondrial CaMKII overexpression (mtCaMKII) have severe dilated cardiomyopathy and decreased ATP that causes elevated cytoplasmic resting (diastolic) Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration and reduced mechanical performance. We map a metabolic pathway that rescues disease phenotypes in mtCaMKII mice, providing insights into physiological and pathological metabolic consequences of CaMKII signaling in mitochondria. Our findings suggest myocardial dilation, a disease phenotype lacking specific therapies, can be prevented by targeted replacement of mitochondrial creatine kinase or mitochondrial-targeted CaMKII inhibition.

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome, Tiimac

### Affiliations
Biomolecular and mass spectrometry group
Biomolecular mass spectrometry and proteomics group, Utrecht University

### Submitter
Eleonora Corradini

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular mass spectrometry and proteomics group, Utrecht University


