### Accession
PXD017906

### Title
Proteomic analysis of distal cholangiocarcinoma

### Description
Distal cholangiocarcinoma is an aggressive malignancy with a dismal prognosis. There is a lack of diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. An improved understanding of proteomic changes associated with malignancy and identification of potential biomarkers can help improve the survival of patients. A workflow utilizing discovery mass spectrometry and verification by parallel-reaction monitoring was used to analyze surgically resected formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples from distal cholangiocarcinoma patients and normal bile ducts in order to identify differentially expressed proteins. 20 tumors and 6 controls were successfully analyzed in the discovery experiment and 16 tumors and 9 controls in the PRM analysis. In the discovery experiment a total of 3057 proteins were identified. 87 proteins were found to be differentially expressed between the conditions (q<0.05 and fold change ≥2 or ≤0.5). 31 proteins were upregulated in the distal cholangiocarcinoma samples as compared to controls and 56 downregulated. Bioinformatic analysis revealed an abundance of the differentially expressed proteins to be associated with the tumor reactive stroma. Parallel-reaction monitoring verified 28 proteins as upregulated and 18 as downregulated. In conclusion several proteins without prior association with cholangiocarcinoma biology were identified and verified as differentially expressed between distal cholangiocarcinoma samples and normal bile ducts. These proteins can be further evaluated to elucidate their biomarker potential and role in distal cholangiocarcinoma carcinogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were processed blinded to patient identity and outcome and preparation was performed in paralell for all samples. For deparaffinisation and protein retrieval macrodissected samples were incubated in 1 ml of EnVision™ FLEX Target Retrieval Solution (High PH) (K8004, Dako) with a dilution of 1:50 at 97 °C for 10 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rcf at 4 °C for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed and the deparaffinization steps were repeated once. Samples were resuspended in 150 μl of 500 mM Tris-HCL pH 8 followed by transfer to a new tube as some paraffin contamination was attached to the tube wall. The samples were incubated at 90 °C for 1 hour. 150 μl of 6M guanidine-HCL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) was added followed by probe sonication for 2*4 minutes on ice. Samples were then centrifuged at 14 000 rcf for 10 minutes at 24 °C and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Proteins were reduced by adding 6 μl 1 M dithiothreitol and incubating for 1 hour at 56 °C. Alkylation was performed by adding 20 μl of 1 M iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in dark. Precipitation was carried out overnight using pure ethanol at a ratio (v/v) (sample: ethanol) of 1:9 and storage at -20 °C. Following centrifugation at 14 000 rcf for 15 minutes at 4 °C the supernatant was carefully discarded, and the pellet resuspended in 100 μl 50 mM AMBIC. Protein determination was carried out using the microBSA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisherScientifiic, Rockford, IL) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The digestion was carried out using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio (w/w) (trypsin: protein) of 1:50 followed by incubation at 37 °C overnight. The samples were dried using centrifugal evaporation and resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid. Peptide determination was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisherScientific, Rockford, IL). Sample were spiked with Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture (ThermoFisherScientific, Rockford, IL) in order to evaluate chromatographic performance. 25 fmol of Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture was spiked in for every μg of peptide in the sample and the sample was diluted to a final concentration of 0.25 μg/μl in 0.1 % formic acid for injection. One µg of sample was injected and measured with a flow rate of 300 nL/ minute and a two-column setup was used for the separation including Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm * 25 cm as analytical column and Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm * 2 cm as precolumn (both obtained from ThermoFisherScientific, Rockford, IL).Shotgun LC-MS/MS and PRM was performed with a Thermo easy nLC system online to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) (ThermoFisherScientific, Rockford, IL) was used for the identification of proteins. The selection of spectra contained employed the following settings: min. precursor mass 350 Da; max. precursor mass 5000 Da; s/n threshold 1.5. Parameters for Sequest HT searches were as follows: precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da; Trypsin; 1 missed cleavage site; Uniprot human database; dynamic modification; oxidation (+15.995 Da; (M,P)). static modification; carbamidomethyl (+ 57.021 Da; (C)). Percolator was used for the processing node and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. Proteins were identified using at least two peptides.  Precursor ions area detector was used for quantification, the quantification of each protein is calculated from the average area of the 3 most abundant peptides identified for that particular protein. For the PRM the same sample preparation and instrument was utilized. MS1 ion chromatogram extraction and relative quantification was performed using Skyline. Perseus was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bile duct cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Prm, Cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Department of Surgery. Clincal Sciences Lund. Lund University
Lund University Department of Surgery

### Submitter
Johannes Byrling

### Lab Head
Dr Bodil Andersson
Department of Surgery. Clincal Sciences Lund. Lund University


