### Accession
PXD003851

### Title
Reticulocytes vs mature red blood cell

### Description
comparative study reticulocytes vs mature red blood cell

### Sample Protocol
Selection of CD71+ve reticulocytes from cord blood was performed using the MACS purification system (Miltenyi Biotec, Singapore). One to two mL of cord blood at 50% haematocrit in PBS was incubated with magnetic beads conjugated to CD71 antibody (MIltenyi Biotec) for 20 minutes at room temperature (200ul blood: 25ul CD71 microbeads). After incubation, the blood sample was passed through a MACS LS column followed by three times washing with PBS. Flow through (CD71-ve) and bound fractions (CD71 +ve) were collected and purity monitored by flow cytometry using Thiazole orange staining and/or sub-vital staining. Samples were verified for purity (>90%) prior to MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
CD71+ve and CD71-ve red cells were sub-fractionated to membrane and luminal contents and then digested using trypsin following standard shotgun proteomic sample preparation procedure. The tryptic peptides were labelled using 4-plex iTRAQ reagents.  The Q Exactive raw files were converted to mgf file using Proteome Discoverer ver1.4.  the combined data of all fractions in each replicate were searched Mascot against  Uniprot Human protein DB using an in-house Mascot server 2.41.  The Mascot results were exported to csv file, and further analyzed in MS Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoiesis is marked by progressive changes in morphological, biochemical and mechanical properties of erythroid precursors to generate red blood cells (RBC). The earliest enucleated forms derived in this process, known as reticulocytes, are multi-lobular and spherical. As reticulocytes mature, they undergo a series of dynamic cytoskeletal re-arrangements and the expulsion of residual organelles, resulting in highly deformable biconcave RBCs (normocytes). To understand the significant, yet neglected proteome-wide changes associated with reticulocyte maturation, we undertook a quantitative proteomics approach. Immature reticulocytes (marked by the presence of surface transferrin receptor, CD71) and mature RBCs (devoid of CD71) were isolated from human cord blood using a magnetic separation procedure. After sub-fractionation into triton-extracted membrane proteins and luminal samples (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation), quantitative mass spectrometry was conducted to identify more than 1800 proteins with good confidence and coverage. While most structural proteins (such as Spectrins, Ankyrin and Band 3) as well as surface glycoproteins were conserved, proteins associated with microtubule structures, such as Talin-1/2 and &#xdf;-Tubulin, were detected only in immature reticulocytes. Atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based imaging revealed an extended network of spectrin filaments in reticulocytes (with an average length of 48&#xa0;nm), which shortened during reticulocyte maturation (average spectrin length of 41&#xa0;nm in normocytes). The extended nature of cytoskeletal network may partly account for increased deformability and shape changes, as reticulocytes transform to normocytes.

### Keywords
Mature red blood cell, Malaria, Reticulocytes, Itraq

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological Univeristy
Nanyang Technical University

### Submitter
Siu Kwan Sze

### Lab Head
Dr Newman Sze
Nanyang Technological Univeristy


