### Accession
PXD007582

### Title
Chromatin proteomics reveals novel combinatorial histone modification signatures that mark distinct subpopulations of macrophage enhancers

### Description
The integrated activity of cis-regulatory elements fine-tunes transcriptional programs of mammalian cells by recruiting cell type–specific as well as ubiquitous transcription factors (TFs). Despite their key role in modulating transcription, enhancers are still poorly characterized at the molecular level, and their limited DNA sequence conservation in evolution and variable distance from target genes make their unbiased identification challenging. The coexistence of high mono-methylation and low tri-methylation levels of lysine 4 of histone H3 is considered a signature of enhancers, but a comprehensive view of histone modifications associated to enhancers is still lacking.  By combining chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with mass spectrometry, we investigated cis-regulatory regions in macrophages to comprehensively identify histone marks specifically associated with enhancers, and to profile their dynamics after transcriptional activation elicited by an inflammatory stimulation. The intersection of the proteomics data with ChIP-seq and RNA-seq analyses revealed the existence of novel subpopulations of enhancers, marked by specific histone modification signatures: specifically, H3K36me2/K4me1 marks transcribed enhancers, while H3K36me3/K4me1 and H3K79me2/K4me1 combinations mark distinct classes of intronic enhancers. Thus, our MS analysis of functionally distinct genomic regions revealed the combinatorial code of histone modifications, highlighting the potential of proteomics in addressing fundamental questions in epigenetics.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 20–30 × 106 of RAW cells were homogenized in lysis buffer (10% sucrose, 0.5 mM EGTA [pH 8.0], 15 mM NaCl, 60 mM KCl, 15 mM HEPES, 0.5% Triton, 0.5 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM NaF, 5 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM sodium butyrate and protease inhibitor), and nuclei were separated from cytoplasm by centrifugation at 3750 rpm (4°C) for 30 min on sucrose cushions. Nuclear pellets were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), re-suspended in digestion buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6], 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2 and 0.1 mM PMSF) and digested with micrococcal nuclease at a final concentration of 0.01 U/l, for 60 min at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 mM EDTA and chilling on ice. After centrifugation of re-suspended nuclei at 10 000 rpm (4°C) for 10 min, the soluble fraction of chromatin (S1) comprising smaller fragments, was collected as the supernatant. Pellets were re-suspended in dialysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6], 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, 5 mM NaF, 5 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM sodium butyrate and protease inhibitor) and dialyzed overnight at 4°C in a dialysis tube. The second soluble fraction of chromatin (S2), comprising large fragments, was likewise obtained after centrifugation at 10 000 rpm (4°C) for 10 min. The S1 fraction was combined with a small aliquot of the S2 fraction and diluted in ChIP dilution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6], 50 mM NaCl and 5 mM EDTA). Chromatin was incubated overnight at 4°C with H3K4me1, H3K4me3 or H3K9me3 antibodies. In parallel, 200–250 l of G protein–coupled magnetic beads was blocked in 0.5% BSA in PBS overnight at 4°C. Blocked beads were washed, added to chromatin and incubated for 3 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Beads were washed four times (with 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6] and 10 mM EDTA) using increasing salt concentration for the last three washes (of 75, 125 and 175 mM NaCl). LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) supplemented with 50 mM DTT was added to the beads for 5 min at 70°C to elute the immunoprecipitated proteins from the beads. Proteins were resolved on 4–12% Bis-Tris acrylamide SDS-PAGE pre-cast gels. For the basal and dynamics histone PTMs analysis, three biological replicates (n = 3) for each ChIP were performed. Bands corresponding to histones H3 and H4 were excised and in-gel digested. Briefly, gel bands were cut in pieces and de-stained. Gel pieces were then chemically alkylated in-gel by incubation with D6-acetic anhydride 1:9 in 1M NH4HCO3 (60–70 l final volume) and saturated CH3COONa solution as a catalyzer. After 3 h at 37°C with vigorous shaking in a thermomixer, chemically-modified gel slices were washed with NH4HCO3 and alternating with ACN at increasing % (from 50 to 100). In-gel digestion was performed with 100 ng/l trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C overnight, in order to obtain an “in-gel” ArgC-like digestion. Finally, digested peptides were collected and extracted using 5% formic acid alternated with ACN 100%.  Digested peptides were desalted and concentrated using a combination of reverse-phase C18/carbon “sandwich” system and ion-exchange (SCX) chromatography, on hand-made nano-columns (StageTips); digested peptides loaded on C18/carbon and SCX StageTips were then eluted with high-organic solvent (80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid) and 5% NH4OH/30% methanol, respectively. Eluted peptides were lyophilized, re-suspended in 1% TFA in ddH2O, pooled and subjected to LC-MS/MS. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) using an EASY-nLC™ 1000 connected to a Q-Exactive instrument through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The nano LC system was operated in one column set-up with a 25-cm analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 350 μm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (1.9 μm) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in ddH2O, and solvent B was 80% ACN with 0.1% FA. Samples were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 0–40% solvent B over 100 min followed by a gradient of 40–60% in 5 min and 60–95% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min in the EASY-nLC 1000 system. The Q-Exactive instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MSMS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–1350) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R = 60 000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full scans and 100 ms for MSMS, and the target value for MSMS was set to 1e5 (R = 15 000 at m/z 200). The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20s for Q-Exactive instrument. Standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were: spray voltage, 2.4 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analyzed by the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8, using the Andromeda search engine. The MOUSE 1401 database (51 195 entries) was used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C, because the chemical derivatization of lysines with deuterated acetic anhydride prior to trypsin digestion results in an Arg-C–like digestion. In MaxQuant, the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. The main search was performed with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was permitted, and the minimum peptide length was set at 6 amino acids.  The peptide search focused on lysine methylation and acetylation, with the variable modifications of lysine D3-acetylation (+45.0294 Da), lysine mono-methylation (masses of D3-acetylation [+45.0294] plus mass of mono-methylation [+14.016 Da]), lysine di-methylation (+ 28.031 Da), lysine tri-methylation (42.046 Da) and lysine acetylation (+42.010 Da) were included. To reduce the rate of false positives, which increases with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search, raw data were analyzed with multiple and parallel MaxQuant jobs, setting different combinations of variable modifications: 1) D3-acetylation, lysine mono-methylation, lysine di-methylation and lysine acetylation; 2) D3-acetylayion with lysine mono-methylation and lysine tri-methylation; and 3) D3-acetylayion with tri-methylation and lysine acetylation. MaxQuant search results were exported, and peptides scoring lower than 60 (corresponding to a Mascot score of 15) and with a localization probability score < 0.75 (following previous phospho-PTM studies) were removed, as they were identified with low confidence. Filtered data were subjected to manual inspection and validation using QualBrowser version 2.0.7 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) were constructed for each precursor based on the m/z value, using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a mass precision of up to four decimals. For each histone-modified peptide isoform, its relative abundance percentage (RA%) was estimated by dividing the area under the curve (AUC) of each modified peptide by the sum of all the AUC values of all observed isoforms of that peptide. Hence, the RA % value for each specific peptide represents the relative proportion of that peptide among all quantified peptide forms sharing the same amino acid sequence. The relative enrichment of each PTM, both at the basal state and after LPS stimulus, was calculated as a ratio between its RA % in the ChIP and in the input. Visualization of histone PTM enrichment and unsupervised hierarchical clustering were performed with Perseus, setting correlation distances and complete linkage as parameters. Differences among histone PTMs associated to a specific chromatin region were assessed by t-test analysis, followed by Bonferroni’s post-hoc test. Visualisation of MSMS spectra for each modification was performed using the Viewer tool in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The integrated activity of cis-regulatory elements fine-tunes transcriptional programs of mammalian cells by recruiting cell type-specific as well as ubiquitous transcription factors (TFs). Despite their key role in modulating transcription, enhancers are still poorly characterized at the molecular level, and their limited DNA sequence conservation in evolution and variable distance from target genes make their unbiased identification challenging. The coexistence of high mono-methylation and low tri-methylation levels of lysine 4 of histone H3 is considered a signature of enhancers, but a comprehensive view of histone modifications associated to enhancers is still lacking. By combining chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with mass spectrometry, we investigated cis-regulatory regions in macrophages to comprehensively identify histone marks specifically associated with enhancers, and to profile their dynamics after transcriptional activation elicited by an inflammatory stimulation. The intersection of the proteomics data with ChIP-seq and RNA-seq analyses revealed the existence of novel subpopulations of enhancers, marked by specific histone modification signatures: specifically, H3K4me1/K36me2 marks transcribed enhancers, while H3K4me1/K36me3 and H3K4me1/K79me2 combinations mark distinct classes of intronic enhancers. Thus, our MS analysis of functionally distinct genomic regions revealed the combinatorial code of histone modifications, highlighting the potential of proteomics in addressing fundamental questions in epigenetics.

### Keywords
Enhancers, Histone ptms, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Monica Soldi

### Lab Head
Dr Monica Soldi
European Institute of Oncology


