### Accession
PXD000172

### Title
Quantitative dissection and stoichiometry determination of the human SET1/MLL histone methyltransferase complexes

### Description
Methylation of lysine 4 at histone H3 (H3K4) at promoters is tightly linked to transcriptional regulation in human cells. At least six different COMPASS-like multi-subunit (SET1/MLL) complexes have been described that contain methyltransferase activity towards H3K4, but a comprehensive and quantitative analysis of these SET1/MLL complexes is lacking. We applied label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to determine the subunit composition and stoichiometry of the human SET1/MLL complexes. Peptides were applied to online nanoLC-MS/MS, using a 120 min acetonitrile gradient (5.6 - 76%). Mass spectra were recorded on an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo) selecting the 15 most intense precursor ions of every full scan for fragmentation. Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.3.0.5, with label-free quantification (LFQ), match between runs (between triplicates) and the iBAQ algorithm enabled. MaxQuant default settings were used for peptide identification; Enzyme: Trypsin/P, MS tolerance (FTMS): 6 ppm, max missed cleavages: 2, max charge: 7, MS/MS tolerance (ITMS): 0.5 Da, Peptide FDR: 0.01 and Protein FDR: 0.01. Normalized mass spectrometric intensities (LFQ intensities) were compared between the GFP-tagged and control sample, using an adapted permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) t-test in Perseus (MaxQuant package).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Methylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 (H3K4) at promoters is tightly linked to transcriptional regulation in human cells. At least six different COMPASS-like multisubunit (SET1/MLL) complexes that contain methyltransferase activity for H3K4 have been described, but a comprehensive and quantitative analysis of these SET1/MLL complexes is lacking. We applied label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to determine the subunit composition and stoichiometry of the human SET1/MLL complexes. We identified both known and novel, unique and shared interactors and determined their distribution and stoichiometry over the different SET1/MLL complexes. In addition to being a core COMPASS subunit, the Dpy30 protein is a genuine subunit of the NURF chromatin remodeling complex. Furthermore, we identified the Bod1 protein as a discriminator between the SET1B and SET1A complexes, and we show that the H3K36me-interactor Psip1 preferentially binds to the MLL2 complex. Finally, absolute protein quantification in crude lysates mirrors many of the observed SET1/MLL complex stoichiometries. Our findings provide a molecular framework for understanding the diversity and abundance of the different SET1/MLL complexes, which together establish the H3K4 methylation landscape in human cells.

### Keywords
Human, Histone methylation, Ms, Set1, Mll, Compass

### Affiliations
Radboud University Nijmegen

### Submitter
A.H. Smits

### Lab Head


