### Accession
PXD016243

### Title
The examination of Pseudomonas aeruginosa proteome in the presence of phenolic acids

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which is an important oppurtunistic pathogen, is a serious threat for human health, worldwide. New antimicrobial agents are in search and phenolic acids, secondary metabolites of plants, are promising candidates. In this project, the protein profile changes of Pseudomoas aeruginosa were determined after phenolic acid exposure by shot-gun proteomics. It was aimed to enlighten the antimicrobial action mechanism of subinhibitory concentrations of phenolic acids on pathogenic bacteria via proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
After the total protein isolations of Pseudomonas aeruginosa cultures treated with/without phenolic acids, they were subjected to LC-ESI-MS/MS. In HPLC step high pH column was used, fractions were seperated by maldi-spotter and collected randomly. The peptide samples were obtained by trypsin in 'in solution digestion' process. ESI-MS/MS was applied to these samples twice for each collected fraction for two individual biological samples.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data were converted to mgf and merged to be analyzed in Mascot version 2.3. The reference protein database of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in UniProt was used for search of peptides in Mascot. Conditions in MASCOT search were: In fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); in variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Peptide tolerance, +1.2 Da; MS/MS tolerance, +0.6 Da; peptide charge +2 and +3; instrument, ESI-TRAP; decoy checked.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, a widely distributed opportunistic pathogen, is an important threat to human health for causing serious infections worldwide. Due to its antibiotic resistance and virulence factors, it is so difficult to combat this bacterium; thus, new antimicrobial agents are in search. 3-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid (3-HPAA), which is a phenolic acid mostly found in olive oil wastewater, can be a promising candidate with its dose-dependent antimicrobial properties. Elucidating the molecular mechanism of action is crucial for future examinations and the presentation of 3-HPAA as a new agent. In this study, the antimicrobial activity of 3-HPAA on <i>P. aeruginosa</i> and its action mechanism was investigated via shot-gun proteomics. The data, which are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016243, were examined by STRING analysis to determine the interaction networks of proteins. KEGG Pathway enrichment analysis via the DAVID bioinformatics tool was also performed to investigate the metabolic pathways that undetected and newly detected groups of the proteins. The results displayed remarkable changes after 3-HPAA exposure in the protein profile of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> related to DNA replication and repair, RNA modifications, ribosomes and proteins, cell envelope, oxidative stress, as well as nutrient availability. 3-HPAA showed its antimicrobial action on <i>P. aeruginosa</i> by affecting multiple bacterial processes; hence, it could be categorized as a multitarget antimicrobial agent.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Antimicrobial action mechanism, Lc-esi-ms/ms, Phenolic acids

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Izmir Institute of Technology, Turkey
Izmir Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Ozgun Oyku Ozdemir

### Lab Head
Dr Ferda Soyer Donmez
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Izmir Institute of Technology, Turkey


