### Accession
PXD006224

### Title
pig GIT meatproteome -  Dietary changes in nutritional studies shape the structural and functional composition of the pigs' fecal microbiome-from days to weeks

### Description
Background: The possible impact of changes in diet composition for the intestinal microbiome is mostly studied after some days of adaptation to the diet of interest. The question arises if few days are enough to reflect the microbial response to the diet by changing the community composition and function. The present study investigated the fecal microbiome of pigs in a time span of four weeks after a dietary change to get an insight of the needed adaptation period. Four different diets were used differing in either protein source (field peas meal vs. soybean meal) or the concentration of calcium and phosphorus (CaP).  Results: Twelve pigs were sampled at seven time points within four weeks after the dietary change. Fecal samples were used to sequence the 16S rDNA amplicons, to analyse the microbial proteins via LC-MS/MS and to determine the SCFA production. The analysis of OTU abundances and quantification values of proteins showed a significant separation of three periods of time (p=0.001). Samples from the first day are used to define the ‘Zero phase’, samples of weeks one and two are combined as ‘metabolic phase’ and an ‘equilibrium phase’ was defined based on samples from week three and four. Only in this last phase, a separation according to the supplementation of CaP was significantly detectable (p=0.001). No changes were found based on the corn-soybean meal or corn-field peas administration. The analysis of possible factors causing this significant separation showed only an overall change of bacterial members and functional properties. The metaproteomic approach yields a total of about 9700 proteins, which were used to deduce possible metabolic functions of the bacterialcommunity.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve pigs were randomly assigned to four experimental diets. Diets were formulated to meet or exceed the animal´s nutrient requirement and differ among each other in the protein source and the CaP levels. Two out of the four diets contain the low digestible (LD) corn-field peas meal as a protein source, whereas the remaining two diets comprise the high digestible (HD) corn-soybean meal as a protein source. Each of these dietary groups was further supplied with high and low CaP levels. Diets with high and low CaP level were formulated to contain respectively 120% and 66% of the requirement for 50-75 kg pigs (NRC, 2012).   All animals were initially fed a conventional diet until week 12 of age  . At week 13 of age, animals were randomly assigned to the 4 experimental diets (3 animals per diet) which were fed until week 20 of age. Pigs were individually allocated in pens and fecal samples have been constantly collected before and during the experimental treatments. Eighty-four fecal samples across the whole experimental time span were selected for the investigation of the fecal microbiota adaptation to the experimental diets. Samples were collected on ice and immediately stored at -80°C until their analysis. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analyses Procedures for sample preparation, including protein extraction and the in-gel digestion of the proteins, were performed as previously described in Tilocca et.al [13]. Tryptic peptides were purified and desalted by using self-assembled C18 Stage Tips [24]. Tips containing the C18 membranes with the bounded peptide mixture were stored at -20°C and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (5% ACN/ 0.1% TFA) before the LC-MS/MS measurement.  LC-MS/MS analysis One point five µL of the resuspended peptides mixture was measured by using Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) faced with EasyLC 1000 nano-UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) as previously described [25]. Peptides mixture separation was performed on a 20 cm fused silica column of 75 µm inner diameter (Proxeon Biosystems). The column has been in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides mixture was loaded onto the column in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 87-minute segmented gradient of 10–50% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid).  MS/MS instrument was set to positive ion mode. Full scan was acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 1650 in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 120,000 followed by HCD fragmentation of the 12 most intense precursor ions. High-resolution MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000. The target values were 3*106 charges for the MS scans and 1*105 charges for the MS/MS scans with a maximum fill time of 25 ms and 45 ms, respectively. Fragmented masses were excluded for 30 s after MS/MS. Spectra de-noising was performed prior to peptides identification by considering the only top 12 peaks in a window of 100 Da width.

### Data Protocol
Out of the total LC-MS/MS raw data inventory, a restricted number of samples was selected for a preliminary investigation of the bacterial composition. Selected samples were representative of the potential variability induced by the experimental treatments and the potential variability across the experimental time frame.  Sorted raw data were processed through Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v.1.4.1.14) and searched against NCBInr bacteria database (release October 19th, 2015) in order to evaluate the overall taxonomic composition and export a consensus fasta database. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Mascot significance threshold was set to 0.05 and the criteria that consider only entries with at least one peptide per protein was chosen. All other filters and settings of the software were kept as default, including protein grouping with peptide confidence set on “high” and delta Cn of 0.1. The Percolator node supporting a strict maximum parsimony principle was activated with a false discovery rate of 1%.  The consensus protein fasta database obtained from the previous Proteome Discoverer processing of the raw files was employed as an in-house database (14,535 entries) for a second search performed on MaxQuant software. The use of the custom database for processing the whole raw data inventory is aimed to maximise the protein identification rate and reduce the false discovery rate by including the only protein entries that exclusively belong to the bacterial specimen of our interest [26]. Additionally, an independent database-dependent search of all raw files was performed against UniProtKB database (release March 2016) Sus scrofa (UniProt ID 9823; 61,019 entries). MaxQuant software (v.1.5.3.8), set on LFQ modality, was used for peptides identification and proteins IDs inference. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed for in silico protease digestion and peptides had to be fully tryptic. All other parameters of the software were set as default, including a peptide and protein FDR < 1%, at least 1 peptide per protein, precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm after mass recalibration and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Porcine git, Lc/msms, Bacteria, Metaproteome, Sus scrofa

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


