### Accession
PXD012415

### Title
Dynamic role of Rotatin in mitosis, ciliogenesis and nucleokinesis correlates with variable mutant cerebral phenotypes.

### Description
Recessive mutations in RTTN, encoding centrosome associated protein Rotatin, were originally identified as cause of polymicrogyria, a cortical malformation. With time a wide variety of other brain malformations has been ascribed to RTTN mutations, such as primary microcephaly. However, the function of Rotatin is largely unknown and the molecular disease mechanism underlying these malformations has not yet been elucidated. Here, we report four novel families identified by high throughput sequencing, one of them with a novel deep intronic variant. We reviewed RTTN-related disease phenotypes and defined the spectrum which includes intellectual disability (ID), short stature, microcephaly, lissencephaly, periventricular heterotopia, polymicrogyria and other malformations. Rotatin expression, function and cellular disease phenotype were studied in cultured primary skin fibroblasts from eight unrelated affected individuals. We found that Rotatin deficiency leads to abnormal centrosome amplification during mitosis, resulting in multipolar spindle formation, mitotic failure, increased apoptosis and aneuploidy. In non-dividing healthy cells, Rotatin localizes at the primary cilium, both at basal body and axoneme during ciliogenesis. Interestingly, interphase mutant cells show aberrant ciliogenesis. Proteomics analysis reveals that exogenous Rotatin in HEK293 cells interacts with the non-muscle cellular myosin complex (MYH9-MYH10-MYH14), which is essential for nucleokinesis during neuronal migration. In hiPSC-derived neurons, endogenous Rotatin localizes to the leading edge centrosome, which pulls the perinuclear cage during nucleokinesis, suggesting a pivotal role of Rotatin in neuronal migration. This study sheds light on the pleiotropic cellular functions of Rotatin, explaining disease spectrum linked to both neuronal proliferation and migration.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation (IP) Exogenous RTTN was immunoprecipitated after transfection in HEK293T cells. Initially, 15 μL EZview Red Anti-c-Myc Affinity Gel beads (E6654, Sigma Aldrich®) were washed with non-denaturing TNE-1% lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.6 + 100mM NaCl + 50mM NaF + 1% NP-40 + 1mM EDTA + Protease inhibitor tab Roche®). RTTN-transfected, LAC-MYC transfected and control HEK293T cells in 10 cm2 Petri’s dishes were transferred on ice, washed with 1×𝑑PBS, and lysed with 800 μL TNE-1% lysis buffer. To test transfection efficiency, each dish contained a 24 mm coverslip, which was subsequently fixated and immunostained (Figure S2.B.), before adding the lysis buffer. Lysates were incubated on ice for 10 minutes and centrifuged at 10000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was added to the washed beads and incubated overnight under agitation at 4°C. After washing 3 times with TNE-1% lysis buffer and centrifugation at 1000 x g, 15 sec, 4°C, bead pellets were subjected to a Mass spectrometry preparation. To confirm proteomics results, MYH10 and RTTN were immunoprecipitated in similar manner after transfection of RTTN in HEK293T (Figure S6.). Cell lysates were incubated overnight with 1:1000 μl Myosin IIB antibody [3H2] (ab684) (Abcam®) or 1:100 μl polyclonal rabbit anti-RTTN SASY. Protein-antibody complexes were subsequently incubated for 4 hours at 4°C with 50 μl Protein A Sepharose CL-4B beads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences®) under rotation, followed by WB of the separated bead pellet in 50 μl 2×Laemmli supplemented with 5% β-mercaptoethanol. Mass spectrometry After overnight incubation of whole-protein lysates on the beads, the bead-pellets were transferred to Pierce spin columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The beads were thoroughly washed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA), followed by a reduction in 50 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.2) supplemented with 2.4 mM sodium deoxycholate, 2.4 mM RTTN Supplement Page 5 sodium N-lauryl sarcosine and 5 mM dithiothreitol (all from Sigma Aldrich). Sulfhydryl groups in cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Fluka, Honeywell Research Chemicals, Bucharest, RO) to form carbamidomethyl derivatives. Samples were 1:1 diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and overnight digestion was performed after adding 0.5 μg trypsin (TPCK Trypsin, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and 1 mM CaCl2 (Merck, Darmstadt, DE). Detergents were removed/precipitated in 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën, Honeywell Research Chemicals, Bucharest, RO) and the digests were washed twice with water saturated ethylacetate (Merck). Desalting of the protein sample was performed on a C18 solid phase extraction column (“home-made ZipTip” from a 15G punch from EmporeTM Octadecyl C18 47 mm extraction disks, 3M, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and after purification proteins were solubilized in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.5 % formic acid (both from Biosolve, Valkenswaard, NL) . Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a home-made 20 cm x 100 μm C18 column (BEH C18, 130 Å, 3.5 μm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) after trapping on a nanoAcquity UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (Waters, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid-chromatograph coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer, essentially as described in Sap et al1.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of MS/MS spectra was done with the Mascot software (Daemon version 2.3.2 and Distiller version 2.3.02, Matrix Science®) using MGF files created by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) as input. Protein Mascot scores and numbers of unique peptides were taken directly from the Mascot output and reported. Only hits with a Mascot score higher than 40 were taken into account for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Recessive mutations in RTTN, encoding the protein rotatin, were originally identified as cause of polymicrogyria, a cortical malformation. With time, a wide variety of other brain malformations has been ascribed to RTTN mutations, including primary microcephaly. Rotatin is a centrosomal protein possibly involved in centriolar elongation and ciliogenesis. However, the function of rotatin in brain development is largely unknown and the molecular disease mechanism underlying cortical malformations has not yet been elucidated. We performed both clinical and cell biological studies, aimed at clarifying rotatin function and pathogenesis. Review of the 23 published and five unpublished clinical cases and genomic mutations, including the effect of novel deep intronic pathogenic mutations on RTTN transcripts, allowed us to extrapolate the core phenotype, consisting of intellectual disability, short stature, microcephaly, lissencephaly, periventricular heterotopia, polymicrogyria and other malformations. We show that the severity of the phenotype is related to residual function of the protein, not only the level of mRNA expression. Skin fibroblasts from eight affected individuals were studied by high resolution immunomicroscopy and flow cytometry, in parallel with in vitro expression of RTTN in HEK293T cells. We demonstrate that rotatin regulates different phases of the cell cycle and is mislocalized in affected individuals. Mutant cells showed consistent and severe mitotic failure with centrosome amplification and multipolar spindle formation, leading to aneuploidy and apoptosis, which could relate to depletion of neuronal progenitors often observed in microcephaly. We confirmed the role of rotatin in functional and structural maintenance of primary cilia and determined that the protein localized not only to the basal body, but also to the axoneme, proving the functional interconnectivity between ciliogenesis and cell cycle progression. Proteomics analysis of both native and exogenous rotatin uncovered that rotatin interacts with the neuronal (non-muscle) myosin heavy chain subunits, motors of nucleokinesis during neuronal migration, and in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived bipolar mature neurons rotatin localizes at the centrosome in the leading edge. This illustrates the role of rotatin in neuronal migration. These different functions of rotatin explain why RTTN mutations can lead to heterogeneous cerebral malformations, both related to proliferation and migration defects.

### Keywords
Mitosis, Rotatin, Ciliogenesis, Nucleokinesis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC Rottrdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC Rottrdam, the Netherlands


