### Accession
PXD016551

### Title
Positive effect of Manganese on growth of two strains of Granulicella sp. revealed by proteomic and genomic analyses

### Description
Members of Acidobacteria phylum are difficult to isolate and grow. Nevertheless, for some isolated strains, trace elements solution is needed in culture media for Acidobacteria growth but the impact of these metals on their growth and metabolism is not known. Here we evaluated the effect of trace element solution SL-10 in on the growth of two strains (5B5 and WH15) of Acidobacteria belonging to Granulicella sp. and studied the proteomic responses to the metal with the best growth results, complementing with genomic characterization. Granulicella species had highest growth with the addition of Mn, as well as higher tolerance to this metal compared to seven other metal ions. Variations in tolerance to metal ion concentrations suggests that Granulicella sp. strains possess different mechanisms to deal with metal ion homeostasis and stress. The proteomic profiles of both strains indicated that Mn was more important in enhance enzymatic activity than to protein expression regulation. We did not find the most common transcriptional regulation of Mn homeostasis  and we found candidate transporters that could be potentially involved in Mn homeostasis for Granulicella species. The presence of such transporters might be involved in tolerance to higher Mn concentrations, improving the adaptability of bacteria to metal enriched environments, such as the decaying wood-rich Mn environment where these two strains were isolated. Furthermore, strain 5B5 is likely more adapted to survive in an environment with higher concentration of several metal ions when compared to strain WH15.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected at day 4 of the growth curve, when the differences in the OD600nm between manganese treatment and control treatment started to be statistically significant. A total of 3 ml of bacterial cells per replicate (n=6 for each strain) were harvested by centrifugation at 10,015 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. Pellets were washed twice with 1 mL of TE buffer and finally resuspended in 1 ml TE buffer. A volume of 500 µL of cell suspension was transferred into 2 mL screw cap tubes filled with 500 µL glass beads (0.1 mm in diameter; Sarstedt, Germany) and mechanically disrupted using Fastprep (MP Biomedicals) for 3 x 30 sec at 6.5 m/s; with on ice incubation for 5 min between cycles. To remove cell debris and glass beads, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C at 21,885 x g, followed by a second centrifugation (30 min at 4 °C at 21,885 x g) to remove insoluble and aggregated proteins. The protein extracts were kept at -20 °C. Protein concentration was determined using RotiNanoquant (Carl Roth, Germany). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Protein lanes were cut into ten equidistant pieces and in-gel digested using trypsin as described earlier (Grube et al., 2014). Tryptic peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC II coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos using a non-linear binary 76 min gradient from 5 – 75 % buffer B (0.1 % acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and infused into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 in the m/z range of 300 – 1,700. The 20 most-intense peaks were selected for CID fragmentation in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 seconds; single-charged ions and ions with unknown charge were excluded from fragmentation; internal calibration was applied (lock mass 445.120025).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against a database containing protein sequences of Granulicella sp. strain 5B5 or Granulicella sp. strain WH15 and common laboratory contaminants (9,236 entries or 7,782 entries, respectively) using Sorcerer-Sequest v.27, rev. 11 (Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold v4.8.4 7 (Proteome Software, USA) as described earlier (Stopnisek et al., 2016). Relative quantification of proteins is based on normalized spectrum abundance factors (NSAF (Zhang et al., 2010)). The mass spectrometry proteomics data will beare deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository XXX. Statistical analysis was done using MeV (Saeed et al., 2003); t-test was applied for proteins that were identified in at least two replicates of the respective condition. Hierarchical clustering and t-test of z-transformed normalized data were performed with the following parameter unequal group variances were assumed (Welch approximation), P-values based on all permutation with P=0.01, significance determined by adjusted Bonferroni correction. Only significantly changed proteins showing at least 1.5-fold changes between conditions were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acidobacteria, Granulicella, Proteome, Metabolism, Genome, Manganese

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


