### Accession
PXD030371

### Title
Beta-Adrenergic stimulation of breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and bone tropic MDA-MB-231-BoM 1833 cell line secretome

### Description
In this study, we aimed to study the effect of Beta-2 Adrenergic Receptor stimulation on secreted proteins in triple negative breast cancer cell lines. We also wanted to compare protein expression in parental or bone tropic metastatic cell lines and how they respond to adrenergic signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned medium from three replicate samples of MDA-231 or MDA-1833 treated with beta-2 adrenergic receptor agonist was collected and centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min to pellet cellular debris. Conditioned media was then transferred to micro tubes and protein concentration was measured. 50 µg of protein from each condition was processed using the solid-phase-enhanced-sample-preparation (SP3) protocol, followed by enzymatic digestion overnight with trypsin/LysC (2 micrograms) at 37 oC and 1000 rpm. Protein identification was carried out by nano Liquid Chromatography coupled with Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from a full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). The ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV. The global settings were as follows: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS and chrom. peak width (FWHM) of 15 s. The full scan settings were as follows: 70 k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3 × 106, maximum injection time 120 ms; dd settings: minimum AGC target 8 × 103, intensity threshold 7.3 × 104, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, and dynamic exclusion 45 s. The MS2 settings were as follows: microscans 1, resolution 35 k (m/z 200), AGC target 2 × 105, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass, and spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed with Proteome Discoverer software. Protein identification analysis was performed with the data available in the UniProt protein sequence database for the Homo sapiens Proteome 2020_05 with 75,069 entries and a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). Two protein search algorithms were considered: (i) the mass spectrum library search software MSPepSearch, with the NIST human HCD Spectrum Library (1,127,970 spectra and (ii) the Sequest HT tandem mass spectrometry peptide database search program. Both search nodes considered an ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set as 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, peptide N-terminus Gln->pyro-Glut, protein N-terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target False Discovery Rate—FDR 1%; validation based on q-value. Protein-label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ion quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: Peptides: unique plus razor; precursor abundance was based on intensity; normalization mode was based on the total peptide amount; the minimum amount of replicate files that a feature must be detected in to be used was set to 50% in the sample group; the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on a t-test (background based). The Feature Mapper node from the Proteome Discoverer software was used to create features from unique peptide-specific peaks within a small retention-time and mass range. This was achieved by applying a chromatographic retention time alignment with a maximum shift of 10 min and 10 ppm of mass tolerance allowed for mapping features from different sample files. For feature linking and mapping, the minimum DM vs. control signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set at 5.

### Publication Abstract
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS), particularly through the &#x3b2;2 adrenergic receptor (&#x3b2;2-AR), has been linked with breast cancer (BC) and the development of metastatic BC, specifically in the bone. Nevertheless, the potential clinical benefits of exploiting &#x3b2;2-AR antagonists as a treatment for BC and bone loss-associated symptoms remain controversial. In this work, we show that, when compared to control individuals, the epinephrine levels in a cohort of BC patients are augmented in both earlier and late stages of the disease. Furthermore, through a combination of proteomic profiling and functional in vitro studies with human osteoclasts and osteoblasts, we demonstrate that paracrine signaling from parental BC under &#x3b2;2-AR activation causes a robust decrease in human osteoclast differentiation and resorption activity, which is rescued in the presence of human osteoblasts. Conversely, metastatic bone tropic BC does not display this anti-osteoclastogenic effect. In conclusion, the observed changes in the proteomic profile of BC cells under &#x3b2;-AR activation that take place after metastatic dissemination, together with clinical data on epinephrine levels in BC patients, provided new insights on the sympathetic control of breast cancer and its implications on osteoclastic bone resorption.

### Keywords
Human, Secreted, Lc-msms, Conditioned medium, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal INEB - Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Meriem Lamghari
i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal INEB - Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal


