### Accession
PXD005492

### Title
Integrative proteomics and phosphoproteomics profiling and systems biology analysis reveal dynamic signaling networks and mTORC1-dependent mitochondrial function in T cell activation

### Description
The underlying mechanisms by which naïve T cells exit from quiescence after antigen stimulation remain elusive. Using multiplex isobaric labeling proteomics technology, we report unbiased, temporal profiling of whole proteome and phosphoproteome during the activation in the wild type and Rptor-/- T cells. TCR stimulation results in dynamic reprogramming of the proteome and phosphoproteome, with predominant upregulation of molecular machineries in protein translation and mitochondrial activation. Loss of mTORC1 disrupts TCR-induced mitochondrial functions including mitoribosome biogenesis, one-carbon metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets from wild type (WT) naïve T cells and Rptor-/- T cells stimulated with α-CD3-CD28 for 0 and 16 h respectively with replicates for each were lysed, digested and labeled with TMT tags. Five sequential phosphopeptide enrichments were done from the pooled TMT labeled samples and the flowthrough of phosphopeptide enrichment was desalted and separated into 80 fractions on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Every other fractions were used for whole proteome analysis. Samples were separated on heated C18 column followed by mass spectrometry analysis on Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with one MS scan and top 20 high resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database.  Searches were performed using 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633) for phosphoproteome data. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular circuits by which antigens activate quiescent T&#xa0;cells remain poorly understood. We combined temporal profiling of the whole proteome and phosphoproteome via multiplexed isobaric labeling proteomics technology, computational pipelines for integrating multi-omics datasets, and functional perturbation to systemically reconstruct regulatory networks underlying T&#xa0;cell activation. T&#xa0;cell receptors activated the T&#xa0;cell proteome and phosphoproteome with discrete kinetics, marked by early dynamics of phosphorylation and delayed ribosome biogenesis and mitochondrial activation. Systems biology analyses identified multiple functional modules, active kinases, transcription factors and connectivity between them, and mitochondrial pathways including mitoribosomes and complex IV. Genetic perturbation revealed physiological roles for mitochondrial enzyme COX10-mediated oxidative phosphorylation in T&#xa0;cell quiescence exit. Our multi-layer proteomics profiling, integrative network analysis, and functional studies define landscapes of the T&#xa0;cell proteome and phosphoproteome and reveal signaling and bioenergetics pathways that mediate lymphocyte exit from quiescence.

### Keywords
Rptor, Mtorc1, T cell activation, Phosphoproteomics, Mitochondrial function, Proteomic, System biology, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Structural Biology MS 311, Room D1034C St. Jude Children's Research Hospital 262 Danny Thomas Place Memphis, TN 38105-3678

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng, PhD
Structural Biology MS 311, Room D1034C St. Jude Children's Research Hospital 262 Danny Thomas Place Memphis, TN 38105-3678


