### Accession
PXD007895

### Title
Site-specific Analysis of O-linked Glycoproteome Using Chemoenzymatic Strategy, part 2

### Description
Protein glycosylation is ubiquitous and plays critical roles in biology. However, study of O-linked glycoproteome (O-glycoproteome), a major type of protein glycosylation, has been severely impeded due to paucity of technology. We presented a chemoenzymatic strategy for extraction of site-specific O-linked glycopeptides (SOGO), which enabled simultaneous enrichment and identification of O-linked glycosylation sites (O-glycosites) in an unprecedented depth. Central to SOGO is a tandem-use of solid-phase capture of peptides and an O-linked glycan (O-glycan) dependent endoprotease named OpeRATOR. Interestingly, OpeRATOR requires O-glycan to specifically cleave the N-terminus of glycan-occupied Ser and Thr leading to unambiguous identification of O-glycosites and corresponding glycoproteins. The identified O-glycosites facilitated downstream determination of microheterogeneity of intact O-linked glycopeptides (O-glycopeptides). We benchmarked the method using human serum and identified 805 peptides containing 777 O-glycosites from 1,345 site-specific O-glycopeptides and 302 glycoproteins. We applied the method to study change of protein-specific O-glycosylation in human T cells infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1). Strikingly, 1404 peptides containing 1,352 O-glycosites from 577 glycoproteins were identified. In addition, altered site-specific O-linked glycosylation (O-glycosylation) during HIV infection of T cells were observed. In total, 1989 O-glycosites from 789 glycoproteins were precisely pinpointed from human serum and T cells. We observed conserved motifs for O-glycoproteome. Finally, ontology analysis revealed diverse roles for O-glycoproteins arguing broad application of our method to study biology in respective to protein O-glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and labelling. Bovine fetuin (P12763), human serum and T cells were denatured in 8 M urea/1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (AB) and reduced in 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 hour. Proteins were alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) for 30 min in the dark. Resulting samples were diluted eight-fold using 200 mM AB buffer before adding trypsin (enzyme/protein ratio of 1/40 w/w) and incubating at 37C for 16 hours. After digestion, peptides were separated to two aliquots for either guanidination on C18 column or desalting by C18 column per manufacturer’s instructions. Labelling of peptides using TMT reagents was conducted per manufacturer’s instructions. On-column peptide guanidination. On-column peptide guanidination has been described previously 12. Briefly, peptides were loaded on preconditioned C18 column. The column was then sequentially washed three times with 0.1% TFA and guanidination solution (mix equal volume of 2.85M aqueous ammonia, 0.6M O-methylisourea and 0.1% TFA, final pH=10.5). After the final wash, guanidination solution was added to cover C18 materials in the column that was incubated in 65°C for 20 min. After incubation, column was washed three time using 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted in 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptide guanidination allows identification of site-specific O-glycopeptides with Lys residues, which otherwise reacts to AminoLink solid-support and cannot be released by enzyme. Solid-phase extraction of site-specific O-glycopeptides. Peptides were conjugated to AminoLink resin (Pierce, Rockford, IL) as previously described 14. Briefly, pH of C18 elution containing peptides was adjusted to 7.4 by adding phosphate buffer. Next, peptides were incubated with resin (100 µg/100 µl resin, 50% slurry) and 50 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3) at RT for at least 4 hours or overnight with shaking. The resin was blocked by 1M Tris-HCl solution (pH7.4) with 50 mM NaCNBH3 at RT for 1 hour. The resin was washed three times with 50% ACN, 1.5 M NaCl, water and 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8). The site-specific O-glycopeptides were released from the resin by incubation with OpeRATORTM and SialEXOTM (1 unit/1 µg peptides each enzyme, Genovis Inc, Cambridge, MA) in 100 µl of 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) at 37C for 16 hours. Enzymatic activity of OpeRATORTM is higher when sialic acids are removed by SialEXOTM per manufacturer’s description. After incubation, released peptides in solution were collected. The resin was washed twice with 20 mM Tris-HCl to collect the remaining peptides. Peptides were desalted by C18 column and dried using lyophilization. Enrichment of intact glycopeptides. Intact glycopeptides were enriched using SAX (HyperSepTM Retain AX Columns (RAX) column. Briefly, peptides in 60% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v) after C18 desalting were adjusted to 95% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v). The RAX columns were conditioned in ACN, 100 mM triethylammonium acetate, water and finally 95% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) for three times per solution. Samples were loaded, washed three time using 95% ACN (v/v) 1% TFA (v/v) and eluted in 50% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v). The samples were dried using lyophilization. Peptide fractionation. Peptides (100 µg) were fractionated into 96 fractions using 1220 Series HPLC (Agilent Technologies, Inc., CA) equipped with a Zorbax Extend-C18 analytical column containing 1.8 μm particles at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. The mobile-phase A was 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and B was 10 mM ammonium formate and 90% ACN (pH 10). Peptides were separated following linear gradient: 0–2% B, 10 min; 2–8% B, 5 min; 8–35% B, 85 min; 35–95% B, 5 min; 95–95% B, 15 min. Fractions were collected from 0 to 96 min. The 96 fractions were concatenated into 24 fractions. The samples were dried using lyophilization. LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mobile phase flow rate was 0.2 μL/min with 0.1% FA and 3% ACN in water (A) and 0.1% FA 90% ACN (B). The gradient profile was set as following: 6% B for 1 min, 6−30% B for 84 min, 30−60% B for 9 min, 60−90% B for 1 min, 90% B for 5 min and equilibrated in 50% B, flowrate 0.5 μL/min for 10 min. MS analysis was performed using a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. Spectra (AGC target 4 × 105 and maximum injection time 50 ms) were collected from 350 to 1800 m/z at a resolution of 60 K followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS (at a resolution of 50 K, collision energy 36%, intensity threshold of 2 × 105 and maximum IT 105 ms) of the 16 most abundant ions using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly, and more than six protonated ions. Fixed first mass was 110 m/z. A dynamic exclusion time of 45s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
Database search of site-specific O-glycopeptides. Bovine fetuin (P12763) in a database with HIV gp120 (AAB50262.1) and TGFbeta1 (P01137) were used for analysis of fetuin using the same procedure for search of the human protein database below except that all peptides were used. RefSeq human protein database (72,956 sequences, downloaded from NCBI website Mar 25, 2015) was used to generate a randomized decoy database (decoy-pro) using The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). This concatenated target-decoy protein database was digested at C-terminus of Lys/Arg with 2 miss-cleavage sites (trypsin digestion) followed by digested at N-terminus of Ser/Thr with 5 miss-cleavage sites (OpeRATOR digestion) in silico and finally Ser/Thr containing peptides with peptide length between 6 to 46 amino acids were used resulting in 30,759,520 non-redundant peptide entries. SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search against the database with oxidation (M), guanidination (K), HexHexNAc (S/T) and HexNAc (S/T) as variable modifications. Static modification was carbamidomethylation. FDR set at 1% using Percolator. The raw files were extracted for MS/MS spectra containing oxonium ions with 10 ppm tolerance, 204 ion as mandatory together with two of the other nice oxonium ions. The result was filtered to use identification with glycan modification and oxonium ions. 1% FDR was used and the FDR was inspected using identification labelled with decoy-pro.   Analysis of glycopeptides. GPQuest was used to search for intact glycopeptides 14, 29. Prior to search, raw files were converted to mzML files using MSConvert in ProteoWizard with Peak Picking enabled and default settings for other options 44. For the peptide database, peptides identified by SOGO were extended to their tryptic counterparts using the following rules: (1) extend the N-terminus when Lys/Arg is at the C-terminus of peptides to tryptic end; (2) extend both termini of peptides when no Lys/Arg at the C-terminus of peptides to tryptic ends. Reconstructed tryptic peptides with 6-46 amino acids were used to combined with O-glycopeptide sequences identified in the literatures 14, 15, 19, 20, 22, 35, 45, 46. In GPQuest, we first extract MS/MS spectra containing oxonium ions with 204 as mandatory. The monoisotopic peaks of precursor ions were corrected. Fragment ion indexing was used to match top 100 peaks excluding oxonium ions in the MS/MS spectra to peptide database. Variable modification was oxidation. Static modification was carbamidomethylation. Additional static modification was TMT labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine for quantitative experiments. 20 ppm was used for reporter ions. A modified Morpheus scoring as previously described has been used 4, 47. In this Morpheus score, the integer number is the total number of b-, y-, peptide- and Y1-ions, set at least seven 14; and the decimal number is intensity of these ions in total intensity excluding intensity of oxonium ions, set at least 0.2 equal to 20%. We used target-decoy strategy to calculate FDR and 1% FDR was used to filter data. Further filters were used to exclude peptides with N-glycosylation motif NXS/T (X ≠ Pro) except that the peptides contained O-glycans Hex(1)HexNAc(1), Hex(1)HexNAc(1)NeuAc(1) and Hex(1)HexNAc(1)NeuAc(2). Quantitative proteomics of T cells infected with HIV. MS raw data were searched against the RefSeq human protein database using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Variable modification was oxidation (M). Static modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT labelling at peptide N-terminus and Lys. False discovery rate (FDR) set at 1% using Percolator. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm at MS1, 0.06 Da at MS2 and 20 ppm for reporter ions. PSM with only high confidence, less than 30% isolation interference of precursor ions and at least 20 average signal-to-noise value were used for quantification. The data was normalized by corresponding median of each analysis. Data distribution and result statistics in post-processing nodes were enabled for analysis. All other settings were default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Site specific, Hiv, O-linked glycoproteomics, Solid phase

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

### Submitter
Weiming Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.


