### Accession
PXD008252

### Title
Nidogen-1 is a novel extracellular ligand for the NKp44 activating receptor

### Description
The release of soluble ligands of activating Natural Killer (NK) cell receptors may represent a regulatory mechanism of NK cell function both in physiologic and in pathologic conditions. Here, we identified the extracellular matrix protein Nidogen-1 (NID1) as a ligand of NKp44, an important activating receptor expressed by activated NK cells. When released as soluble molecule, NID1 can regulate NK cell function by modulating NKp44-induced IFN-γ production or cytotoxicity.  We also show that NID1 may be present at the cell surface. In this form or when bound to a solid support (bNID1), NID1 failed to induce NK cell cytotoxicity or cytokine release. However, analysis by mass spectrometry revealed that exposure to bNID1 can induce relevant changes in the proteomic profiles suggesting an effect on different, biological processes of human NK cells.

### Sample Protocol
Polyclonal IL-2-activated NK cells derived from four different healthy donors were cultured for 20 h at 37°C in FCS- and IL-2-deprived medium in the absence or in the presence of rNID1 (20 g/ml) directly coated on the plate or of anti-NKp44 mAb coated via GAM. Next, for subsequent proteomic analysis, cells were processed by in-StageTip (iST) method65. Briefly, the pellets were lysed, reduced and alkylated in a single step using a buffer containing 2% (w/v) SDC (sodium deoxycholate), 10 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride), 40 mM CAA (chloroacetamide), 100 mMTrisHCl pH 8.0 and loaded into StageTip. The lysates were diluted with 25 mMTris pH 8.5 containing 1 µg of trypsin. Samples were acidified with 100 µl of 1% (v/v) TFA and washed three times with 0.2 % (v/v) TFA. Elutions were performed with 60 µl of 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) ACN. Samples were loaded from the sample loop directly into a 75-μm ID × 50 cm 2 μm, 100 Å C18 column mounted in the thermostated column compartment and the peptides were separated with increasing organic solvent at a flow rate of 250 nl/min using a non-linear gradient of 5-45 % solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 180 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Orbitrap detection was used for both MS1 and MS2 measurements at resolving powers of 120 K and 30 K (at m/z 200), respectively. Data dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in top speed mode with a 2 sec. cycle time, during which precursors detected within the range of m/z 375−1500 were selected for activation in order of abundance. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.8m/z isolation window was used, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s. Automatic gain control targets were 2.5 × 105 for MS1 and 5 × 104 for MS2, with 50 and 54ms maximum injection times, respectively. The signal intensity threshold for MS2 was 1 × 104. HCD was performed using 28% normalized collision energy. One microscan was used for both MS1 and MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software66, version 1.6.0.1, was used to process the raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match), a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptide identification was required.Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 February 2017). In the processing the variable modifications are Acetyl (Protein N-Term) Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), on the contrary the Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification.The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software. Algorithm MaxLFQ was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of the missing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The release of soluble ligands of activating Natural Killer (NK) cell receptors may represent a regulatory mechanism of NK cell function both in physiologic and in pathologic conditions. Here, we identified the extracellular matrix protein Nidogen-1 (NID1) as a ligand of NKp44, an important activating receptor expressed by activated NK cells. When released as soluble molecule, NID1 regulates NK cell function by modulating NKp44-induced IFN-&#x3b3; production or cytotoxicity. In particular, it also modulates IFN-&#x3b3; production induced by Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF)-DD following NKp44 engagement. We also show that NID1 may be present at the cell surface. In this form or when bound to a solid support (bNID1), NID1 fails to induce NK cell cytotoxicity or cytokine release. However, analysis by mass spectrometry revealed that exposure to bNID1 can induce in human NK cells relevant changes in the proteomic profiles suggesting an effect on different biological processes.

### Keywords
Nid1 nk nkp44  receptor

### Affiliations
IGG
Ist G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Chiara Lavarello

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist G. Gaslini


