### Accession
PXD005314

### Title
Human cerebrospinal fluid proteoform profiling

### Description
. In this study, we have investigated the capacities of last-generation Ultra-High Resolution Q-Tof systems to deal with high complexity intact protein samples, have developed the tools to process the intact protein data in an existing label-free quantification pipeline, and have evaluated the approach on a cohort of patients suffering from neurodegenerative disease in a proof-of concept study. Several proteoforms have been pointed out for their capacity to distinguish Alzheimer disease patients from patients suffering from other neurodegenerative disease and have been characterized.

### Sample Protocol
. In this study, we have investigated the capacities of last-generation Ultra-High Resolution Q-Tof systems to deal with high complexity intact protein samples, have developed the tools to process the intact protein data in an existing label-free quantification pipeline, and have evaluated the approach on a cohort of patients suffering from neurodegenerative disease in a proof-of concept study. Several proteoforms have been pointed out for their capacity to distinguish Alzheimer disease patients from patients suffering from other neurodegenerative disease and have been characterized.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data processing  Data Processing : LC-MS data were automatically processed (calibration, protein signal extraction with Dissect™, deconvolution and determination of monoisotopic masses with SNAP™, charge state filtering, similarity filtering, export of deconvoluted monoisotopic masses with corresponding retention time and intensities) in Data Analysis 4.2™ (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). Singly charged compounds have been automatically excluded. Only the isotopically resolved compounds have been taken into account.  LC-MS/MS data were automatically processed (calibration, creation of the LC-MS/MS compound list, deconvolution, export of XML list with deconvoluted parent ion and fragment spectra masses and intensities) in Data Analysis 4.2™ (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) Statistical analyses were performed with Profile Analysis 2.1™ (Bruker Daltonics). The retention times, intensities and deconvoluted masses and retention times obtained for each compound from the Data Analysis processing have been used to generate the bucket table. The mass accuracy and retention time tolerance were set to 2 ppm and 0,5 (High Flow analysis) or 2 min (Low Flow analysis).Compounds sharing the same mass and retention time coordinates within those tolerances have been considered as similar. The bucket tables were built with all compounds present at least in 60% of one class, and the missing values were replaced by the average value of the bucket in the class the analysis belongs to. Intensities values were then normalized with the quantile normalization algorithm available in Profile Analysis. A student’s t-test was performed to reveal compounds that were capable of discriminating 2 classes (p-value <0.02). We then selected the compounds that were also discriminating in the absence of normalization and missing values replacement for the correlation with clinical data step. This analysis was performed with the MedCalc™ 12.1.4.0 software.  LC MS/MS identifications.  Identifications were done either manually with BioTools 3.2™ (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) or automatically with Byonic™ (ProteinMetrics, SanCarlos, USA).  With BioTools, the Top-Down Sequencing search functionality was used with Mascot 2.4(Matrix Science) to identify proteoforms with a partially unmodified sequence. When this approach did not suffice to identify the protein the designated proteoform originates from, a blast search that was performed after an initial tag determination. In both cases, the full characterization was then obtained by mutation/modification searches performed with the Sequence Editor functionality available in BioTools 3.2™.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Csf, Alzheimer, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
Bruker Daltonique S.A
Clinical Proteomic Platform  CHU de Montpellier - Hôpital St. Eloi  Institute of Regenerative Medicine -  Biotherapy - IRMB 80, av A. Fliche, 34295 Montpellier Cedex 5

### Submitter
Pierre-Olivier SCHMIT

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christophe Hirtz
Clinical Proteomic Platform  CHU de Montpellier - Hôpital St. Eloi  Institute of Regenerative Medicine -  Biotherapy - IRMB 80, av A. Fliche, 34295 Montpellier Cedex 5


