### Accession
PXD028011

### Title
proteome of different mutant strains of M. pneumoniae

### Description
This project or dataset comprises raw data of the proteome of different mutant strains of M. pneumoniae (∆mpn453; ∆mpn372; CV2 (∆mpn133∆mpn372); CV0 (WT_gp35) and ∆mpn133).The proteome of the strain was used to corroborate the genotype of the obtained mutants and to discard unspected changes in the protein expression profile.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome samples of different mutant strains, mycoplasma strains were grown at an exponential phase of growth. Then the medium was removed and cells were washed twice with PBS. Total protein extracts were obtained by lysing the cells with 200 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT and 0.1 M Hepes). The total protein extracts of two biological replicates were analyzed by LC/MS/MS. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (37°C, 60 min), and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 6-fold with 0.2M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37°C overnight with trypsin (ratio protein:enzyme 10:1). Peptides generated upon digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2.5 µL of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos fitted with a nanospray source after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system. Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75 μm x 250 mm with a gradient of 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 60 min, at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with the nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and its source temperature at 325°C. In addition, 20 µg of the total extract was digested and desalted, and 1 µg of the resulting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro using the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min).

### Data Protocol
Two technical replicates for each strain were analyzed unless otherwise indicated. The spectra were assigned to peptides by using Mascot and a customized database comprising all the ORFs longer than 19 amino acids. Protein abundance was estimated as the average area under the height of the precursor ions for the three most abundant peptides of each protein. In order to correct for systematic differences in the distribution of protein abundances between samples, summarized protein areas were normalized by the median of the areas distribution for this sample. The log2 of the normalized area fold-changes between mutant strains and the WT strain were computed. Significant changes in protein abundance were assessed by independent two-sided t-test (scipy.stats python package v1.5.0 (Virtanen et al, 2020)), followed by multiple tests correction using Benjamini-Hochberg method with 5% family-wise false discovery rate (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). This analysis was restricted to those cases in which protein values from two technical replicates were available in all the strains, and no significant changes were found in the abundances of any protein compared to those observed in WT strain

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mpn372, Mpn133, Mpn453, Mutant, Mycoplasma pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) Dr. Aiguader 88 (Barcelona 08003, Spain) (lab head)

### Submitter
Samuel Miravet Verde

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) Dr. Aiguader 88 (Barcelona 08003, Spain) (lab head)


