### Accession
PXD037102

### Title
LC-MS characterization of anti-PD-L1 and CXCR4 bispecific nanobodies

### Description
Antibodies and derivative drugs targeting immune checkpoints have been approved for the treatment of several malignancies, but there are fewer responses in patients with pancreatic cancer. Here, we designed a nanobody molecule with bi-targeting on PD-L1 and CXCR4, as both targets are overexpressed in many cancer cells and play important roles in tumorigenesis.  The nanobody sequences targeting PD-L1 and CXCR4 were linked by the (G4S)3 flexible peptide to construct the anti-PD-L1/CXCR4 bispecific nanobody. The bispecific nanobody was expressed in E. coli cells and purified by affinity chromatography. The purified nanobody was biochemically characterized by mass spectrometry, Western blotting and flow cytometry to confirm the molecule and its association with both PD-L1 and CXCR4. The biological function of the nanobody and its anti-tumour effects were examined.

### Sample Protocol
Antibodies and derivative drugs targeting immune checkpoints have been approved for the treatment of several malignancies, but there are fewer responses in patients with pancreatic cancer. Here, we designed a nanobody molecule with bi-targeting on PD-L1 and CXCR4, as both targets are overexpressed in many cancer cells and play important roles in tumorigenesis.  The nanobody sequences targeting PD-L1 and CXCR4 were linked by the (G4S)3 flexible peptide to construct the anti-PD-L1/CXCR4 bispecific nanobody. The bispecific nanobody was expressed in E. coli cells and purified by affinity chromatography. The purified nanobody was biochemically characterized by mass spectrometry, Western blotting and flow cytometry to confirm the molecule and its association with both PD-L1 and CXCR4. The biological function of the nanobody and its anti-tumour effects were examined.

### Data Protocol
The purified bispecific nanobody (1 mg/mL) was concentrated in a 0.05 mmol/L NH4HCO3 solution. An ultrahigh pressure liquid system (ACQUITY I-Class) was connected to a VION IMS-Q-TOF (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). The MassPREP (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) desalting column was used for UPLC with a controlled column temperature of 60 ℃. Mobile phase A was a 0.1% formic acid-water solution, and mobile phase B was a 0.1% formic acid-acetonitrile solution. The system was preequilibrated with 95% mobile phase A, and then 0.5 μg of the bispecific nanobody was injected and eluted with a gradient at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: capillary voltage, 2.0 kV; sampling cone voltage, 60 V; ion source temperature, 115 °C; desolvent gas temperature, 500 °C; and desolvent gas flow rate, 900 L/min. Data were collected by UNIFI 1.8, and mass (Da)-intensity was obtained by deconvolution analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nanobody, Complete mw, Bispecific, Protein

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, Engineering Research Center of Cell& Therapeutic Antibody, Ministry of Education,Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
shuyi xu

### Lab Head
Dr Mingyuan Wu
School of Pharmacy, Engineering Research Center of Cell& Therapeutic Antibody, Ministry of Education,Shanghai Jiao Tong University


