### Accession
PXD037277

### Title
Sacculi from E. coli strain MG1655 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Braun’s lipoprotein (Lpp) plays a major role in stabilizing the integrity of the cell envelope in E. coli, as it provides a covalent crosslink between the outer membrane and the peptidoglycan layer. Here, using atomic force microscopy, we visualized Lpp directly on peptidoglycan sacculi. Lpp is homogeneously distributed over the outer surface of the sacculus at a high density.

### Sample Protocol
Sacculi were digested with trypsin (final concentration 2 mg/mL) at 37 °C with continuous stirring for at least 12 hours, and the reaction was stopped by the addition of 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The solution was incubated at 37 °C for 15 min and then centrifuged at 92,000 g for 30 min. The supernatant was collected and dried in a vacuum concentrator. The sample was suspended in MilliQ water.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The RAW files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 to generate a list of identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mg1655, Lc-ms/ms, Sacculi

### Affiliations
Shandong University
College of Marine Life Sciences, and Frontiers Science Center for Deep Ocean Multispheres and Earth System, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.

### Submitter
Qi Sheng

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhong Zhang
College of Marine Life Sciences, and Frontiers Science Center for Deep Ocean Multispheres and Earth System, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.


