### Accession
PXD024188

### Title
Competitive binding of STATs to receptor phospho-Tyr motifs accounts for altered cytokine responses in autoimmune disorders

### Description
In this study, we compared the effects of two cytokine treatments on the proteome of human Th-1 cells. We used saturating doses of murine single-chain IL-27 (EBI3+p28, 10nM) and HyperIL-6 (20nM) and continuously stimulated cells of three donors with the two cytokines for 24h or left untreated.

### Sample Protocol
Human CD4+ T-cells were isolated from buffy coat samples of healthy donors. The cells were grown under Th-1 polarizing conditions and each donor separated into three populations for SILAC: Light: unstimulated, Medium (K6, R6): IL-27, Heavy (K8, R10): HypIL-6. Cells were grown for 10 days to ensure quantitative SILAC incorporation. After expansion, cells were starved without IL-2 for 24 hours before stimulation with 10 nM IL-27 or 20 nM HyIL-6 for 15 minutes (phosphoproteomics) or 24 h (global proteomic changes). Cells were then washed three times in ice-cold PBS, mix in a 1:1:1 ratio, resuspended in SDS-containing lysis buffer (1% SDS in 100 mM Triethylammonium Bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)) and incubated on ice for 10 min to ensure cell lysis. Then, cell lysates were centrifuged at 20000 g for 10 minutes at +4째C and supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Protein concentration was determined by using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo, #23227), and 10 mg of protein per experiment were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma, #D0632) for 1 h at 55째C and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, #I6125) for 30 min at RT. Protein was then precipitated using six volumes of chilled (-20째C) acetone overnight. After precipitation, protein pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of 100 mM TEAB and digested with Trypsin (1:100 w/w, Thermo, #90058) and digested overnight at 37.C. Then, samples were cleared by centrifugation at 20000 g for 30 min at +4째C, and peptide concentration was quantified with Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo, #23275).

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer .RAW files were analyzed, and peptides and proteins quantified using MaxQuant, using the built-in search engine Andromeda (102). All settings were set as default, except for the minimal peptide length of 5, and Andromeda search engine was configured for the UniProt Homo sapiens protein database (release date: 2018_09).

### Publication Abstract
Cytokines elicit pleiotropic and non-redundant activities despite strong overlap in their usage of receptors, JAKs and STATs molecules. We use IL-6 and IL-27 to ask how two cytokines activating the same signaling pathway have different biological roles. We found that IL-27 induces more sustained STAT1 phosphorylation than IL-6, with the two cytokines inducing comparable levels of STAT3 phosphorylation. Mathematical and statistical modeling of IL-6 and IL-27 signaling identified STAT3 binding to GP130, and STAT1 binding to IL-27R&#x3b1;, as the main dynamical processes contributing to sustained pSTAT1 levels by IL-27. Mutation of Tyr613 on IL-27R&#x3b1; decreased IL-27-induced STAT1 phosphorylation by 80% but had limited effect on STAT3 phosphorgylation. Strong receptor/STAT coupling by IL-27 initiated a unique gene expression program, which required sustained STAT1 phosphorylation and IRF1 expression and was enriched in classical Interferon Stimulated Genes. Interestingly, the STAT/receptor coupling exhibited by IL-6/IL-27 was altered in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). IL-6/IL-27 induced a more potent STAT1 activation in SLE patients than in healthy controls, which correlated with higher STAT1 expression in these patients. Partial inhibition of JAK activation by sub-saturating doses of Tofacitinib specifically lowered the levels of STAT1 activation by IL-6. Our data show that receptor and STATs concentrations critically contribute to shape cytokine responses and generate functional pleiotropy in health and disease.

### Keywords
Human th-1, Il-27, Il-6

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
University of Dundee, School of Life Sciences, Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology

### Submitter
Stephan Wilmes

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Moraga-Gonzalez
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.


