### Accession
PXD030233

### Title
Identification of di-Boron cleavage events at Dha residues on recombinant protein in e.coli lysate

### Description
Neurokinin-A (NKA) is only active when its C-terminus is amidated. B2(OH2) is thought to interact with Dha and cleave the peptide, leaving the amide on the C-terminus of the left-hand peptide. PeptideID MS/MS experiment was performed in e.coli lysate with overevpressed recombinant NKA-eH3 to prove diBoron activity in biologically relevant context. Overall analysis of the Dha generation and consumption on e.coli lysate was also performed.

### Sample Protocol
The constructed NKA-eH3.1 plasmid was used to transform into E. coli BL21(DE3) competent cells and expressed as a histone H3 protein with a N-terminal fused neuropeptide. Cells were grown in 300 ml LB media with 100 µg/ml ampicillin at 37 oC and induced with 1 mM IPTG when the OD600 reached 0.6. The incubation was continued for another 3 hr at the same temperature. Cell pellets were resuspended in 20 ml wash buffer (50 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) with a protease inhibitor cocktail and sonicated using a microtip. The supernatant was separated by centrifugation (20,000 rpm, 20 min at 4 oC) and then discarded. To dissolve histone proteins, the cell pellets were mixed with 0.5 ml DMSO at room temperature for 10 mins and then shaken with 5 ml unfolding buffer (7 M GdnHCl, 20 mM Tris, 10 mM DTT, pH 7.5) for 1 hr. Then the mixture was centrifuged at 20,000 rpm for 10 mins at room temperature. To remove DTT, the supernatant was desalted into DBHDA reaction buffer (3 M GdnHCl, 100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 8.0) via PD-10 columns (Cytiva). After measuring the concentration of the protein mixtures in E. coli lysates by BCA assay (PierceTM BCA protein assay kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 250 molar equivalents of DBHDA were added. The mixture was incubated at 37 oC for 3 hr to achieve NKA(Dha)-eH3.1, and then desalted into diboron reaction buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0) to remove excess DBHDA using PD-10 columns (Cytiva). The diboron cleavage was proceeded in the presence of 100 mM tetrahydroxydiboron and 25 mM sodium ascorbate. A 100 µg protein mixture from each reaction solution was digested with trypsin for MS/MS analysis. ‘In-solution’ tryptic or chymotryptic digestions were performed following an MS-compatible protocol. Specifically, an 100 µg cell lysate sample was diluted into 100 µl with 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer containing 8 M urea,  and then treated with 10 mM TCEP at room temperature for 30 mins. The mixture was incubated with 50 mM freshly prepared 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 mins in dark. Then a ten-time dilution was performed with a 50 mM TEAB buffer. The mixture was treated with trypsin (1:20 w/w trypsin:protein), or with 10 mM CaCl2 and chymotrypsin (1:20 w/w chymotrypsin:protein) at 37 oC overnight. The salts within the digested samples were extracted by an Oasis HLB 1cc Vac cartridge (Waters) and the peptide fragments were eluted with 250 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA/50% acetonitrile or 0.1% TFA/80% acetonitrile in milliQ water). Then the elution was concentrated overnight on centrifugal evaporator (EZ-2.3 Elite, GeneVac SP).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant (2.0.1.0)(1). Peptides were searched against reference database (uniport proteome UP000000625, downloaded 19.05.2021) with additional sequence of recombinant protein provided below. Default settings were used apart from the following changes:  semi-tryptic search was performed with the following variable modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation, N-teminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, Cysteine -> Dha (custom defined -33.9877 Da), C-terminal amidation (every peptide), New N-term after diBoron cleavage at DHA (custom defined -30.9881 Da). Up to four modifications were allowed per peptide. Additionally, match between runs function was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Biomolecule environments can enhance chemistries with the potential to mediate and modulate self-modification (e.g., self-cleavage). While these enhanced modes are found in certain biomolecules (e.g., RNA ribozymes), it is more rare in proteins. Targeted proteolytic cleavage is vital to physiology, biotechnology, and even emerging therapy. Yet, purely chemically induced methods for the site-selective cleavage of proteins remain scarce. Here, as a proof of principle, we designed and tested a system intended to combine protein-enhanced chemistry with tag modification to enable synthetic reductive protein chemistries promoted by diboron. This reductively driven, single-electron chemistry now enables an operationally simple, site-selective cleavage protocol for proteins directed to readily accessible dehydroalanine (Dha) residues as tags under aqueous conditions and in cell lysates. In this way, a mild, efficient, enzyme-free method now allows not only precise chemical proteolysis but also simultaneous use in the removal of affinity tags and/or protein-terminus editing to create altered N- and C-termini such as protein amidation (&#x2500;CONH<sub>2</sub>).

### Keywords
Chemical cleavage, Dha, Amidated c-term

### Affiliations
Rosalind Franklin Institute
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford Oxford, UK; Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; The Rosalind Franklin Institute, Oxfordshire, UK

### Submitter
Yana Demyanenko

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Davis
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford Oxford, UK; Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; The Rosalind Franklin Institute, Oxfordshire, UK


