### Accession
PXD004117

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the extracellular and intracellular role of IL-33 in primary human endothelial cells

### Description
IL-33 is a nuclear cytokine from the IL-1 family that plays important roles in health and disease.Under healthy conditions, IL-33 is constitutively expressed to high levels in the nucleus of producing cells in various human and mouse tissues. The extracellular function of IL-33 cytokine has been well documented, but it remains unclear whether intracellular nuclear IL-33 has additional functions in the nucleus. Here, we used a global proteomic approach based on quantification of 5000 individual proteins by high-resolution mass spectrometry to compare the extracellular and intracellular roles of IL-33 in primary human endothelial cells, a major source of IL-33 protein in human tissues. Large-scale analysis of protein expression was performed either after stimulation of the cells with the IL-33 mature form IL-3395-270 (during 6h or 24h) or after siRNA knockdown of intracellular IL-33 (two experiments, each with a different pool of distinct siRNAs, noted siRNA1 and siRNA2). In each case, proteins were fractionated by 1D SDS-PAGE in 12 gel bands, and label-free quantitative analysis was performed. The present dataset corresponds to the stimulation of human endothelial cells with IL-3395-270 during 6h (IL33_6) or 24h (IL33_24). Cells cultured in the absence of IL-33 were used as control (CTil33). Three independent biological replicates (noted _A, _B, _C) were prepared and analyzed for each condition, leading to 9 different samples. Each of them was fractionated into 12 gel bands analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS, leading to 108 raw files.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 2% of SDS and sonicated, and protein concentration was determined by detergent-compatible assay (DC assay, Biorad). Protein samples were reduced in Laemli buffer (final composition 25mM DTT, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 40mM Tris pH 6.8), 5min at 95°C. Cysteine residues were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 90mM and incubation during 30min at room temperature in the dark. Protein samples were loaded on a home-made 1D SDS-PAGE gel and electrophoretic migration was performed in order to fractionate each protein sample (100µg) into 12 gel bands. For replicate and comparative analyses, samples were processed on adjacent migration lanes that were cut simultaneously with a long razor blade. Gel slices were washed and proteins were digested by 0.6 µg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted, dried in speed-vac and resuspended with 17 µL of 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate3000 system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five µL of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex) at 20 µL/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. After 5 minutes desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (75 µm ID x 15 cm, PepMap C18, Dionex) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B during 80 min at 300 nL/min flow rate. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300-2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 60000. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was employed within 60 seconds to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and for quantitative analysis (Individual processing for each of the 3 MS datasets described above). Data were searched against Human entries of the Swissprot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Knowledgebase release 2016/01, Human taxonomy). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 0.8 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to 1. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs. To perform relative quantification between proteins identified in different biological conditions, we used the LFQ metric from the MaxQuant “protein group.txt” output (reflecting a normalized protein quantity deduced from all peptides intensity values detected in all the different fractions from the compared samples).

### Publication Abstract
IL-33 is a nuclear cytokine from the IL-1 family that plays important roles in health and disease. Extracellular IL-33 activates a growing number of target cells, including group 2 innate lymphoid cells, mast cells and regulatory T cells, but it remains unclear whether intracellular nuclear IL-33 has additional functions in the nucleus. Here, we used a global proteomic approach based on high-resolution mass spectrometry to compare the extracellular and intracellular roles of IL-33 in primary human endothelial cells, a major source of IL-33 protein in human tissues. We found that exogenous extracellular IL-33 cytokine induced expression of a distinct set of proteins associated with inflammatory responses in endothelial cells. In contrast, knockdown of endogenous nuclear IL-33 expression using two independent RNA silencing strategies had no reproducible effect on the endothelial cell proteome. These results suggest that IL-33 acts as a cytokine but not as a nuclear factor regulating gene expression in endothelial cells.

### Keywords
Human, Fractionation, Cytokine, Shotgun, Inflammation, Huvec, Il-33, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Gonzalez de Peredo
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


