### Accession
PXD040362

### Title
Proteomics analysis of regulation by Bmal1 and physiological time-restricted feeding

### Description
To define regulation of tissue proteomes by Bmal1, daily feeding rhythm, and the interaction, we employed Bmal1-stopFL mice, which do not express the main transcriptional activator of the molecular clock, Bmal1, except in cre recombinase-expressing cells1,2 (Figure 1A). Bmal1-stopFL mice lacking cre (Bmal1 knockout, KO) are analogous to Bmal1-null mice and display severely impaired behavioral and molecular rhythms1-3. Hepatocyte-specific Alfp-cre and skeletal muscle-specific Hsa-cre genes were introduced to generate a single line wherein both hepatocyte and skeletal muscle Bmal1 were reconstituted (Liver+Muscle-RE), i.e., rescued (Smith, Koronowski et al. 2023). This approach had the benefit of analyzing liver and muscle from the same mice but comes with the qualification that the abundance of some proteins may be influenced by Bmal1 function in the other tissue, or by a synergistic effect of Bmal1 in both tissues, rather than through rescue of local Bmal1 function alone. Proteomic anlaysis was performed in liver and skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of liver and muscle for proteomic analysis was performed essentially as described previously [PMID: 30814737; 36472367]. Briefly, tissue was lysed in 6 M guandine in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 containing 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-choloroacetamide but tip-probe sonication and heated at 95℃ for 5 min. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min at 4℃ and supernatant containing protein was diluted with 1-volume of water and then precipitated with 4-volumes of acetone overnight at -30℃. Protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4℃ and washed with 80% acetone. The protein pellet was dried briefly to remove residual acetone and resuspended in 10% trifluoroethanol in 100mM HEPEs pH 7.5. Proteins were quantified with BCA, normalized to 10 µg/10 µL and digested overnight with 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Sigma) and 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade LysC (Wako, Japan) overnight at 37℃. Separate pooled samples of liver and muscle was also generated by mixing 4 µg of each sample and aliquoted into 10 µg/10 µL prior to digestion for use as internal controls. The peptides were labelled directly with 20 µg of 10-plex TMT (Thermo Scientific) for 1.5 h at room temperature. A total of six TMT labeling experiments (three for liver and three for muscle)  were performed. The labelling scheme and experimental design is described in Table SX and also uploaded to the Pride Proteomics Repository (see Data Availability). After labelling, the reaction was deacylated with a final concentration of 0.2% hydroxylamine for 15 min followed by acidification to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic (TFA) and the samples for each TMT experiment pooled. Samples were desalted directly with SDB-RPS microcolumns as previously described [PMID: 36472367] and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (MeCN) containing 0.1% TFA and fractionated by neutral pH reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex 3500 micro-UHPLC. Peptides were injected onto a 0.3 mm x 15 cm column (C18BEH; 1.7 µm; Waters) maintained at room temperature and separated over 60 min gradient of 2-40% Buffer B at 6 µL/min into 48 fractions and automatically concatenated into 12 fractions in a looping fashion (Buffer A: 10 mM ammonium formate pH 7.5; Buffer B: 90% MeCN. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80℃.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% MeCN containing 0.1% TFA and separated on a nano-Dionex 3500 UHPLC. Peptides were injected onto a 0.075 mm x 40 cm column (C18AQ; 1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Germany packed into PepSep, Marslev, Denmark)) maintained at 40 ℃ and separated over 60 min gradient of 2-30% Buffer B at 300 nL/min. Peptides were detected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 30%. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 350–1,550 m/z (120,000 resolution, 8 x 105 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with fixed cycle time of 3 s via HCD fragmentation mode and detection in the orbitrap (50,000 resolution; 1 × 105 AGC, 86 ms maximum injection time and 0.7 m/z isolation width). Only ions with charge state 2-7 triggered MS/MS with peptide monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 s at 10 ppm. DDA Data were searched against the UniProt mouse database (October 2020; UP000005640_9606 and UP000005640_9606_additional) with MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% (PMID: 19029910). All data were searched with oxidation of methionine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine and 10-plex TMT of peptide N-termini and Lysine set as fixed modifications. First search MS1 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by recalibration and main search MS1 tolerance set to 4.5 ppm, while MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular clocks and daily feeding cycles support metabolism in peripheral tissues. Although the roles of local clocks and feeding are well defined at the transcriptional level, their impact on governing protein abundance in peripheral tissues is unclear. Here, we determine the relative contributions of local molecular clocks and daily feeding cycles on liver and muscle proteomes during the active phase in mice. LC-MS/MS was performed on liver and gastrocnemius muscle harvested 4 h into the dark phase from WT, Bmal1 KO, and dual liver- and muscle-Bmal1-rescued mice under either ad libitum feeding or time-restricted feeding during the dark phase. Feeding-fasting cycles had only minimal effects on levels of liver proteins and few, if any, on the muscle proteome. In contrast, Bmal1 KO altered the abundance of 674 proteins in liver and 80 proteins in muscle. Local rescue of liver and muscle Bmal1 restored &#x223c;50% of proteins in liver and &#x223c;25% in muscle. These included proteins involved in fatty acid oxidation in liver and carbohydrate metabolism in muscle. For liver, proteins involved in de novo lipogenesis were largely dependent on Bmal1 function in other tissues (i.e., the wider clock system). Proteins regulated by BMAL1 in liver and muscle were enriched for secreted proteins. We found that the abundance of fibroblast growth factor 1, a liver secreted protein, requires BMAL1 and that autocrine fibroblast growth factor 1 signaling modulates mitochondrial respiration in hepatocytes. In liver and muscle, BMAL1 is a more potent regulator of dark phase proteomes than daily feeding cycles, highlighting the need to assess protein levels in addition to mRNA when investigating clock mechanisms. The proteome is more extensively regulated by BMAL1 in liver than in muscle, and many metabolic pathways in peripheral tissues are reliant on the function of the clock system as a whole.

### Keywords
Liver, Muscle, Circadian rhythm, Clock, Bmal1

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


