### Accession
PXD003799

### Title
Proteomics Informed by Transcriptomics for Characterising Active Transposable Elements and Genome Annotation in Aedes aegypti

### Description
The incomplete genome annotation of non-model organisms hampers molecular and proteomic studies. Proteomics informed by transcriptomics (PIT) is suited to non-model organisms because peptides are identified using transcriptomic, not genomic, data. Aedes aegypti is the mosquito vector for the (re-)emerging dengue, chikungunya, yellow fever and Zika viruses. An Ae. aegypti genome sequence is available, however experimental evidence for >90% of the Ae. aegypti proteome or the activity of transposable elements (TEs) that constitute 50% of the Ae. aegypti genome is lacking. We used PIT to characterise the proteome of the Aedes aegypti derived cell line Aag2. Hotspots of incomplete genome annotation were identified which are not explained by poor sequence and assembly quality. We developed criteria for the characterisation of proteomically active TEs and demonstrate that protein expression does not correlate with a TE’s genomic abundance. Finally, we identify Phasi Charoen-like virus as an unrecognised contaminant of Aag2 cells. We therefore present the first proteomic characterisation of mobile genetic elements, and provide proof-of-principle that PIT can evaluate a genome’s annotation to guide annotation efforts.

### Sample Protocol
An exponentially growing culture of the Aedes aegypti cell line Aag2 was harvested in 2X SDS-PAGE Laemmli sample buffer. The proteins in 50 μg of total protein extract were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel lane was cut into 20 slices and each slice subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a ProGest automated digestion unit (Digilab, Marlborough, MA USA). The resulting peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA USA). After washing with 0.5% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Dionex) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min, 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58 min, 32-40% B over 3 min, 40-90% B over 1 min, held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 2000 and the top six multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap. Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30 sec; exclusion list size, 500) were used. Fragmentation conditions in the LTQ were as follows: normalized collision energy, 40%; activation q, 0.25; activation time 10 msec; and minimum ion selection intensity, 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
PIT analysis was done using a bespoke bioinformatic pipeline (PIT: Genome annotation_from mgf; http://gio.sbcs.qmul.ac.uk/root?workflow_id=63cd3858d057a6d1) available on the publically available proteomics resource GIO (Fan et al., 2015). The default settings on each tool contained in the pipeline were used unless otherwise  stated, as follows. The 20 .RAW files from the MS/MS analysis were first converted to mzML files using MSConvert whilst the de novo transcriptome produced by Trinity (containing 73,881 sequences) was translated in all 6 frames (ORFs with a start codon > 200 nt) using PIT:ORFall to produce 62,675 ORFs. The resultant mzML and FASTA files were used for a database search and subsequent downstream processing using MSGF+MSMS Search and PIT:PSMProcessing. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications in the search. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion, a MS tolerance of 10 ppm and a decoy search database option enabled. The PSM-FDR for peptides and proteins was set to 0.01. The mzid output file was used by PIT:Extract hits to extract ~160,000 peptides corresponding to Trinity generated transcript ORFs. The Trinity transcripts were mapped to the Ae. aegypti genome (taxid: 7159; Aedes-aegypti-Liverpool_SCAFFOLDS_AaegL3.fa, VectorBase, vectorbase.org (Giraldo-Calderón et al., 2015) release date Apr, 2014) using GMAP. The output files from PIT:Extract hits and GMAP were used for PIT:Integrate, which is the core of PIT methodology, to integrate identified transcriptomic and proteomic features into a single file. In the final step of the workflow, PIT:Protein homology was used to BLAST each protein sequence against the Ae. aegypti (Aedes-aegypti-Liverpool_PEPTIDES_AaegL3.3, VectorBase: release date Oct, 2014), Cx. quinquefasciatus (taxid: 7176; Culex-quinquefasciatus-Johannesburg_PEPTIDES_CpipJ2.2.fa, VectorBase: release date Aug, 2014), D. melanogaster (taxid: 7227; proteome ID UP000000803, Uniprot release date Oct, 2014) and the NCBI non-redundant protein RefSeq databases respectively For each protein, if the identity of the BLAST hit passed the threshold (default value is 60%) the search for that sequence stopped, if not, the sequence was BLAST searched against the NCBI non-redundant database.  MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) (Cox & Mann, 2008) in combination with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) were used to compare the PIT analysis with conventional proteomic analysis. The 20 .RAW files were processed and searched against a combined FASTA file containing the 6 frame translation of the de novo transcriptome produced by Trinity, a 6 frame translation of the official Ae. aegypti transcript list (Aedes-aegypti-Liverpool_TRANSCRIPTS_AaegL3.3.fa; VectorBase: release date Oct 2014) and the official Ae. aegypti peptide list (Aedes-aegypti-Liverpool_PEPTIDES_AaegL3.3.fa). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications in the search. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion, a MS tolerance of 6 ppm, a maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide and a minimum peptide length of 6, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a maximum charge of 7. Reverse database search options were enabled and contaminants included. The MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.5 Da and the FDR for peptides and proteins was set to 0.01. A posterior error probability (PEP) score was generated for each protein. Only proteins with a PEP of less than 0.1 were considered in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Pit, Aedes aegypti, Proteomics informed by transcriptomics

### Affiliations
School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS81TD
University of Bristol, Bristol UK

### Submitter
Andrew Davidson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Davidson
School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS81TD


