### Accession
PXD025961

### Title
A homeobox7 transcription factor from Mesembryanthemum crystallinum enhanced salt tolerance

### Description
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum (common ice plant) is a facultative halophyte species, which has adapted to extreme conditions. In this study, we cloned a McHB7 transcription factor gene from the ice plant. The expression of McHB7 was significantly induced by 500 mM NaCl and it reached the peak under salt treatment for 7 days. The McHB7 protein was targeted to the nucleus. Overexpression of McHB7 gene in ice plant leaves by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation led to 25 times more McHB7 transcripts than the non-transformed control wild type (WT). After 500 mM NaCl treatment for 7 days, SOD, POD activities and water content of the transgenic plants were significantly higher than WT, while MDA content was decreased in the transgenic plants. Proteomics results showed that a total of 1082 and 1072 proteins were profiled under control and salt treatment, respectively. 22 (2%) and 11 (1%) proteins were uniquely identified under control and salt stress conditions, respectively. Among these 11 proteins, 7 were increased and 4 were decreased. Most identified proteins involved in the processes of regulation of biological, transporter and catalytic activity, biosynthesis of secondary metabolties and response to stimulus were significantly increased in the McHB7 overexpression ice plants under high salinity. All the results demonstrate that the McHB7 transcription factor plays a positive role in improving plant salt tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
A phenol method was used for protein extraction [6]. Infiltrated ice plant leaves (1 g fresh weight) were ground into powder by motor and pestle. A total of 3 mL extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.9 M Sucrose, 20 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol, 1×protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1 mM PMSF) and 3 mL Tris-saturated phenol were added into the protein powder, and then transferred to a centrifugation tube, and vortexed well at 4 ℃ for 1 h. The samples were centrifuged at 4℃, 15,000 g for 15 min. The upper layer was transferred to a new tube carefully, then five times volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol was added for protein precipitation. The samples were placed in -20℃ overnight. After centrifugation at 4℃, 15,000 g for 15 min, the supernatant was removed. The precipitate was washed, resuspended in 80% acetone, and transferred to a new 2 mL centrifuge tube, placed in -20℃ for 20 min. After centrifugation at 4 ℃, 13,000 rpm for 15 min and washing again with 100% acetone, the protein pellet was dissolved in 150 µL dissolution buffer (6 M Urea, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH8.5). Protein quantification was determined by using a Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of proteins were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Four biological replicates were conducted for each sample.The protein samples from four biological replicates of WT control and four biological replicates of transgenic plants were digested with trypsin as previously described [6]. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) was carried out on an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Germering, DE, USA) coupled with a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo FisherScientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). The peptides were separated by an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (250 mm ×75 μm; 2 μm-C18) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) with 3 h gradient at the flow rate of 0.35uL/min. The LC gradient was: 0-5 min, 2%B; 140 min, 35%B; 160 min, 100%B; 165 min, 100%B; 170 min, 2%B; 180 min, 2%B, run stop. The MS was operated between MS scan and MS/MS scan automatically with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Eluted peptides were detected in the Orbitrap MS at a resolution of 120 K with a scan range of 350-1800 m/z, and the most abundant ions bearing 2-7 charges were selected for MS/MS analysis. Automatic gain control (AGC) for the full MS scan was set as 200,000 with maximum injection time (MIT) as 50 ms, and AGC Target of 10,000 and MIT of 35 ms were set for the MS/MS scan. The MS/MS scan used quadrupole isolation mode, collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation energy, and 35% collision energy, and an IonTrap detector. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds was applied to prevent repeated sequencing of the most abundant peptides.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for protein identification. The SEQUEST algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer was used to process raw data files. Spectra were searched using the TAIR10 protein database with the following parameters: 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 as mass tolerance for MS2, two maximum missed tryptic cleavage sites, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.021) on cysteine residues, dynamic modifications of (oxidation of methionine (+15.996) and phosphorylation (+79.966) on tyrosine, serine, and threonine. Search results were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and peptide confidence level was set for at least two unique peptides per protein for protein identification. Relative protein abundance in the samples was measured using label-free quantification in the Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Proteins identified and quantified in all 4 out of 4 biological samples were used, and no imputation was performed. Peptides in the control and transgenic samples were quantified as area under the chromatogram peak. The heatmap was generated using online software MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca). Functional categorization was built by Proteome Discoverer software and venn diagram was made by Venny 2.1.0 (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). Protein network analysis was conducted using String (https://string-db.org/cgi/network).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mesembryanthemum crystallinum</i> (common ice plant) is a halophyte species that has adapted to extreme conditions. In this study, we cloned a <i>McHB7</i> transcription factor gene from the ice plant. The expression of <i>McHB7</i> was significantly induced by 500 mM NaCl and it reached the peak under salt treatment for 7 days. The <i>McHB7</i> protein was targeted to the nucleus. <i>McHB7</i>-overexpressing in ice plant leaves through <i>Agrobacterium</i>-mediated transformation led to 25 times more <i>McHB7</i> transcripts than the non-transformed wild type (WT). After 500 mM NaCl treatment for 7 days, the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and peroxidase (POD) and water content of the transgenic plants were higher than the WT, while malondialdehyde (MDA) was decreased in the transgenic plants. A total of 1082 and 1072 proteins were profiled by proteomics under control and salt treatment, respectively, with 22 and 11 proteins uniquely identified under control and salt stress, respectively. Among the 11 proteins, 7 were increased and 4 were decreased after salt treatment. Most of the proteins whose expression increased in the <i>McHB7</i> overexpression (OE) ice plants under high salinity were involved in transport regulation, catalytic activities, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and response to stimulus. The results demonstrate that the <i>McHB7</i> transcription factor plays a positive role in improving plant salt tolerance.

### Keywords
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum; mchb7; transcription factor; salt treatment; proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Biology, Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA

### Submitter
Xuemei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
Department of Biology, Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA


