### Accession
PXD008914

### Title
RNA-binding protein repertoire of embryonic stem cells

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) have essential roles in RNA-mediated gene regulation, and yet annotation of RBPs is limited mainly to those with known RNA-binding domains. To systematically identify the RBPs of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), we here employ interactome capture, which combines UV cross-linking of RBP to RNA in living cells, oligo(dT) capture and MS. From mouse ESCs (mESCs), we have defined 555 proteins constituting the mESC mRNA interactome, including 283 proteins not previously annotated as RBPs. Of these, 68 new RBP candidates are highly expressed in ESCs compared to differentiated cells, implicating a role in stem-cell physiology. Two well-known E3 ubiquitin ligases, Trim25 (also called Efp) and Trim71 (also called Lin41), are validated as RBPs, revealing a potential link between RNA biology and protein-modification pathways. Our study confirms and expands the atlas of RBPs, providing a useful resource for the study of the RNA-RBP network in stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
R1 mouse embryonic stem cells were purchased from ATCC (catalog no. SCRC-1011) and maintained on mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs, CF-1 strain, MCTT 001-CF1-V) treated with mitomycin C (Sigma, M4287) in GlutaMax DMEM (Gibco, 10569) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco, 16000-044), nonessential amino acids (Gibco, 11140-050), 100 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Amresco) and 1,000 U/ml leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) (Millipore, ESG1107). Prior to interactome capture experiments, R1 cells were purified from MEFs and cultured on 0.1% gelatin-coated dishes. For in vitro differentiation of ESCs into embryoid bodies, 1 × 106 R1 cells were plated on 90-mm Petri dishes in ESC medium without LIF. Medium was renewed every other day. HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (WelGENE). MCF-7 cells were maintained in RPMI1640 supplemented with 10% FBS (WelGENE). In vivo isolation of mESC (R1) RBPs was carried out as previously described18,77. Briefly, 6 × 108 R1 cells (per condition) were irradiated with 0.15 J/cm2 UV light at 254 nm, lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% lithium dodecyl sulfate, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT) and supplemented with 30 ng of in vitro transcribed, poly(A)-tailed luciferase mRNA. Oligo dT25 beads (NEB, S1419S) were used to capture poly(A)+ RNAs, and covalently cross-linked proteins were released from captured RNAs by treatment with RNase A/T1 mix, as described elsewhere77. Eluted proteins were identified and quantified by LC-MS/MS. For quantitative RT-PCR of pulled-down RNAs (Fig. 1d), equal volumes of each lysate were treated with proteinase K (0.4 mg/ml, Roche) for 1 h at 50 °C, and RNAs were extracted by addition of Trizol to the lysate. The same volumes of RNA were used for subsequent reverse transcription. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry including alkylation, buffer exchange and digestion was performed as reported with minor modifications18,77. Samples were adjusted to 5 mM DTT, incubated for 1 h at 56 °C and concentrated using Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filters (0.5 ml, 3-kDa cut-off) (Millipore). After addition of 200 μl 55 mM iodoacetamide, the samples were mixed at 600 r.p.m. for 30 min in the dark and then concentrated. The buffer was exchanged by adding 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3, and the sample was then concentrated for three successive rounds. After addition of 0.6 μg trypsin in 40 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3, the filter units were incubated at room temperature overnight. The derived peptides were collected by centrifugation of the filter units, washed with 50 μl of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifuged again. Reductive dimethylation for stable isotope labeling of the samples was performed according to a previously described protocol78. Labeled peptide samples retrieved from the pulldown and the according controls were combined and fractionated into 12 fractions on an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator according to the manufacturer's protocol using Immobiline DryStrips (pH 3–10 NL, 13 cm; GE Healthcare). Focusing was performed at a constant current of 50 mA with a maximum voltage of 8,000 V. After reaching 20 kVh the samples were collected, acidified with CF3COOH and desalted using StageTips79. The dried samples were dissolved in 10 μl 4% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 (ref. 80) and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine81 against mouse proteins in UniProt82 (53,623 entries, downloaded on 21 June 2011), to which 265 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries had been added. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 p.p.m. for peptide masses, followed by 6 p.p.m. in the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. At least one unique peptide was required for protein identification. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable protein group if no peptide sequence unique to a single database entry was identified.  For protein quantification a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the 'requantify' and 'match between runs' function enabled. Protein groups assigned to contaminants or reverse sequences were removed. Average protein ratios were reported if they were quantified in at least two biological replicates on the basis of at least two ratio counts per replicate. Statistical analysis was performed using the Limma package in R/Bioconductor83,84. After fitting a linear model to the data, an empirical Bayes moderated t-test was used, and P values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins that had an adjusted P value < 0.01 and were more abundant in the cross-linked sample than in the control sample were assigned to the mRNA interactome (584 protein groups). Correlations between replicates were calculated in R using Pearson correlation. The 584 protein groups mapped to 555 unique genes that were used for subsequent processing.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) have essential roles in RNA-mediated gene regulation, and yet annotation of RBPs is limited mainly to those with known RNA-binding domains. To systematically identify the RBPs of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), we here employ interactome capture, which combines UV cross-linking of RBP to RNA in living cells, oligo(dT) capture and MS. From mouse ESCs (mESCs), we have defined 555 proteins constituting the mESC mRNA interactome, including 283 proteins not previously annotated as RBPs. Of these, 68 new RBP candidates are highly expressed in ESCs compared to differentiated cells, implicating a role in stem-cell physiology. Two well-known E3 ubiquitin ligases, Trim25 (also called Efp) and Trim71 (also called Lin41), are validated as RBPs, revealing a potential link between RNA biology and protein-modification pathways. Our study confirms and expands the atlas of RBPs, providing a useful resource for the study of the RNA-RBP network in stem cells.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rna-binding, Mouse, Mecs

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center


