### Accession
PXD022735

### Title
In-depth proteomic analysis of Plasmodium berghei sporozoites using trapped ion mobility spectrometry with parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation

### Description
We took advantage of a novel highly sensitive timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer, based on trapped ion mobility spectrometry with parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation. Combined with three alternative methods for sporozoite purification, this approach allowed us to identify the deep proteome of P. berghei sporozoites using low numbers of parasites. This study provides a reference proteome for P. berghei sporozoites, identifying a core set of proteins expressed accross species, and illustrates how the unprecedented sensitivity of the timsTOF PRO system enables deep proteomic analysis from limited sample amounts.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmodium sporozoites were obtained by hand dissection of the salivary glands of infected mosquitoes. We compared three different methods for parasite purification: 1) the density gradient purification procedure used as a reference method 2) immunocapture of sporozoites using magnetic beads coupled to anti-CSP antibodies and 3) sorting of fluorescent sporozoites by flow cytometry. Lysis of sporozoites was done directly in Laemmli buffer. Lysates were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) for short migration (5 mm). Lanes containing the samples were then cut into small pieces and submitted to trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces, desalted by StageTips and analysed by LC-MS/MS system (nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic files (mgf) were generated using Data Analysis 5.1 (Bruker) and processed with X!Tandem pipeline version 0.2.36 (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline) using databases from UniProt or PlasmoDB. The databases used were: Contaminants_20160129 containing a list of common contaminants, Anopheles_stephensi_UP.fasta (Date 09/2018, number of entries: 11,767) and PlasmoDB_PB_39_PbergheiANKA (Date 09/2018, number entered: 5,076). The search parameters were : maximum 1 missed cleavage allowed, Cys-CAM as fixed modification, Met-Ox and acetyl N-term as variable modifications. MS mass error tolerances were adapted to instrument. MS1 mass error tolerance were set to 50 ppm. MS2 mass error tolerance were set to 50 ppm. Protein lists were filtered and validated using Proline software version 1.6.1 (FDR < 1% at peptide and protein level, minimum 1 peptide per protein).

### Publication Abstract
Sporozoites of the malaria parasite Plasmodium are transmitted by mosquitoes and infect the liver for an initial and obligatory round of replication, before exponential multiplication in the blood and onset of the disease. Sporozoites and liver stages provide attractive targets for malaria vaccines and prophylactic drugs. In this context, defining the parasite proteome is important to explore the parasite biology and to identify potential targets for antimalarial strategies. Previous studies have determined the total proteome of sporozoites from the two main human malaria parasites, P. falciparum and P. vivax, as well as P. yoelii, which infects rodents. Another murine malaria parasite, P. berghei, is widely used to investigate the parasite biology. However, a deep view of the proteome of P. berghei sporozoites is still missing. To fill this gap, we took advantage of the highly sensitive timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer, combined with three alternative methods for sporozoite purification, to identify the proteome of P. berghei sporozoites using low numbers of parasites. This study provides a reference proteome for P. berghei sporozoites, identifying a core set of proteins expressed across species, and illustrates how the unprecedented sensitivity of the timsTOF PRO system enables deep proteomic analysis from limited sample amounts.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Timstof pro, Malaria, Sporozoites, Proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite
Plateforme P3S - UMS PASS 37 - Sorbonne Universite - INSERM

### Submitter
Cédric Pionneau

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Plateforme P3S - UMS PASS 37 - Sorbonne Universite - INSERM


