### Accession
PXD003257

### Title
Proteomic comparison defines novel markers to characterize heterogeneous populations of extracellular vesicle subtypes

### Description
The extracellular vesicles (EVs) have become the focus of rising interest, because of their numerous functions in physiology and pathology. Cells release heterogeneous vesicles of different sizes and intracellular origins, including small EVs formed inside endosomal compartments (i.e. exosomes) and EVs of various sizes budding from the plasma membrane. Specific markers for the analysis and isolation of different EV populations are missing, imposing important limitations to understanding EV functions. Here, EVs from human dendritic cells were first separated by their sedimentation speed and then either by their behavior upon upward floatation into iodixanol gradients, or by immuno-isolation. Extensive quantitative proteomic analysis allowing comparison of the isolated populations showed that several classically used exosome markers, like major histocompatibility complex, flotillin and heat shock 70 kDa proteins, are similarly present in all EVs. We identified proteins specifically enriched in small EVs, and define a new set of five protein categories displaying different relative abundance in distinct EV populations. We demonstrate the presence of exosomal and non-exosomal subpopulation within small EVs, and propose their differential separation by immuno-isolation using either CD63, CD81 or CD9. Our work thus provides new guidelines to define subtypes of EVs for future functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent sets of iodixanol fractions recovered from 4.4x108 or 2.8x108 cells pooled from 2-3 donors were simultaneously separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal blue. Three gel slices were excised per fraction for each set. For immuno-isolated samples and their flow-through, SDS-PAGE was used without separation as a cleanup step, and only one gel slice was excised. Subsequently, gel slices were washed and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% MeCN, we performed in-gel digestion using trypsin overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30 °C. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin or trypsin/LysC. A nanoflow HPLC instrument was coupled on-line to the LTQ-Orbitrap XL Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer and an RSLCnano system to the Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column, separated and MS data acquired using Xcalibur software. Peptides were separated by HPLC over a two-step gradient of 157 min from 0% to 30% acetonitrile and of 20 min (from 30% to 50%) and by UHPLC over a two-step gradient of 100 min (from 5% to 35%) and of 15 min from 35% to 75% acetonitrile and analyzed in the Orbitrap XL or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Full-scan MS was acquired with 60,000 and 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer, respectively and ions from each full scan were fragmented with CID or HCD, respectively and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
All peptide/protein identification data were processed using the Institut Curie-developed software myProMS (http://myproms.curie.fr/) version 3.0 (work in progress), which performs search engine results validation, false positive rate (FDR)-based data filtering, protein quantification, statistical analysis and data visualization. FDR calculation uses the qvality algorithm and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. For qualitative analysis, a protein was considered present in an iodixanol fraction if identified by at least 3 distinct peptides in the group of 3 gel slices obtained per fraction, for at least one donor. For label free quantification, peptide XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were computed with MassChroQ version 1.2.1 using OBIWarp alignment algorithm. A scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a two-tailed t test was performed with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have become the focus of rising interest because of their numerous functions in physiology and pathology. Cells release heterogeneous vesicles of different sizes and intracellular origins, including small EVs formed inside endosomal compartments (i.e., exosomes) and EVs of various sizes budding from the plasma membrane. Specific markers for the analysis and isolation of different EV populations are missing, imposing important limitations to understanding EV functions. Here, EVs from human dendritic cells were first separated by their sedimentation speed, and then either by their behavior upon upward floatation into iodixanol gradients or by immuno-isolation. Extensive quantitative proteomic analysis allowing comparison of the isolated populations showed that several classically used exosome markers, like major histocompatibility complex, flotillin, and heat-shock 70-kDa proteins, are similarly present in all EVs. We identified proteins specifically enriched in small EVs, and define a set of five protein categories displaying different relative abundance in distinct EV populations. We demonstrate the presence of exosomal and nonexosomal subpopulations within small EVs, and propose their differential separation by immuno-isolation using either CD63, CD81, or CD9. Our work thus provides guidelines to define subtypes of EVs for future functional studies.

### Keywords
Dendritic cells, Extracellular vesicles, Microvesicles, Exosomes, Ectosomes

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP) Institut Curie

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP) Institut Curie


