### Accession
PXD040497

### Title
Vacuum insulated probe heated electrospray ionization source (VIP-HESI) significantly enhances micro flow rate chromatography signals in the Bruker timsTOF mass spectrometer.

### Description
Nano-flow chromatography-tandem mass spectrometer (nLC-MS/MS) is a popular choice in proteome research as it provided high-sensitivity analysis with minimal sample usage, but its quantitative proteomics applications become restricted by low analytical throughput, and low robustness. To circumvent this limitation, we describe the performance of the new Vacuum Insulated Probe Heated ElectroSpray Ionization source (VIP-HESI) coupled to the Bruker timsTOF mass spectrometer and show it enhances micro-spray flow rate chromatography signals in comparison to nanospray source conditions using the CaptiveSpray (CS) and ElectroSpray Ionization (ESI) sources. In addition, using a 0.5 x 200mm and 1 × 150 mm columns, achieved excellent reproducibility of chromatographic retention time, coefficient of variation, and precision quantification using data from un-depleted mouse plasma, HeLa and K562 digest peptide samples.

### Sample Protocol
PepCalMix solution containing 20 non-naturally occurring synthetic peptides that cover a wide mass and retention time range was synthesized by SynPeptide, Shanghai, China. A stock solution of 1pmol/μL was prepared in 5% v/v acetic acid in 2% v/v acetonitrile-containing water and different dilutions were made from this stock. Frozen plasma aliquots were thawed at 4°C for 3 hours, protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay and samples were normalized by aliquoting out 400μg in PBS. Denaturation was done by lysis buffer (200mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 20% SDS) to a final concentration of 5% SDS. Samples reduced with 5mM TCEP for 15 min at 55°C and then alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide for 10 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid and S-trap buffer (100mM TEAB pH8.5/90% methanol) was added prior to loading on S-trap 96 well-plate format by 1 min spin at 4000 x g. Once loaded, samples were washed six times with 400μL S-trap buffer and spun at 4000 x g for 5 min to ensure complete dryness. Tryptic digestion was performed at 37°C with Trypsin in digestion buffer (100mM TEAB pH8.5) at a 1:25 ratio. Frozen mouse tissues (Liver, kidney and gastroc muscle) was lysed in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 7.55 with 5% SDS and homogenized on a Precellys Evolution. Protein concentration of the lysate was determined using the BCA protein assay. Lysate containing 200ug protein was aliquoted out and denatured for 2 min at 90C. After denaturation, samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP (Sigma Cat# 4706) for 30 min at 60°C and then alkylated with 10mM ɑ-iodoacetamide (Millipore Cat# 407710) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% and S-trap buffer (100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 7.1 + 90% methanol) was added at 1:7 ratio prior to loading on S-trap™ columns. Using a positive pressure manifold samples were washed twice with S-trap buffer before overnight digestion at 37°C with Trypsin in digestion buffer (50mM ammonium carbonate pH8.0) at 1:50 ratio. Digested peptides were eluted as per the manufacturer's instructions.   HeLa S3 cells cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum were grown at 37⁰C in 5% CO2 to confluency. Cells were lysed in urea buffer (8M urea, 0.1M Tris pH 8.2) by three rounds of flash-freezing in ethanol/dry ice followed by thawing/vortexing. Protein quantity was determined by BCA assay andlysate was reduced with 5mM TCEP (Pierce) for 30 min at 37⁰, alkylated with 15mM Iodacetamide for 30 min at 20⁰C, and then quenched with 5mM TCEP for 30 min at 20⁰C. Digestion was carried using trypsin at a ratio of 1:100 ratio and samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid\H2O (v/v) for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. K562 cells were cultured at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in EMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and were grown to 70% confluence. Cells were lysed in the urea buffer (8 M urea, 0.1% RapiGest, and 100 mM NH4HCO3). Protein quantity was determined by BCA assay. Proteins were reduced with 5mM TCEP for 30 min at 37⁰C, alkylated with 10mM Iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, and digested using 1:50 trypsin, and samples desalted with tC18 SepPak cartridges.

### Data Protocol
For dia-PASEF runs, Spectronaut 16.0 analysis in peptide-centric mode was used to perform the targeted data extraction of all samples. The identification results were filtered with a q-value of <0.01 and MS2 ion peak areas of quantified peptides were summed to estimate the protein quantification. For slice-pasef runs, we measured HeLa sample amounts of 10ng, 100ng, and 1000ng at 20μL/min flow rate with 20cm x 0.5mm x 1.9μm (Dr. Maisch, GmbH) column setup coupled with VIP-HESI source. DIA-NN 1.8.2 was used and --tims -scan was provided to DIA-NN in the additional options section. The measurements corresponding to each combination of the acquisition method and the injection amount were analyzed separately, and the output tsv file was filtered at a 1% global protein q-value.

### Publication Abstract
By far the largest contribution to ion detectability in liquid chromatography-driven mass spectrometry-based proteomics is the efficient generation of peptide ions by the electrospray source. To maximize the transfer of peptides from liquid to a gaseous phase to allow molecular ions to enter the mass spectrometer at micro-spray flow rates, an efficient electrospray process is required. Here we describe superior performance of new Vacuum-Insulated-Probe-Heated-ElectroSpray-Ionization source (VIP-HESI) coupled with micro-spray flow rate chromatography and Bruker timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer. VIP-HESI significantly improves chromatography signals in comparison to nano-spray ionization using the CaptiveSpray source and provides increased protein detection with higher quantitative precision, enhancing reproducibility of sample injection amounts. Protein quantitation of human K562 lymphoblast samples displayed excellent chromatographic retention time reproducibility (&lt;10% coefficient-of-variation (CV)) with no signal degradation over extended periods of time, and a mouse plasma proteome analysis identified 12% more plasma protein groups allowing large-scale analysis to proceed with confidence (1,267 proteins at 0.4% CV). We show that Slice-PASEF mode with VIP-HESI setup is sensitive in identifying low amounts of peptide without losing quantitative precision. We demonstrate that VIP-HESI coupled with micro-flow-rate chromatography achieves higher depth of coverage and run-to-run reproducibility for a broad range of proteomic applications.

### Keywords
Vacuum insulated probe heated electrospray ionization source (vip-hesi), Dia-pasef, Slice-pasef, Electrospray ionization (esi), Captive spray (cs), Micro-flow rate chromatography

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Lab head, Director Proteomics Group, Institute for Systems Biology (ISB), Seattle, WA, USA

### Submitter
Mukul Midha

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Lab head, Director Proteomics Group, Institute for Systems Biology (ISB), Seattle, WA, USA


