### Accession
PXD044020

### Title
Uncoupling Metabolic Health from Thermogenesis via BCAA Flux in Brown Fat

### Description
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is best known for thermogenesis. Whereas numerous studies in rodents found tight associations between the metabolic benefits of BAT and enhanced whole-body energy expenditure, emerging evidence in humans suggests that BAT is protective against Type 2 diabetes independent of body-weight. The underlying mechanism for this dissociation remained unclear. Here, we report that impaired mitochondrial flux of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) in BAT, by deleting mitochondrial BCAA carrier (MBC, encoded by Slc25a44), was sufficient to cause systemic insulin resistance without affecting whole-body energy expenditure or body-weight. We found that brown adipocytes catabolized BCAAs in the mitochondria as essential nitrogen donors for the biosynthesis of glutamate, N-acetylated amino acids, and one of the products, glutathione. BAT-selective impairment in mitochondrial BCAA flux led to elevated oxidative stress and insulin resistance in the liver, accompanied by reduced levels of BCAA-nitrogen derived metabolites in the circulation. In turn, supplementation of glutathione restored insulin sensitivity of BAT-specific MBC knockout mice. Notably, a high-fat diet rapidly impaired BCAA catabolism and the synthesis of BCAA-nitrogen derived metabolites in the BAT, while cold-induced BAT activity is coupled with an active synthesis of these metabolites. Together, the present work uncovers a mechanism through which brown fat controls metabolic health independent of thermogenesis via BCAA-derived nitrogen carriers acting on the liver.

### Sample Protocol
On Bead Digestion and Labeling Beads were washed with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) buffer, followed by resuspension in 1M Urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and initially digesting it with 2 µg Trypsin (Promega) at 37oC for two hours. After initial trypsin incubation, samples were centrifuged briefly, and the supernatants were collected in new tubes. Beads were further washed three times with 1M Urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), washed fractions were pooled with supernatants and left to digest overnight at room temperature. The following morning, digested peptides were reduced first with 5 mM TCEP, followed by alkylation with 10 mM Iodoacetamide, quenching alkylation with 5 mM DTT and finally quenching the digestion process with TFA. Acidified digested peptides were desalted over C18 StageTips [PMID: 12585499]. Peptides were then eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and dried in a speedvac. Dried samples were reconstituted with 200 mM EPPS buffer, pH 8.0, and labelled with TMTPro reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following incubation at room temperature for 2 h, the reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Samples were combined, further desalted over StageTips, finally eluted into autosampler inserts (Thermo Scientific), dried in a speedvac and reconstituted with 5% Acetonitrile, 5% TFA for MS analysis.    Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry Mass spectrometric data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (with a FAIMS device enabled) coupled to a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000. The 100 µm capillary column was packed in-house with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a 180 min linear gradient from 5% to 32% buffer B (90% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (5% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 550 nL/min across the column. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (resolution - 60,000; scan range - 400−1,600 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target – 400,000; maximum injection time – automatic). MS2 spectra were collected in the Orbitrap following higher-energy collision dissociation (resolution – 50,000; AGC target – 125,000; normalized AGC target - 250%; NCE (normalized collision energy) – 36; isolation window - 0.5 Th; maximum injection time - 86ms).  FAIMS compensation voltages (CVs) were set at -40V, -60V, and -80V.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis Database searching included all entries from the mouse UniProt Database (downloaded in May 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order [PMID: 17327847]. Raw files were converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle [PMID: 33190505].  Searches were performed with Comet [PMID: 23148064] using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and fragment bin tolerance of 0.02.  TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini +304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a linear discriminant after which proteins were assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1% analysis [PMID: 21183079].  TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. More specifically, reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to exclude those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) < 160 across all TMT channels and < 0.5 precursor isolation specificity.  The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed (for a given protein).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown adipose tissue (bat), Branched-chain amino acids (bcaa)

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Anthony Verkerke

### Lab Head
Dr Shingo Kajimura
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Harvard Medical School


