### Accession
PXD020088

### Title
First identification of ITM2B interactome in the human retina

### Description
ITM2B is a type II ubiquitous transmembrane protein which role remains unclear. ITM2B mutations have been associated with different disorders: mutations leading to longer mutant proteins have been reported in two distinct Alzheimer-like autosomal dominant disorders with early-onset progressive dementia, cerebellar ataxia, spasticity and variable degrees of deafness, early onset-cataract and vascular retinal abnormalities. Both disorders share neurological features including severe cerebral amyloid angiopathy, non-neuritic plaques, and fibrillary tangles as in Alzheimer Disease. Our group reported a missense mutation in ITM2B underlying an unusual retinal dystrophy with no dementia. This finding would suggest a specific role of ITM2B in the retina. The identification and characterization of retinal protein partners would bring new insights to the cellular functions of ITM2B in the retina. We performed ITM2B immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative proteomic analysis on normal human retina using two distinct antibodies recognizing different epitopes of the protein. Two pools of ITM2B protein partners were identified for each antibody and compared for functional annotation. Besides common proteins, specific partners involved in translation and mitochondrial homeostasis were identified suggesting a role of ITM2B in these cellular functions. To our knowledge, this is the first report of ITM2B interactome in human retina. Our findings also support a unique and specific role for the newly annotated ITM2B protein isoform.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of the human retina Postmortem human ocular globes from donors were acquired from the School of Surgery (Ecole de Chirurgie, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France) and from the Laboratory of Anatomy, (Faculty of Medicine of St-Etienne, France). Experiments on postmortem human retina were performed according to the National regulations, as well as the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol was approved by the IRBs of the School of Surgery and Faculty of Medicine of St-Etienne. The authorization for the use of human samples for research at the Institut de la Vision is registered as CODECOH DC-2015-2400.  One post-mortem human retina was obtained by the surgery school of Paris from an 85-year old man with no apparent history of ophthalmic disorder. The entire retina without the macula was put in liquid nitrogen and conserved in -80°C. Total proteins were extracted from the human retina using 1.8 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5 , 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton 100 X) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1% Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 Sigma, 1% Protease inhibitor cocktail Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The mix of lysis buffer and human retina was kept on ice during 30 min with vortexing every 10 min. After centrifugation 13 000 rpm 10 min, the supernatant containing the proteins was transferred to a new tube. The proteins extracted were used for immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation  We used Dynabead protein G (Life Technologies) to perform immunoprecipitation. We choose two different anti-ITM2B antibodies: one raised in rabbit (14.88 µg; PA531441 Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), another one raised in mouse (6 µg; SC-374362 Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, USA) and one mouse IgG (6 µg;  G3A1, Cell Signaling Technology, Leiden, Netherlands) as a control. The procedure below was performed three independent times to obtain triplicates. A volume of 50 µl mix of beads were used, after removing the solution, the remaining beads were incubated with rotation for 1.30 hour at 4°C with the 3 different antibodies and a total of 600 µl PBS 1X 0.02 % Tween 20 for each antibody. After one wash with 500 µl PBS 0.02 % Tween 20, 190 µl of human retina proteins extract were applied to the antibody-Dynabeads mix and incubated overnight at 4°C with rotation. The next morning the immunoprecipitates were washed each twice with 500 µl of PBS 0.02 % Tween 20 and one last time with 500 µL of PBS 1X.  LC-MS/MS analyses Proteins on beads from 3 experimental conditions (control, mouse antibody, rabbit antibody) were digested in biological triplicates overnight at 37°C by sequencing grade trypsin (12,5 µg/ml ; Promega Madison, WI, USA) in 20 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Merck). Peptides mixtures were analyzed by a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 (both from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, a 98 min gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 375-1500. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 28 %. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of protein abundance variations Label-free relative quantification was performed in a Between-Subject Study Design using Progenesis-Qi software 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.2) coupled to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragments. The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for the trypsin protease. The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr), acetylation (Protein N-term). The SwissProt database (02/2017) with the Homo sapiens taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Protein identifications were validated if at least two unique peptides by protein were identified. Protein abundance measurements were calculated according to the Hi-3 label-free quantification method. Protein variations were validated if their calculated p-values were under 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Integral Membrane Protein 2 B (ITM2B) is a type II ubiquitous transmembrane protein which role remains unclear. ITM2B mutations have been associated with different disorders: mutations leading to longer mutant proteins have been reported in two distinct Alzheimer-like autosomal dominant disorders with early-onset progressive dementia and cerebellar ataxia. Both disorders share neurological features including severe cerebral amyloid angiopathy, non-neuritic plaques, and fibrillary tangles as in Alzheimer disease. Our group reported a missense mutation in ITM2B, in an unusual retinal dystrophy with no dementia. This finding suggests a specific role of ITM2B in the retina. As the identification of retinal-specific ITM2B partners could bring new insights into the cellular functions of ITM2B, we performed quantitative proteomics of ITM2B interactome of the human retina. Overall, 457 ITM2B partners were identified with 8 of them involved in visual transduction. In addition, bulk Gene Ontology analyses showed that many ITM2B partners are involved in several other biological functions, such as microtubule organization, protein translation and interestingly, mitochondrial homeostasis. These data represent the first report of the ITM2B interactome in the human retina and may serve as a valuable inventory of new potential ITM2B partners for future investigations of ITM2B physiological functions and dysfunctions.

### Keywords
Human, Ap-ms, Interactome, Itm2b, Retina

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, F-75012 Paris, France

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Audo
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, F-75012 Paris, France


