### Accession
PXD008933

### Title
proximity tagging -  A proximity-tagging system to identify membrane protein-protein interactions

### Description
we have developed a new catalytic tagging system and have used it on the identification of interacting partners of membrane proteins

### Sample Protocol
the interacting proteins are enzymatically labelled in cells. Then the cells were lysed and the labelled proteins were enriched by affinity pull down followed by trypsin digest and LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed and searched with MaxQuant 1.5.4.1 with MS tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The UniProt human protein database (release 2016_07, 70630 sequences) and database for proteomics contaminants from MaxQuant were used for database searches

### Publication Abstract
The communication between cells and between cellular organelles is often controlled by the interaction of membrane proteins. Although many methods for the detection of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) exist, membrane PPIs remain difficult to detect. Here we developed a proximity-based tagging system, PUP-IT (pupylation-based interaction tagging), to identify membrane protein interactions. In this approach, a small protein tag, Pup, is applied to proteins that interact with a PafA-fused bait, enabling transient and weak interactions to be enriched and detected by mass spectrometry. Pup does not diffuse from the enzyme, which allows high-specificity labeling. We applied this approach to CD28, a critical costimulatory receptor for T lymphocyte activation, and identified known CD28 binding partners and multiple potential interacting proteins. In addition, we demonstrated that this method can identify the interaction between a cell surface receptor and its ligand.

### Keywords
Catalytic tagging, Lc-ms/ms, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
ShanghaiTech University
School of Life Science and Technology ShanghaiTech University 100 Haike Road, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Jun Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Min ZHUANG
School of Life Science and Technology ShanghaiTech University 100 Haike Road, Shanghai, China


