### Accession
PXD011734

### Title
The puzzling construction of the conidial outer layer of Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
The outer layers of the fungal cell wall are the first barrier facing external challenges. In theinvasive morphotype of the airborne pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus, i.e. conidia, the outer cell wall consists of α-(1,3)-glucan, melanin and proteinaceous rodlets made up by  the RodA hydrophobin. The hydrophobicity of the RodA rodlets facilitates air dispersal of  conidia and progression within lungs. When conidia reach the alveolae, these are           phagocytosed by host cells and killed upon germination, which requires melanin and rodlets elimination to occur. The dormant condition of the conidia protects them against activation of the host killing pathways. The outer cell wall of conidia is thus essential for        maintaining the viability of the fungus. To study the role of α-(1,3)-glucan, melanin, and RodA rodlets in conidia protection, multiple mutants without two or the three major        components of the outer layer were constructed and analyzed. Deletions led to the exposure of new molecules on the conidial surface. Multiple gene deletions did not always lead to   logical additivity of the phenotypes. Unexpected compensatory cell wall surface            modifications were indeed observed, such as the synthesis of the mycelial virulence factor galactosaminogalactan, the presence of chitin and glycoproteins or specific changes in     permeability. In spite of significant modifications, sensitivity to killing by phagocytic  host cells of the multiple mutants involving melanin changed little compared to the        sensitive parent strain lacking melanin (ΔpksP), further indicating the importance of      melanin in protecting conidia against killing by monocytes.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, conidia were incubated in 60% formic acid for 10 minutes on ice.   Dried samples were re-suspended in 100 μL of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Samples were processed for mass spectrometry analysis and protein identification and quantification as previously described (Jeannin et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Raw results were analyzed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) and the     protein group text output file was used for data analysis. For each replicate experiment,  the values corresponding to contaminants or reverse protein sequences were removed. "Intensity" values were used for normalization and statistics computation. The signal was  normalized to the sum of intensities in each experiment and the log2-transformed values    were used to calculate means for each protein, based on at least two independent           experimental replicates. Transforms and data visualization were done with R (https://cran.r-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
If the mycelium of Aspergillus fumigatus is very short-lived in the laboratory, conidia can survive for years. This survival capacity and extreme resistance to environmental insults is a major biological characteristic of this fungal species. Moreover, conidia, which easily reach the host alveola, are the infective propagules. Earlier studies have shown the role of some molecules of the outer conidial layer in protecting the fungus against the host defense. The outer layer of the conidial cell wall, directly in contact with the host cells, consists of &#x3b1;-(1,3)-glucan, melanin, and proteinaceous rodlets. This study is focused on the global importance of this outer layer. Single and multiple mutants without one to three major components of the outer layer were constructed and studied. The results showed that the absence of the target molecules resulting from multiple gene deletions led to unexpected phenotypes without any logical additivity. Unexpected compensatory cell wall surface modifications were indeed observed, such as the synthesis of the mycelial virulence factor galactosaminogalactan, the increase in chitin and glycoprotein concentration or particular changes in permeability. However, sensitivity of the multiple mutants to killing by phagocytic host cells confirmed the major importance of melanin in protecting conidia.

### Keywords
Conida, Out layer, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Unité des Aspergillus Institut Pasteur 28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Paul Latgé
Unité des Aspergillus Institut Pasteur 28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris


