### Accession
PXD010835

### Title
A label-free quantitative proteomic analysis reveals amino acids and carbohydrate metabolic enzymes are differentially accumulated in three Jerusalem artichoke (Helianthus tuberosus L.) cultivars exhibiting phenological tuberization characters

### Description
Jerusalem artichoke (JA) tubers are an important bio-economy developing crop because of its invaluable bioproducts in both food and biofuel aspects. However,  the molecular mechanism of its tuberization, and the differences among different cultivars have been little studied to date. Here, we conducted a comparative proteome profiling of the JA tubers of three different cultivars including PJA, DJA, and HJA, showing phenotypic characteristics. Tuber epidermal pigmentation and underground tuberization habit were different phenological characters in the three cultivars and inulin content was also a physiological character exceptionally DJA regardless of the similar level of total carbohydrate amount. We identified a total of 420 proteins in the tubers and out of 114 showed significantly modulated among the cultivars. GO classification of the DEPs revealed biosynthesis amino acid and carbohydrate metabolic enzymes were differentially expressed in the three cultivar tubers. Integrated physiological inulin content and the biosynthetic protein expression levels among the cultivars suggest that Sucrose:sucrose 1-fructosyltransferase (1-SST) prioritizes inulin biosynthesis rather than rate-limiting enzyme fructan:fructan 1-fructosyltransferases (1-FFT). Furthermore, we confirmed the relationship between transcript-protein expression levels was in discord within inulin biosynthesis enzymes 1-SST and 1-FFT with the terms in previous RT-qPCR results using the same tubers. Our data represent the first report that comparative proteome profiling in JA tubers among the different cultivars and provides the metabolic and molecular basis for understanding carbohydrate metabolism in storage tuber tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Two wild JA cultivars in South Korea (PJA, HJA) and a salt-tolerant JA cultivar from China (DJA), which exhibit distinct characteristic variations were used in order to analysis the proteome profiles of JA tubers as previous study (Jung et al. 2016). The three kind of tubers were collected from underground soil in outdoor and were planted in the plastic pots filled with sterilized mixed fertile soil and vermiculate (4:1, v/v) after washed several times with distilled water on April. Plants were grown in a growth room at 25±2°C (16 hr light/8 hr dark) for 6 months supplying surface irrigation on every 2 or 3 days. The tubers of three cultivars were harvested in October with the size for each tuber width was 2-2.5 cm at the same point. To obtain appropriate proteome profiles, tubers of each cultivar were pooled from three different plants and two biological replicates. Thus, a total of 6 samples were collected from the three cultivars. Following harvest, each tuber was cleaned, very thin sliced by a razor blade, lyophilized and stored at 4°C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) as described previously (Cox and Mann 2008; Cox et al. 2014; Tyanova et al. 2016b; Tyanova et al. 2016a). All three biological replicates were cross-referenced against the H. tuberosus de novo assembled gene set obtained from in-house developed transcriptomic profiling as previous our work (56,187 entries) (Jung et al. 2014). LFQ data processing was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, which is set to 20 ppm of the first search and 4.5 ppm of the main search. Furthermore, LFQ data were searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance. A maximum of two missed tryptic digestion was allowed. The fixed modifications specified were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Additional modifications used in protein quantification were specified for acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis were carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5) (Tyanova et al. 2016b). Normalization of all the identified proteins was carried out by dividing the LFQ intensity of a particular peptide to the total LFQ intensity of a sample to compensate the differences between LFQ intensities due to different total protein loads. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8) using Perseus software (Tyanova et al. 2016b). Multiple Sample test controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.01, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gel-free proteomics, Inulin, Tuber, Jerusalem artichoke (helianthus tuberosus)

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, 1268-50 Samrangjin-ro, Samnangjin-eup, Miryang, 50463, Korea Plant Systems Engineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, 34141, Korea.
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim, Hye Sun Cho
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, 1268-50 Samrangjin-ro, Samnangjin-eup, Miryang, 50463, Korea Plant Systems Engineering Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, 34141, Korea.


