### Accession
PXD037622

### Title
Increased lipid transport and de novo synthesis lead to dynamic lipidome remodeling and regulation of lipid-dependent kinases during megakaryopoiesis and proplatelet formation

### Description
During megakaryopoiesis and consecutive platelet production, megakaryocytes undergo robust cellular morphological changes which are associated with the reprogramming of signaling pathways. Moreover, it can be assumed that lipid membrane composition and signaling are strongly modified. However, the knowledge of lipid alteration during megakaryopoiesis and which pathways are involved is still lacking. Here, we use a lipid-centric multiomics approach to create a quantitative map of the megakaryocyte lipidome during maturation and proplatelet formation. Our data reveal that megakaryocyte differentiation is driven by an increased fatty acyl import and de novo lipid synthesis, resulting in the modulation towards an anionic membrane phenotype. This phenotype and the upregulation of diacylglycerols highly correlate with the activation of lipid-dependent kinases such as PKC and BTK. Using inhibitors of fatty acid import and phospholipid synthesis proved to block membrane remodeling and kinase activation and directly reduced proplatelet formation. Altogether, this study provides a framework for understanding how membrane lipid remodeling during megakaryocyte differentiation impacts kinase signaling and proplatelet formation while providing a knowledge base to exploit megakaryopoiesis.

### Sample Protocol
For the bone marrow (BM) isolation, a centrifugation protocol previously published by Heib et al. was used. To induce MK differentiation, the freshly isolated BM cells (pool of 5 individual animals) were cultivated in 10 cm cell culture dishes containing DMEM (supplemented with 1 % penicillin / streptomycin and 10 % FBS) and differentiation was initiated by adding (1%) recombinant TPO. Cells were cultivated for different time periods at 37 °C, 5 % CO2. On day 1, 3, and 7, cells were harvested (1000 rpm, 5 min) and resuspended in 950 µl PBS. The cell suspension was carefully pipetted on a two-phase BSA gradient (bottom: 1.5 ml 3 % BSA in PBS, top: 1.5 ml 1.5 % BSA in PBS) to separate cells by weight. After 40 minutes, the supernatant was removed and the cell pellet washed 3 times with 500 µl PBS. Cells were counted in a Neubauer chamber and adjusted to 200.000 cells per tube. Cell pellets were shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for later use.  Lipid and protein extraction was performed following the SIMPLEX protocol previously described by Coman et al. In brief, 225 µl MeOH and the internal standard mixture were added to all samples and cell pellets homogenized through 2 – 5 min ultrasonication. Two blanks used as quality controls were processed in parallel, one with and the other without internal standards. Next, 750 µl methyl-tert-butyl-ether (MTBE) was added and samples incubated for 1 h at 950 rpm, 4 °C. To induce phase separation, 188 µl water (HPLC-grade) was added and samples incubated on ice for 5 min. After a 10 min centrifugation step at 10.000 xg, 4 °C, the upper organic phase was carefully removed and dried under a gentle nitrogen flow. The dried organic phase was reconstituted in 100 µl IPA/MeOH/CHCl3 (4:2:1, v/v/v) containing 7.5 mM ammonium acetate for lipid analysis. To complete protein precipitation, 527 µl MeOH was added to the lower aqueous phase and samples stored at -20 °C for 2 h, following centrifugation for 30 min at 12.000 xg, 4 °C. The protein pellet was dried and further subjected to protein analysis.  Protein samples were diluted 1:2 in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS), heated at 90°C for 5min prior the protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. For enzymatic protein digestion, 20µg of protein was used and the ProtiFi S-trap technology applied. In short, solubilized protein was reduced and carbamidomethylated by adding 64mM DTT and 48mM IAA, respectively. Before loading the samples onto S-trap mini cartridges, trapping buffer (90%vol/vol methanol, 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate) was added. Thereafter, samples were thoroughly washed and subsequently digested using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix at 37°C for two hours. Finally, peptides were eluted, dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analyses.  LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5µl of 30% formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides. Afterwards, samples were diluted with 40µl of loading solvent (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid), whereof 5µl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A pre-column (2 cm × 75 µm C18 Pepmap100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) run at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA) was used to pre-concentrate peptides prior to chromatographic separation. Peptides were then separated on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 µm 25cm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks)) by applying a flow rate of 300nL/min and using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 155min, resulting in a total LC run time of 195min including washing and equilibration steps. A timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1700 V was used for mass spectrometric analyses. The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode and a moderate MS data reduction was applied. Further parameters included a scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700 to record MS and MS/MS spectra and a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 – 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 100 ms to achieve trapped ion mobility separation. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.16 s. Furthermore, the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 59 eV and the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700. All samples were analysed in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
The publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine was used for protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ). Therefore, raw data were searched against the SwissProt database mus musculus (version 220621 with 17519 entries). Search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of two peptides per protein whereof at least one has to be unique for each protein was set as search criterium for positive identifications. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.05 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
During megakaryopoiesis, megakaryocytes (MK) undergo cellular morphological changes with strong modification of membrane composition and lipid signaling. Here we adopt a lipid-centric multiomics approach to create a quantitative map of the MK lipidome during maturation and proplatelet formation. Data reveal that MK differentiation is driven by an increased fatty acyl import and <i>de novo</i> lipid synthesis, resulting in an anionic membrane phenotype. Pharmacological perturbation of fatty acid import and phospholipid synthesis blocked membrane remodeling and directly reduced MK polyploidization and proplatelet formation resulting in thrombocytopenia. The anionic lipid shift during megakaryopoiesis was paralleled by lipid-dependent relocalization of the scaffold protein CKIP-1 and recruitment of the kinase CK2&#x3b1; to the plasma membrane, which seems to be essential for sufficient platelet biogenesis. Overall, this study provides a framework to understand how the MK lipidome is altered during maturation and the impact of MK membrane lipid remodeling on MK kinase signaling involved in thrombopoiesis.

### Keywords
Megakaryopoiesis, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Lipidomics, Megakaryocytes, Lipid-dependent kinases

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


