### Accession
PXD019103

### Title
Colorectal cancer proteome project for biomarke search and development of clinical test

### Description
To find differentially expressed protein in colorectal cancer compared with normal colon tissue, we performed global proteome analysis using LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomes were extracted from frozen tissue using urea-based lysis buffer. After reducing, alkylation, and digestion of samples, peptide samples were desalted by C18 StageTip.Desalted peptides were dried up and re-dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Desalted peptides were injected into a 50-cm C18 capillary column mounted to an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for full-scan MS spectra was 1×10E6 charges in the 375-1500 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z in profile mode. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.4 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30 eV. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z with an ion target value of 5x10E4, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and dynamic exclusion for 15 s in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was carried out with MaxQuant (version 1.6.4.0) and the Andromeda search engine. The first and the main maximum precursor mass tolerances were set to 20 and 6 ppm, respectively. The reference human proteome database was downloaded from UniProt (with updates up to Sept. 2018). The search assumed trypsin and Lys-C digestions with up to 2 missed cleavages. A minimum of 1 peptide was required for protein identification, but 2 peptides were required to calculate a protein level ratio. The modifications used as variable modifications for protein identification and quantification included oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine. Significantly up-regulated and down-regulated proteins were identified with Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancers are among the most common cancers and a leading cause of cancer death. In our pursuit to discover molecular markers for better characterization and precision theranostics of these cancers, we first conducted global deep proteome analyses and identified maspin (serpin B5, peptidase inhibitor 5) as an upregulated protein in tumor tissue. We then validated its expression in a large cohort of 743 patients with colorectal cancers of all stages and found that both cytoplasmic and nuclear expression varied widely between different patients. Comparison with clinicopathological features revealed that maspin expression levels correlate significantly only with mismatch repair (MMR) status but not with other features. To elucidate the prognostic significance of maspin, we analyzed two outcome-annotated cohorts, one of 572 early stage cancer patients and another of 93 late stage cancer patients. Kaplan-Meier survival, univariate, and multivariate analyses revealed that maspin overexpression predicts longer overall and disease-free survival for early stage microsatellite instability (MSI) subtype colorectal cancer, but there is no correlation with survival for patients with early stage cancer of the microsatellite stability (MSS) subtype or late stage cancer. Our study identifies maspin expression as an independent prognostic marker for risk stratification of early stage MSI subtype colorectal cancer and may provide guidance for improved therapeutic management.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Humna, Cancer

### Affiliations
MSKCC
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of pathology

### Submitter
Atsushi Tanaka

### Lab Head
Dr Michael H. A. Roehrl
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of pathology


