### Accession
PXD033969

### Title
Milk proteins as a feed restriction signature in dairy cows

### Description
Milk production in dairy cows is affected by numerous factors, including diet. Feed restriction is known to have little impact on milk total protein content but its effect on the fine protein composition is still poorly documented. The objective of this study was to describe the effects of two feed restriction trials of different intensities on the milk protein composition of Holstein cows. One restriction trial was short and of high intensity (SH), the second was long and of moderate intensity (LM). Feed restriction decreased the milk protein yield for caseins under the LM trial and of all six major milk proteins under the SH trial. These decreased yields lead to lower concentrations of αs1-, αs2- and β-caseins during the SH trial. The milk proteome was affected as a function of restriction intensity. Among the 345 proteins identified eight varied under the LM trial and 160 under the SH trial. Ontology analyses revealed their implication in carbohydrate, lipid and protein metabolisms as well as in the immune system. These proteins reflected adaptations of the animal and mammary gland physiology to feed restriction and constituted a signature of this change.

### Sample Protocol
Milk samples of 16 Holstein cows were collected during morning milking, before feed distribution, on the sampling day before feed restriction and 5 days after the initiation of feed restriction. Samples of 15 μL skimmed milk containing around 30 g/L proteins, were loaded into 1D gel electrophoresis (NuPAGE® 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel). After the excision of gel bands, the proteins were reduced (DTT, Sigma), alkylated (iodoacetamide, Sigma) and digested with 1 µg trypsin. The peptides were desalted on a Strata-X-column (33 µm, 30 mg, Phenomenex) , dried under a vacuum and taken up in 30 μL loading buffer (0.08% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile) for LC-MS/MS proteome analysis. 4 μl of each sample were injected into an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was performed at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min with a linear gradient of 6-30% (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) for 110 min, 30-98% for 10 min and 98% for 10 min. A complete run, including regeneration with 99% buffer (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) required 147 min. Nanospray ionization was performed by applying 1.6 kV in a positive mode. Capillary transfer was performed at 275°C using a capillary probe SilicaTip Emitter 10 μm. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were captured in the Orbitrap (scan range 400-1500 m/z) with a resolution of 120,000. Dynamic exclusion was set at 10 ppm with a duration of 80 s, and the intensity threshold was fixed at 5 × 104. MS2 was performed using High Collision Dissociation (HCD) in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Polysilaxolane ions m/z 445.12002, 519.13882, 593.15761, and 667.1764 were used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using X!TandemPipeline C++ 0.4.17 and the Bos taurus UniProtKB database (version 2019, 46,697 entries). Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E-value <0.01, protein log (E-value) <−4 and a minimum of two identified peptides per protein. The peptide and protein False Discovery Rates (FDR) were estimated at 0.68% and 0.25%, respectively. MS1 peaks were detected and aligned using MassChroQ 2.2.12. The relative quantification of protein abundances was performed using two complementary methods: spectral counting (SC) defined as the number of MS2 spectra assigned to a protein, and extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) defined as the sum of the MS1 intensities of all peptides associated with a protein. The XIC method is suited to detecting subtle differences in protein abundance based on specific peptide data, while SC only enables the detection of larger abundance variations, including that of presence/absence.

### Publication Abstract
The use of a maximum power point (MPP) tracking (MPPT) controller is required for photovoltaic (PV) systems to extract maximum power from PV panels. However, under partial shading conditions, the PV cells/panels do not receive uniform insolation due to several power maxima appear on the PV array's P-V characteristic, a global MPP (GMPP) and two or more local MPPs (LMPPs). In this scenerio, conventional MPPT methods, including pertub and observe (P&amp;O) and incremental conductance (INC), fail to differentiate between a GMPP and a LMPP, as they converge on the MPP that makes contact first, which in most cases is one of the LMPPs. This results in considerable energy loss. To address this issue, this paper introduces a new MPPT method based on the Seagull Optimization Algorithm (SOA) to operate PV systems at GMPP with high efficiency. The SOA is a new member of the bio-inspired algorithms. When compared to other evolutionary techniques, it uses fewer operators and modification parameters, which is advantageous when considering the rapid design process. In this paper, the SOA-based MPPT scheme is first proposed and then implemented for an 80&#xa0;W PV system using the MATLAB/SIMULINK environment. The effectiveness of the SOA based MPPT method is verified by comparing its performance with P&amp; O and PSO (particle swarm optimization) based MPPT methods under different shading scenarios. The results demonstrated that the SOA based MPPT method performs better in terms of tracking accuracy and efficiency.

### Keywords
Milk proteins, Cows, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
INRAE MICALIS PAPPSO
INRA PAPPSO

### Submitter
Lydie Correia

### Lab Head
Dr Lydie Correia, INRA PAPPSO
INRAE MICALIS PAPPSO


