### Accession
PXD032816

### Title
Variants in SART3 cause a novel spliceosomopathy characterised by failure of testis development and neuronal defects

### Description
Squamous cell carcinoma antigen recognized by T cells 3 (SART3) is an RNA binding protein that regulates a diverse array of biological processes, including recycling small nuclear ribonucleic acids (snRNAs) back to the spliceosome. Here we describe nine individuals from six independent families with a multisystem disorder, characterised by intellectual disability, developmental delay, brain anomalies and 46, XY-specific gonadal dysgenesis, who harbour recessive variants in the SART3 gene. Knockdown of the fly orthologue of SART3, Rnp4f, demonstrates a conserved role in neuronal and testicular development. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) carrying patient SART3 variants have disrupted neuronal and gonadal differentiation in vitro. These iPSCs have significant disruption to multiple signalling pathways and complexes, including spliceosome components and mRNA splicing. We propose that biallelic variants in the SART3 gene underlie a novel spliceosomopathy characterised by neuronal defects and testicular dysgenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were processed using sodium deoxycholate (SDC) solubilization essentially as described previously. Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific), the tryptic peptides were analyzed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The instrument was set to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Each survey full scan (m/z 375–1575) was acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 3 x 106 target value with maximum injection time of 54 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 seconds. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 54 ms, 17,500 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 x 105. Mass spectrometric raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 to obtain protein identifications and their respective label-free quantification values using in-house standard parameters. Downstream statistical analysis was performed in Perseus v1.6.2.374 and LFQ-Analyst75.

### Data Protocol
Cell pellets were processed using sodium deoxycholate (SDC) solubilization essentially as described previously 73. Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific), the tryptic peptides were analyzed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The instrument was set to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Each survey full scan (m/z 375–1575) was acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 3 x 106 target value with maximum injection time of 54 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 seconds. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 54 ms, 17,500 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 x 105. Mass spectrometric raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 to obtain protein identifications and their respective label-free quantification values using in-house standard parameters. Downstream statistical analysis was performed in Perseus v1.6.2.374 and LFQ-Analyst75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gonadal dysgenesis, Spliceosome, 46, Xy dsd, Tip110, Neurodevelopmental disorder, Sart3

### Affiliations
Monash University
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Katie Ayers
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne


