### Accession
PXD028778

### Title
Mouse sertoli cells Palmitoylated protein MS

### Description
Elevated palmitic acid, a most abundant saturated fatty acid, is a risk factor for obesity complications. Here, we report that palmitic acid impairs spermatogenesis by inducing abnormal palmitoylation in Sertoli cells. Firstly, we proposed a correlation between palmitic acid and spermatogenesis by reporting a significant elevation of serum palmitic acid levels in patients with dyszoospermia. In palmitic acid -treated mice, the blood-testis barrier was found to be disrupted, and decreased tight junction protein expression was observed in palmitic acid-treated Sertoli cells. Palmitic acid entered the endoplasmic reticulum and induced endoplasmic reticulum stress, resulting in damage to Sertoli cell barriers.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of palmitoylated proteins and the analysis of the palmitoylation levels of specific proteins, another method using HPDP-Biotin was execulted. In brief, cells were collected after treatment, resuspended in lysis buffer, and lysed by ultrasonication. After centrifugation at 4 °C, 13,000 × g to remove insoluble material, 2 mg of protein was taken out for each sample, and incubated at 4 °C overnight with rotating in 50 mM NEM. After precipitation with methanol/chloroform, the protein samples were resuspended in 200 μl resuspension buffer, and each sample was divided into two equal parts (100 μl for each part): one part was mixed with 800 μl 1 M hydroxylamine (HA), 1mM EDTA, protease inhibitors and 100 μL 4 mM HPDP-Biotin (Thermo Scientific) (+HA Sample), and the other part was treated identically but HA was replaced with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4) (-HA Sample). After incubating at room temperature with rotating for 2 hours, protein samples were precipitated with methanol/chloroform, resuspended in 100 μl resuspension buffer, and added with 900 μl PBS containing 0.2% Triton X-100. In each sample, 50 μl was removed as a loading control, and the remaining was incubated with 15 μl streptavidin-agarose beads (Thermo scientific) for 2 hours at room temperature. The beads were washed twice with wash buffer, and 3-5 times with PBS. Finally, the beads were resuspended with 25 μL 2 × SDS sample buffer containing 1% 2-mercaptoethanol v/v, and proteins were eluted by heating at 95 °C for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
Palmitoylated proteins (100 μg) extracted and purified from each sample were reduced by DTT and carboxyamidomethylated by iodoacetamide. After digestion with trypsin, the peptide mixtures were desalted, freeze dried and then resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA). The resuspended samples were centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 min, and the supernantants were collected and loaded on a LC-20AD nano-HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a C18 trap column (inner diameter 75 μm), followed by a gradient separation. The column outlet was coupled directly to nanoelectrospray ionization (nanoESI) tandem mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific，San Jose，CA), and analyzed using DDA (Data-Dependent Acquisition) method. Protein identification was performed with MaxQuant integrated Andromeda search engine against the UniProt Mus musculus protein database (17,015 sequences). The analysis was performed by Beijing Genomics Institution.

### Publication Abstract
Blood-testis barrier (BTB) damage promotes spermatogenesis dysfunction, which is a critical cause of male infertility. Dyslipidemia has been correlated with male infertility, but the major hazardous lipid and the underlying mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we firstly discovered an elevation of palmitic acid (PA) and a decrease of inhibin B in patients with severe dyszoospermia, which leaded us to explore the effects of PA on Sertoli cells. We observed a damage of BTB by PA. PA penetration to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and its damage to ER structures were exhibited by microimaging and dynamic observation, and consequent ER stress was proved to mediate PA-induced Sertoli cell barrier disruption. Remarkably, we demonstrated a critical role of aberrant protein palmitoylation in PA-induced Sertoli cell barrier dysfunction. An ER protein, Calnexin, was screened out and was demonstrated to participate in this process, and suppression of its palmitoylation showed an ameliorating effect. We also found that &#x3c9;-3 poly-unsaturated fatty acids down-regulated Calnexin palmitoylation, and alleviated BTB dysfunction. Our results indicate that dysregulated palmitoylation induced by PA plays a pivotal role in BTB disruption and subsequent spermatogenesis dysfunction, suggesting that protein palmitoylation might be therapeutically targetable in male infertility.

### Keywords
Mouse, Ms, Palmitoylated protein, Sertoli cells

### Affiliations
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Clinical School of Medical College, Nanjing University, China.
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Clinical School of Medical College, Nanjing University

### Submitter
He Zhaowanyue

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Yao
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Clinical School of Medical College, Nanjing University, China.


