### Accession
PXD008571

### Title
C1R.B*57:03 MHC class I immunopeptidome LC-MSMS

### Description
Characterisation of peptide ligands of Major histocompatibility class (MHC) I isolated by immunoaffinity purification from the C1R (Class I reduced) B-lymphoblastoid cell line, transfected with the MHC class I allele HLA-B*57:03.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen pellets of 10^9 C1R.B*57:03 cells were lysed by a mixture of detergent (NP-40) and mechanical lysis. The MHC complexes were isolated from the lysate using solid phase bound W6/32 monoclonal antibody and eluted with 10% acetic acid. MHC/peptide mixtures were fractioned by RP-HPLC and peptide containing fractions vacuum concentrated prior to reconstitution in 0.1% Formic acid. Peptides were analysed in positive mode by an AB SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray III ion source. Data were collected from 3 pellets. Where material allowed, residual samples were diluted 1 in 3 with 0.1% formic acid and re-analysed, including exclusion lists.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectra were assigned using Protein PilotTM Software 5.0, searching against the reviewed human proteome (swiss-prot accessed November 2017) with the following parameters:  Sample Type - Identification, Cys. Alkylation - None, Digestion - None, Instrument - TripleTOF 5600, ID Focus - Biological modifications, Search Effort – Thorough, FDR Analysis – Yes. Confidences corresponding to a 5% FDR for Distinct peptides in Protein PilotTM search files:
110908_mB5703_2017uniprotPilot5 – 96.4, 110908_mB5703ex_2017uniprotPilot5 – 96.4, 111203_mB5703_2017uniprotPilot5 – 95.8, 111203_mB5703ex_2017uniprotPilot5 – 95.2, 111208_mB5703_2017uniprotPilot5 – 95.4, 111208_mB5703ex_2017uniprotPilot5 – 95.7

### Publication Abstract
Immunophenotypic differences between closely related human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles have been associated with divergent clinical outcomes in infection, autoimmunity, transplantation and drug hypersensitivity. Here we explore the impact of micropolymorphism on peptide antigen presentation by three closely related HLA molecules, HLA-B*57:01, HLA-B*57:03 and HLA-B*58:01, that are differentially associated with the HIV elite controller phenotype and adverse drug reactions. For each allotype, we mine HLA ligand data sets derived from the same parental cell proteome to define qualitative differences in peptide presentation using classical peptide binding motifs and an unbiased statistical approach. The peptide repertoires show marked qualitative overlap, with 982 peptides presented by all allomorphs. However, differences in peptide abundance, HLA-peptide stability, and HLA-bound conformation demonstrate that HLA micropolymorphism impacts more than simply the range of peptide ligands. These differences provide grounds for distinct immune reactivity and insights into the capacity of micropolymorphism to diversify immune outcomes.

### Keywords
Hla-b*57:03, Lc-msms, Immunopeptidome, Mhc

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Patricia Illing

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W. Purcell
Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia


