### Accession
PXD013641

### Title
Extremely fast and accurate open modification spectral library searching of high-resolution mass spectra using feature hashing and graphics processing units

### Description
Open modification searching (OMS) is a powerful search strategy to identify peptides with any type of modification. OMS works by using a very wide precursor mass window to allow modified spectra to match against their unmodified variants, after which the modification types can be inferred from the corresponding precursor mass differences. A disadvantage of this strategy, however, are the large computational requirements, as each query spectrum has to be compared against a multitude of candidate peptides. We have previously introduced the ANN-SoLo tool for fast and accurate open spectral library searching. ANN-SoLo uses approximate nearest neighbor indexing to speed up OMS by selecting only a limited number of the most relevant library spectra to compare to an unknown query spectrum. Here we demonstrate how this candidate selection procedure can be further optimized using graphics processing units. Additionally, we introduce a feature hashing scheme to convert high-resolution spectra to low-dimensional vectors. Based on these algorithmic advances, along with low-level code optimizations, the new version of ANN-SoLo is up to an order of magnitude faster than its initial version. This makes it possible to efficiently perform open searches on a large scale to gain a deeper understanding about the protein modification landscape. We demonstrate the computational efficiency and identification performance of ANN-SoLo based on a large data set of the draft human proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The iPRG2012 data set as described by Chalkley et al. (doi:10.1021/pr301063v) was used to demonstrate the performance of the ANN-SoLo search engine. This data set we used was generated in the context of the 2012 study by the Proteome Informatics Research Group of the Association of Biomolecular Research Facilities. The goal of this study was to assess the community's ability to analyze modified peptides. Towards this end, various participating researchers were asked to identify an unknown data set, after which their proficiency in handling modified peptides was evaluated. The provided data set consisted of a mixture of synthetic peptides with biologically occurring modifications combined with a yeast whole cell lysate as background, and the spectra were measured using a TripleTOF instrument.

### Data Protocol
To search the iPRG2012 data set the human HCD spectral library compiled by NIST (version 2016/09/12) and a TripleTOF yeast spectral library from Selevsek et al. (doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.035550) were used. First, matches to decoy proteins were removed from the yeast spectral library, after which both spectral libraries were concatenated using SpectraST while removing duplicates by retaining only the best replicate spectrum for each individual peptide ion. Next, decoy spectra were added in a 1:1 ratio using the shuffle-and-reposition method. Spectrum preprocessing consisted of the removal of the precursor ion peak and noise peaks with an intensity below 1% of the base peak intensity. If applicable, spectra were further restricted to their 50 most intense peaks. Spectra that contained fewer than 10 peaks remaining or with a mass range less than 250 Da after peak removal were  discarded. Finally, peak intensities were rank transformed to de-emphasize overly dominant peaks. The search settings consist of a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first level of the cascade search, followed by a precursor mass tolerance of 300 Da for the second level of the cascade search. The fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Open modification searching (OMS) is a powerful search strategy to identify peptides with any type of modification. OMS works by using a very wide precursor mass window to allow modified spectra to match against their unmodified variants, after which the modification types can be inferred from the corresponding precursor mass differences. A disadvantage of this strategy, however, is the large computational cost, because each query spectrum has to be compared against a multitude of candidate peptides. We have previously introduced the ANN-SoLo tool for fast and accurate open spectral library searching. ANN-SoLo uses approximate nearest neighbor indexing to speed up OMS by selecting only a limited number of the most relevant library spectra to compare to an unknown query spectrum. Here we demonstrate how this candidate selection procedure can be further optimized using graphics processing units. Additionally, we introduce a feature hashing scheme to convert high-resolution spectra to low-dimensional vectors. On the basis of these algorithmic advances, along with low-level code optimizations, the new version of ANN-SoLo is up to an order of magnitude faster than its initial version. This makes it possible to efficiently perform open searches on a large scale to gain a deeper understanding about the protein modification landscape. We demonstrate the computational efficiency and identification performance of ANN-SoLo based on a large data set of the draft human proteome. ANN-SoLo is implemented in Python and C++. It is freely available under the Apache 2.0 license at https://github.com/bittremieux/ANN-SoLo .

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Open modification searching, Spectral library, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Feature hashing, Approximate nearest neighbor indexing, Graphics processing unit

### Affiliations
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Antwerp, Belgium
University of Antwerp

### Submitter
Wout Bittremieux

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Laukens
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Antwerp, Belgium


