### Accession
PXD030278

### Title
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of the vitreous in idiopathic epiretinal membrane patients

### Description
Purpose: The purpose of present study is to characterize the Idiopathic epiretinal membrane (iERM) through phosphoproteomics to facilitate its diagnosis and treatment. Experimental design: The vitreous of 25 patients with iERM and 15 patients with idiopathic macular hole were analyzed by proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis based on tandem mass tag. PRM was used to verify differential proteins. Results: Proteomic analysis identified a total of 878 proteins, including 50 differential proteins. Phosphoproteomic analysis identified a total of 401 phosphorylation sites on 213 proteins, including 27 differential phosphorylation sites on 24 proteins. Twenty six proteins of these differential proteins and phosphorylated proteins may be closely related to fibrosis in iERM. MAPKAPK3 and MAPKAPK5 are predicted as the major kinases in vitreous of iERM. Conclusion and clinical relevance: Our results screened candidate proteins for the treatment of fibrosis in iERM, among which tenascin-C, galectin-3-binding protein, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, neuroserpin, collagen alpha-1(XI) chain and collagen alpha-1(II) chain are expected to become potential biomarkers or therapeutic targets for iERM. In addition, this article expand the data of vitreous phosphoproteome, and provide a reference resource and new enlightenment for studying the pathogenic mechanisms of retinal diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Firstly, added 1% protease inhibitor and 1% phosphatase inhibitor (Millipore) to the vitreous sample in equal proportions by volume, and lysed by ultrasonic. Then the cellular debris of vitreous sample was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4℃ for 10 min, and the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Finally, the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Sangon Biotech). Trypsin Digestion An equal amount of protein from each sample was taken to be analyzed. Then appropriate standard protein was added, and the total volume was adjusted to equal by the addition of lysate. The equal volume of pre-cooled acetone was added, and 4 times volume of pre-cooled acetone was added after vortex mixing for 20 min, then the protein was precipitated for 2 h at −20°C. After centrifugation at 4500 × g for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded, the precipitation was washed with pre-cooled acetone for twice and left to dry. TEAB (200 mM final concentration) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to precipitation which was disrupted by ultrasonic. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 trypsin (Sangon Biotech) for overnight digestion. DTT (Sangon Biotech) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the sample was incubated for 30 min at 56 °C. Finally IAM (Sangon Biotech) was added to make the final concentration 11 mM and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 min. TMT Labeling Peptide after trypsin digestion was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in Acetonitrile (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% Acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 9 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Modification Enrichment The peptide was dissolved in 50% acetonitrile/6% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich), the supernatant was transferred to the IMAC material washed in advance, and the solution was incubated on a rotary shaker with gentle shaking. After incubation, beads were sequentially washed 3 time with 50% acetonitrile/6% TFA acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Then the modified peptides were eluted with 1% aqueous and the eluates were dried with a vacuum concentrator and stored frozen. Eventually the eluates were desalted according to the instructions of C18 ZipTips. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by LC-MS/MS in Orbitrap Exploris™ 480. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.3 kV. The FAIMS compensation voltage was set at -45V. The peptide parent ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analysed using a high-resolution Orbitrap. The first-order mass spectrometry scan range was set as 400 to 1200m/z, the resolution was was set as 60000. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range was set as 110 m/z, the scan resolution was set to 15000, and TurboTMT was set as None. The data acquisition mode used a data dependent acquisition (DDA) program, namely the first 25 peptides with highest signal intensity were selected to enter the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) after the first-stage scanning and fragmentation energy was set to 35%. Then the secondary mass-spectrometry was performed sequentially. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Maximum fill times were set to 50 ms, the dynamic exclusion was set at 30s to circumvent repeated scanning of the parent ion.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: GO enrichment analysis of the differential proteins was performed (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was was used to identify enriched pathways. All differential proteins and phosphorylated proteins database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 11.0b for protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis. We fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.4 (medium confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized by Cytoscape v3.7.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fibrosis, Proteomic, Extracellular matrix, Phosphoproteomic, Idiopathic epiretinal membrane

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Army Medical University

### Submitter
Chao Sun

### Lab Head
Dr chao sun
Department of Ophthalmology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Army Medical University


