### Accession
PXD026895

### Title
Lack of a Zn/Co substitution ability in the polar diatom Chaetoceros RS19

### Description
Functional substitution of the essential trace metals zinc (Zn) and cobalt (Co) within metalloenzymes has been well documented in marine diatoms and is known to be prevalent among varying genera and species. In contrast to the majority of species studied to date, we find that the polar diatom Chaetoceros RS19, originally isolated from the Ross Sea, Antarctica, has a Zn requirement that cannot be met by Co and thus does not demonstrate a Zn/Co substitution ability as assessed by growth rate. We investigate the underlying metabolic basis of Zn/Co substitution at the transporter, sensor/chaperone, and metalloenzyme level by employing metal quota, metal uptake rate, and proteomic analyses of this substitution-incapable diatom. Co appears to be transported into the cell, but not efficiently utilized by Zn metalloenzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Chaetoceros RS19 cultures were maintained in a 4°C incubator under constant fluorescent lighting (30 µmol photon m-2 s-1). All cultures were randomly repositioned each day to avoid any effect of subtle variation in light intensity on growth. Chaetoceros RS19 was originally collected from the Ross Sea, Antarctica, and isolated by D. Moran. Continuous culture maintenance was done in the Saito laboratory culture collection at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. All cultures were axenic and maintained by sterile technique until needed. Biomass from duplicate 25 mL cultures was collected during log phase growth by centrifugation at 11,000 RPM (14,610 x g) for 40 minutes at 4°C. Proteins were extracted, alkylated and reduced using a modification of previously published methods (Saito et al. 2011; Hughes et al. 2014). Biomass was resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 1% SDS) and heated for 10 min at 95°C, then incubated for 30 min at room temperature with gentle shaking at 350 RPM. Biomass was then centrifuged at 14,100 x g for 20 min to remove cellular debris. The supernatant was transferred to an ethanol-washed microcentrifuge tube and 2 L of benzonase nuclease was added before incubating for 30 mins at 37°C. Samples were then alkylated by adding 5μL of 200mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 per 100 μL of lysate and incubated at 45°C for 30 min. 10 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 was then added, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 mins at 24°C. 10 μL of 200 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 per 100 μL of lysate was then added to quench the reaction.  Proteins were isolated and washed using a magnetic bead method adapted from Hughes et al. (2014), using a 1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Magnetic beads were added to the protein mixture at a concentration of 20 μg / 100 μL of total reaction. The solution was acidified with 10% formic acid to pH 2. Acetonitrile (ACN) was then immediately added to a final concentration of 50% and samples were incubated for 15 min at 37°C, then for 30 mins at room temperature before being placed on magnetic racks for 2 min. The mixture was then washed with an equal volume of 70% ethanol (2×) and acetonitrile (1×). After removing the final ACN wash, the proteins were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and trypsin digested for 14 h at 37°C. The mixture was resuspended, washed with ACN, and placed on the magnetic rack. Proteins adhered to beads while ACN was removed by pipetting. The peptide sample was reconstituted in 2% DMSO and acidified with 1% formic acid to bring to a final concentration of 0.1 μg / μL. Protein concentration was quantified using a colorimetric assay at 562 nm (BCA total protein assay; ThermoFisher Scientific).  Whole cell protein digests were analyzed in technical triplicate by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Paradigm MS4 HPLC system (Michrom) with reverse phase chromatography, a Michrom ADVANCE source, and a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were searched against a Chaetoceros RS19 translated transcriptome database that was generated under iron limitation and otherwise replete conditions (assembly_ChaetocerosRS19_metaT.orf.fasta) using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo, Inc.) with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and parent tolerance of 10 ppm. Database search results were processed and visualized using spectral counting abundance scoring within Scaffold 4.0 (Proteome Software, Inc.). Protein abundances are reported as total normalized spectra with the following parameters: 99.0% minimum peptide threshold, 99.0% minimum and 3 peptides maximum protein threshold, 0.0% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and 0.0% protein FDR. 285,535 mass spectra were detected from 12 biological samples, resulting in 1,064 protein identifications. Of these proteins, 814 had PFam annotations. Statistical analysis of selected proteomes represented by volcano plots was conducted using a paired two way t-test in MATLAB (MathWorks Inc.), with a significance cutoff of p < 0.05. Average spectral count values of zero were changed to a small value (0.1) to allow for fold change estimates. Proteomic heatmaps were generated in R using pheatmap v1.0.12, with Chaetoceros RS19 spectral counts normalized using the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) calculation (Zhang et al. 2010). NSAF normalized spectral counts assigned to redundant PFam annotations were summed together.

### Data Protocol
Whole cell protein digests were analyzed in technical triplicate by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Paradigm MS4 HPLC system (Michrom) with reverse phase chromatography, a Michrom ADVANCE source, and a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were searched against a Chaetoceros RS19 translated transcriptome database that was generated under iron limitation and otherwise replete conditions (assembly_ChaetocerosRS19_metaT.orf.fasta) using Proteome Discoverer’s SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo, Inc.) with a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and parent tolerance of 10 ppm. Database search results were processed and visualized using spectral counting abundance scoring within Scaffold 4.0 (Proteome Software, Inc.). Protein abundances are reported as total normalized spectra with the following parameters: 99.0% minimum peptide threshold, 99.0% minimum and 3 peptides maximum protein threshold, 0.0% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and 0.0% protein FDR. 285,535 mass spectra were detected from 12 biological samples, resulting in 1,064 protein identifications

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaetoceros, Diatom, Cobalt, Zinc

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/ Massachusetts Institute of Technology (WHOI-MIT)
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Department

### Submitter
Riss Kellogg

### Lab Head
Dr Mak A. Saito
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry Department


