### Accession
PXD046234

### Title
New orphan disease therapies from the proteome of industrial plasma processing waste

### Description
Plasma-derived therapeutic proteins are produced through an industrial fractionation process where proteins are purified from individual intermediates, some of which remain unused and are discarded. Relatively few plasma-derived proteins are exploited clinically, with most of available plasma being directed towards the manufacture of immunoglobulin and albumin. Although the plasma proteome provides opportunities to develop novel protein replacement therapies, particularly for rare diseases, the high cost of plasma together with small patient populations impact negatively on the development of plasma-derived orphan drugs. Enabling therapeutics development from unused plasma fractionation intermediates would therefore constitute a significant innovation. To this objective, we characterized the proteome of unused plasma fractionation intermediates and prioritized proteins for their potential as new candidate therapies for human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the plasma fractions were quantified (Bradford method) and characterized by SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide; Thermo Fisher Scientific) in MOPS buffer followed by Coomassie Blue staining. Plasma fractions were denatured in RIPA buffer and detergents removed by filter-aided sample preparation. Proteins (200 µg) were diluted with 8 M urea and centrifuged in filter-units (30-kDa cutoff, Microcon, Merck Group). Samples underwent disulphide bonds reduction (100 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min at 20°C) followed by alkylation (100 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea, 30 min), then filter-units were washed with 8 M urea and successively with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins digestion was carried out on the filters at 37°C overnight using Trypsin Gold-Mass Spec Grade (Promega) 1:50 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were collected by centrifugation. Q Exactive™ HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to perform LC-MS/ MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discover 2.5 (ThermoFisherScientific) jointly with Sequest algorithm was used to identify the proteins. The reference database was Homo sapiens (Taxonomy ID: 9606), including 204961 proteins downloaded from UniProtKB (uniprot.org). Only proteins with FDR ≤ 0.01 were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma-derived therapeutic proteins are produced through an industrial fractionation process where proteins are purified from individual intermediates, some of which remain unused and are discarded. Relatively few plasma-derived proteins are exploited clinically, with most of available plasma being directed towards the manufacture of immunoglobulin and albumin. Although the plasma proteome provides opportunities to develop novel protein replacement therapies, particularly for rare diseases, the high cost of plasma together with small patient populations impact negatively on the development of plasma-derived orphan drugs. Enabling therapeutics development from unused plasma fractionation intermediates would therefore constitute a substantial innovation. To this objective, we characterized the proteome of unused plasma fractionation intermediates and prioritized proteins for their potential as new candidate therapies for human disease. We selected ceruloplasmin, a plasma ferroxidase, as a potential therapy for aceruloplasminemia, an adult-onset ultra-rare neurological disease caused by iron accumulation as a result of ceruloplasmin mutations. Intraperitoneally administered ceruloplasmin, purified from an unused plasma fractionation intermediate, was able to prevent neurological, hepatic and hematological phenotypes in ceruloplasmin-deficient mice. These data demonstrate the feasibility of transforming industrial waste plasma fraction into a raw material for manufacturing of new candidate proteins for replacement therapies, optimizing plasma use and reducing waste generation.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fondazione Toscana Life Sciences
Mass Spectrometry Unit - Fondazione Toscana Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vittoria Cicaloni

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Salvini
Mass Spectrometry Unit - Fondazione Toscana Life Sciences


