### Accession
PXD008198

### Title
Proteome profiling of Mycoplasma gallisepticum under heat stress

### Description
Mycoplasma gallisepticum proteome reponse under heat stress was studied. Heat stress has been shown previously to induce the most widespread and at the same time the most intense response at transcription level among the panel of several stresses. Here the corresponding proteome response was characterized.

### Sample Protocol
Mycoplasma gallisepticum S6 was cultivated at 37 °C on a modified Edwards medium containing tryptose (20 g/L), Tris (3 g/L), NaCl (5 g/L), KCl (5 g/L), yeast dialysate (5%), horse serum (10%) and glucose (1%) at pH 7.4 in aerobic conditions for 12 hours before heat chock, which corresponds to exponential phase. The cells were exposed to sublethal heat shock, i.e. cells were cultivated at 46 °C for 30 minutes and then conditioned for 2 hours at 37 °C and compared to initial culture sampled right before inducing heat shock. All conditions mentioned above were justified previously12. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 8000 rcf and 4 °C for 10 minutes.  Сells were washed three times with PBS, pH 7.5. Cell pellet was treated with 3 μl of 10% RapiGest SF (Waters) and 1 μl nuclease mix for 30 min at 4 °C, then resuspended in 37 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3, vortexed and heated at 100 °C for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 5 min. Protein cysteine bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 5 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 60 °C and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at RT for 30 min. The step with adding DTT was repeated. Clarified extract protein concentration was estimated using Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad). Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) was added in 1/50 w/w trypsin/protein ratio and incubated at 37 °C overnight. To stop trypsinolysis and degrade the acid-labile RapiGest surfactant, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the final concentration of 0,5% v/v (the pH should be less than 2.0), incubated at 37 °C for 45 min and the samples were centrifugated at 15,000 g for 10 min to remove the surfactant. Hydrolyzate was desalted using a Discovery DSC-18 Tube (Supelco) according to the manufacturer protocol. Peptides were eluted with 700 μL 75% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried in a SpeedVac (Labconco) and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA to the final concentration of 5 μg/μL.  To generate protein list and ion library for further quantitative analysis 6 information-dependent acquisition runs were performed on Sciex TripleTOF 5600+ QTOF mass-spectrometer coupled to Eksigent NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system through Sciex NanoSpray III nano-ESI ion source. The gradient length was 2 hours. Identification was performed with Sciex ProteinPilot 4.5 software against a database of all proteins of M. gallisepticum strain S6 (GenBank ID: AFFR01000000). A cut-off of 1% global FDR at protein level and a minimum of 2 identified peptides was applied. To estimate absolute concentration a search with Andromeda engine (as embedded in MaxQuant 1.5.5 software) was performed and obtained iBAQ values were used to predict copy number per cell with linear regression using estimates made for a closely related species Mycoplasma pneumoniae 3  Large-scale quantitative LC-MS analysis was performed on 6 independent biological replicates utilizing DIA SWATH technology. Raw data was obtained by triplicate injection of each sample with LC parameters and configuration identical to IDA experiments.

### Data Protocol
To process SWATH data, protein identification lists (group files) obtained for IDA experiments were translated into ion library with PeakView 2.0 (Sciex) SWATH processing tools. The ion library was built in a way that ensured that all observed peptides with all identified fragments to be used for signal extraction. Extraction window was set to 15 min, mass window was set to 50 ppm. The next step as suggested by the manufacturer (Sciex) proposes direct comparison of peptide intensities (as sum of fragment intensities) per protein, however this way almost completely lacks quality control. To enhance reliability, we filtered extracted ion chromatogram data starting from ion level (that is for each pair of parent and fragment ion in the ion library separately) for reliably quantifiable proteins with the use of a homemade script in R. The script is described in detail in Supplementary Information. In brief, it included several steps of scaling normalization and averaging of replicates at LC-MS acquisition, sample preparation and biological levels and selection of “best flyer”41 peptides and reproducible and interference-free transitions. Top 3 most abundant peptides with not less than 3 qualified transitions were used to produce protein intensity (as sum intensities of selected ions) in every biological sample. Difference between control, temperature exposed and further incubated cultures and its significance on biological level was evaluated for each qualified protein on log-transformed intensities with Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the fact the term "proteome" was proposed to characterize a set of proteins in one of mycoplasma species, proteome response to various exposures in this bacteria are still obscure. Commonly, authors studying proteomic response on perturbation models in mycoplasmas use single approach and do not confirm their findings by alternative methods. Consequently, the results of proteomic analysis should be validated by complementary techniques. In this study we utilized three complementary approaches (SWATH, MRM, 2D-DIGE) to assess response of Mycoplasma gallisepticum under heat stress on proteomic level and combined these findings with metabolic response and the results of transcriptional profiling. We divide response into two modes - one is directly related to heat stress and other is triggered during heat stress, but not directly relevant to it. The latter includes accumulation of ATP and shedding of antigens. Both of these phenomena may be relevant to evasion of host's immune system and dissemination during mycoplasmosis in vivo.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Swath, Heat stress, Dia, Data-independent acquisition, Heat shock, Mycoplasma gallisepticum

### Affiliations
Laboratory of proteomic analysis of Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Russian Federation
Scientific Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation

### Submitter
Ivan Butenko

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Laboratory of proteomic analysis of Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Russian Federation


