### Accession
PXD028336

### Title
PBAF loss leads to DNA damage induced inflammatory signalling through defective G2/M checkpoint maintenance

### Description
PBRM1 is a subunit of the PBAF (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodelling complex that is mutated in approximately 40% of clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC).  PBRM1 loss has been implicated in the response to immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy in ccRCC.  However, it is unclear how PBRM1 influences this.  DNA damage-induced inflammatory signalling is an important factor determining ICI therapy response. This response is kept in check by the G2/M checkpoint, which prevents progression through mitosis with unrepaired damage.  Here, we show that PBRM1 is required for p53-dependent maintenance of the G2/M checkpoint.  In its absence, p53-dependent transcriptional upregulation of p21 is delayed, leading to defective repression of DREAM complex targets and premature entry into mitosis.  Consequently, DNA damage induced inflammatory signalling pathways are activated by cytosolic DNA.  Notably, p53 is infrequently mutated in ccRCC, so PBRM1 mutational status is critical to G2/M checkpoint maintenance following DNA damage in this cancer. These findings have implications for ICI therapy responses in ccRCC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analysis  Cell pellets were lysed in 150 μL buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) on ice, assisted with probe sonication, followed by heating at 90°C for 5 min and re-sonicated. Protein concentration was measured with the Coomassie Plus Bradford Protein Assay (Pierce) according to manufacturer instructions. Protein aliquots of 50 μg were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60°C and alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin at final concentration 75 ng/μL (Pierce). Peptides were labelled with the TMT 10plex reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer instructions. The mixture was acidified with 1% formic acid and the precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation. Supernatant was finally dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  High-pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation and LC-MS analysis Peptides were fractionated with high-pH Reversed-Phase (RP) chromatography with the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptides were fractionated at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min using the following gradient: 5 minutes at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec, combined in 28 fractions and vacuum dried.  LC-MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. Peptides were analysed with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 50°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient method included: 90 min gradient 5%-38% B, 10 min up to 95% B, 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min and 10 min isocratic at 5% B at flow rate 300 nL/min.  Survey scans were acquired in the range of 375-1,500 m/z with mass resolution of 120 k, AGC 4×105 and max injection time (IT) 50 ms. Precursors were selected with the top speed mode in cycles of 3 sec and isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy was 35% with AGC 1×104 and max IT 50 ms. Quantification was obtained at the MS3 level with HCD fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was 0.7 Th, collision energy was 65% and AGC setting 1×105 with 105 ms max IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100-500 with 50k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further fragmentation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification The mass spectra were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the SequestHT search engine for protein identification and quantification. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q were selected as dynamic modifications. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered at q-value<0.01 based on decoy database search. All spectra were searched against reviewed UniProt human protein entries. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT 10plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Only peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise>3 were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The PBRM1 subunit of the PBAF (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complex is mutated in &#x223c;40% of clear cell renal cancers. PBRM1 loss has been implicated in responses to immunotherapy in renal cancer, but the mechanism is unclear. DNA damage-induced inflammatory signaling is an important factor determining immunotherapy response. This response is kept in check by the G2/M checkpoint, which prevents progression through mitosis with unrepaired damage. We found that in the absence of PBRM1, p53-dependent p21 up-regulation is delayed after DNA damage, leading to defective transcriptional repression by the DREAM complex and premature entry into mitosis. Consequently, DNA damage-induced inflammatory signaling pathways are activated by cytosolic DNA. Notably, p53 is infrequently mutated in renal cancer, so PBRM1 mutational status is critical to G2/M checkpoint maintenance. Moreover, we found that the ability of PBRM1 deficiency to predict response to immunotherapy correlates with expression of the cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway in clinical samples. These findings have implications for therapeutic responses in renal cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt, Ms/ms, Pbmr1, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


