### Accession
PXD006648

### Title
Modulation of proteostasis counteracts oxidative stress and affects DNA base excision repair capacity in ATM-deficient cells

### Description
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a syndrome associated with loss of ATM protein function. Neurodegeneration and cancer predisposition, both hallmarks of A-T, are likely to emerge as a consequence of the persistent oxidative stress and DNA damage observed in this disease. Surprisingly however, despite these severe features, a lack of functional ATM is still compatible with early life, suggesting that adaptation mechanisms contributing to cell survival must be in place. Here we address this gap in our knowledge by analysing the process of human fibroblast adaptation to the lack of ATM. We identify profound rearrangement in cellular proteostasis occurring very early on after loss of ATM in order to counter protein damage originating from oxidative stress. Change in proteostasis, however, is not without repercussions. Modulating protein turnover in ATM-depleted cells also has an adverse effect on the DNA base excision repair pathway, the major DNA repair system that deals with oxidative DNA damage. As a consequence, the burden of unrepaired endogenous DNA lesions intensifies, progressively leading to genomic instability.  Our study provides a glimpse at the cellular consequences of loss of ATM and highlights a previously overlooked role for proteostasis in maintaining cell survival in the absence of ATM function.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, TIG1 cells transfected with a control siRNA were grown in “light” DMEM (R0K0), whereas ATM-depleted cells were labelled in “heavy” DMEM (R10K8). Seventy two hours post transfection cells were counted, pooled and nuclear/cytoplasmic extracts were generated. Proteins were precipitated using Methanol:chloroform, reconstituted with 8M urea in 20mM HEPES pH8 and digested with trypsin (urea concentration adjusted to 1M). Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips and dried using a speed vac. Dried tryptic peptides were reconstituted with LC-MS grade water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and separated by nano-LC_MS/MS over 2h gradient (1-35% Acentonitrile) coupled to a an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of SILAC MS data was carried out using the MaxQuant software (v1.5.5.1).  LC_MS/MS data was searched against the Human UniProt database (fasta file released June 2016) using the MaxQuant Andromeda search

### Publication Abstract
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is an inherited, progressive neurodegenerative disorder principally caused by mutations in the <i>NPC1</i> gene. NPC disease is characterized by the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in the late endosomes (LE) and lysosomes (Ly) (LE/Ly). Vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), restores cholesterol homeostasis in fibroblasts derived from NPC patients; however, the exact mechanism by which Vorinostat restores cholesterol level is not known yet. In this study, we performed comparative proteomic profiling of the response of NPC1<sup>I1061T</sup> fibroblasts to Vorinostat. After stringent statistical criteria to filter identified proteins, we observed 202 proteins that are differentially expressed in Vorinostat-treated fibroblasts. These proteins are members of diverse cellular pathways including the endomembrane dependent protein folding-stability-degradation-trafficking axis, energy metabolism, and lipid metabolism. Our study shows that treatment of NPC1<sup>I1061T</sup> fibroblasts with Vorinostat not only enhances pathways promoting the folding, stabilization and trafficking of NPC1 (I1061T) mutant to the LE/Ly, but alters the expression of lysosomal proteins, specifically the lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) involved in the LIPA-&gt;NPC2-&gt;NPC1 based flow of cholesterol from the LE/Ly lumen to the LE/Ly membrane. We posit that the Vorinostat may modulate numerous pathways that operate in an integrated fashion through epigenetic and post-translational modifications reflecting acetylation/deacetylation balance to help manage the defective NPC1 fold, the function of the LE/Ly system and/or additional cholesterol metabolism/distribution pathways, that could globally contribute to improved mitigation of NPC1 disease in the clinic based on as yet uncharacterized principles of cellular metabolism dictating cholesterol homeostasis.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species, Protein synthesis, Ataxia telangiectasia mutated, Base excision repair, Proteasome

### Affiliations
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University
CRUK & MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, University of Oxford, Department of Oncology, Old Road Campus Research Building, Oxford, OX37DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Grigory L Dianov
CRUK & MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, University of Oxford, Department of Oncology, Old Road Campus Research Building, Oxford, OX37DQ, UK


