### Accession
PXD022679

### Title
One-shot analysis of translated mammalian lncRNAs with AHARIBO

### Description
A vast portion of the mammalian genome is transcribed as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) acting in the cytoplasm with largely unknown functions. Surprisingly, lncRNAs have been shown to interact with ribosomes, encode uncharacterized proteins, or act as ribosome sponges. These functions still remain mostly undetected and understudied owing to the lack of efficient tools for genome-wide simultaneous identification of ribosome-associated lncRNAs and peptide-producing lncRNAs. Here we present AHARIBO, a method for the detection of lncRNAs either untranslated, but associated with ribosomes, or encoding small peptides. Using AHARIBO in mouse embryonic stem cells during neuronal differentiation, we isolated ribosome-protected RNA fragments, translated RNAs and corresponding de novo synthesized polypeptides. Besides identifying mRNAs under active translation and associated ribosomes, we found and distinguished lncRNAs acting as ribosome sponges or encoding micropeptides, laying the ground for a better functional understanding of hundreds lncRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on samples processed through the pSILAC and AHARIBO workflows. For pSILAC proteomics, 24 h before lysis mESCs were washed twice with 1x PBS and the medium was replaced with SILAC Advanced DMEM/F-12 Flex Medium (Thermo Scientific #A2494301), supplemented with 1000 units/ml ESGRO Recombinant Mouse LIF protein, 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum, 4500 mg/L glucose, 17.25 mg/L proline, and penicillin/streptomycin. Either light or heavy L-arginine (Sigma-Aldrich #608033) and L-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich #608041) were added at 84 mg/L and 146 mg/L, respectively. Lysates were aliquoted and processed directly or stored at -80°C.  For AHA+ proteomics, cells were incubated with Dulbecco's modified Eagle's limiting medium (DMEM-LM; Thermo Scientific #30030) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 800 µM L-leucine for 40 min to deplete methionine reserves. Methionine-free medium was then supplemented with L-azidohomoalanine (Click-IT™ AHA; Invitrogen #C10102) at a final concentration of 250 µM and incubation time (ranging from 10 min to 120 min; 30 min set as incubation time for the protocol). Cells were then treated with 1x sBlock® (IMMAGINA BioTechnology, catalog n° #RM8; sBlock is an anisomycin-containing proprietary reagent) for 10 min. Then, 6-well plates were placed on ice, medium was removed and cells were washed once with cold 1x PBS supplemented with 1x sBlock. Hypotonic lysis buffer (0.1M NaCl, 0.1 M MgCl2, 0.1M Tris HCL, 1% Tx-100, 1x sBlock, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 units/mL DNAse I - Thermo Scientific #89836, 200 units/mL RiboLock RNase Inhibitor - Thermo Scientific #EO0381, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail - Cell Signaling Technology #5871S) was then added to each well, and cells were lysed with the aid of a scraper. After hypotonic lysis, nuclei and cellular debris were removed by centrifuging at 18000 x g, 4°C for 5 min. Lysates were aliquoted and processed directly or stored at -80°C. Ribosome pulldown was performed using Mag-DBCO beads (IMMAGINA BioTechnology #MDBCO). Lysates were incubated with 50 µl of beads for 1h on a rotator in slow motion (9 rpm) at 4°C. Supernatants were discarded after placing samples on the magnetic rack. Beads were washed three times with 500 µl of 200 mM Tris, 4 % CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, 8M Urea, pH 8.0 at room temperature on a shaker at 1000 rpm, using the magnetic rack to replace the washing solution. After the final wash, beads were resuspended in 30 µl of water and transferred to a new vial. For pSILAC experiment, 50 μg of lysates were then subjected to acetone precipitation and protein pellets were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6M urea. For HARIBO enrichment, the beads used for ribosome pulldown were reconstituted in 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, proteins were digested at room temperature with 0.5 μg Lys-C (Promega, # VA1170) for 4 h, after which the solution was diluted 4 times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 1 μg of trypsin (Promega, # V5111) was then added to the samples and proteolysis was carried out overnight. Digestion was interrupted by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were then desalted by C18 stage-tip, lyophilized, and resuspended in 20 μl of buffer A (0.1% formic 754 acid) for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 2μm particle size, 100Å pore size, id 75 μm) heated at 40°C. For pSILAC samples, the gradient for peptide elution was set as follow: 5- to 25% buffer-B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, 25 to 40% over 15 min, 40% to 100% over 18 min and 100% for 17 min at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. For AHARIBO pulldown samples, the same steps for peptide elution were set over a total gradient of 80 min. The instrument was set in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The full MS scan was 350-1100 m/z in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (200 m/z) and an AGC target of 1x10e6. MS/MS was performed in the ion trap using the top speed mode (3 secs), an AGC target of 5x10e3 and an HCD collision energy of 30.  MS raw files were analyzed by using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched by the SEQUEST HT search engine against the human or the mouse UniProt FASTA databases (UniProtKB 11/2018). Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-term acetylation (+42.011 Da) as variable modifications. SILAC labeling (Lys +8.014 Da, Arg +10.008 Da) was used as quantification method for pSILAC samples. All other values were kept as default.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched by the SEQUEST HT search engine against the human or the mouse UniProt FASTA databases (UniProtKB 11/2018). Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-term acetylation (+42.011 Da) as variable modifications. SILAC labeling (Lys +8.014 Da, Arg +10.008 Da) was used as quantification method for pSILAC samples. All other values were kept as default. Heteroscedastic T-test was used to assess the significant differences in peptide/protein abundance (p-value lower than 0.05) unless stated otherwise. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway analysis were performed using DAVID version 6.8 and PANTHER 14.1 and Enrichr (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/).

### Publication Abstract
A vast portion of the mammalian genome is transcribed as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) acting in the cytoplasm with largely unknown functions. Surprisingly, lncRNAs have been shown to interact with ribosomes, encode peptides, or act as ribosome sponges. These functions still remain mostly undetected and understudied owing to the lack of efficient tools for genome-wide simultaneous identification of ribosome-associated and peptide-producing lncRNAs. Here, we present AHA-mediated RIBOsome isolation (AHARIBO), a method for the detection of lncRNAs either untranslated, but associated with ribosomes, or encoding small peptides. Using AHARIBO in mouse embryonic stem cells during neuronal differentiation, we isolated ribosome-protected RNA fragments, translated RNAs, and corresponding de novo synthesized peptides. Besides identifying mRNAs under active translation and associated ribosomes, we found and distinguished lncRNAs acting as ribosome sponges or encoding micropeptides, laying the ground for a better functional understanding of hundreds of lncRNAs.

### Keywords
Translation, Ribosome, Translatome, Proteogenomics, Rna, Proteomics, Lncrna, Ribo-seq

### Affiliations
IMMAGINA BioTechnology S.r.l, Via Sommarive 18, Povo (Italy)
University of Trento

### Submitter
Romina Belli

### Lab Head
Dr Massimiliano Clamer
IMMAGINA BioTechnology S.r.l, Via Sommarive 18, Povo (Italy)


