### Accession
PXD015102

### Title
Time-series proteomic study of diabetic nephropathy in human proximal tubular epithelial HK-2 cells

### Description
Shotgun time-series proteomic analysis based on stable isotope dimethyl labeling and UHPLC-MS/MSC to relatively quantify the changes in protein expression of human proximal tubular HK-2 cells exposed to a diabetic-like microenvironment

### Sample Protocol
HK-2 cells maintained in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin/streptomycin/amphoterycin B, 1% glutamine and 1% insulin-transferrine-selenium (ITS). One week before the beginning of the experiments, cell culture medium was changed to DMEM low glucose (LG, 5.5 mM glucose) supplemented as stated above. Cells were routinely maintained in 21% O2 (normoxic conditions) at 37 °C. To perform the experiments, six p35 cultured plates were seeded with 2.5 x 105 cells (90% confluence) per time and treatment condition. When completely attached, cells were exposed to either medium DMEM LG or DMEM high glucose (HG, 25 mM glucose) supplemented with 0.5% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin/amphoterycin B, 1% glutamine and 1% ITS under hypoxic (1% O2) or normoxic conditions (21% O2), for 5, 24 and 48 h. For 48 h experiments, cell culture medium was refreshed at 24 h. Hypoxia experiments were performed in an In vivo200 hypoxia workstation. Cells were manipulated and lysed inside the chamber, and all media and buffers were pre-equilibrated to 1% O2. Cells were lysed with 300 μL of lysis buffer (6 M urea, 1% (m/v) BOG, 0.15 M NaCl, 1.3 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaVO4, 5 mM NaF, 2.5 mM sodium-pyrophospate, and 5 mM β-glycerophosphate in PBS) supplemented with 10 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail to prevent protein degradation. The samples were incubated for 60 min at 4 °C, sonicated for 30 min at 0 °C in a water bath, and then centrifuged at 10000g at 4 °C for 15 min. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was quantified using Bradford assay. 20 μg of proteins were mixed with 500 μL of an ice-cold tributylphosphate/acetone/methanol mixture (1:12:1, v/v/v) and incubated at 4 °C for 90 min (mixing every 15 min). The precipitate was centrifuged for 15 min (3000g at 4 °C), washed with 1 mL of cold acetone, and air-dried. Pellets were dissolved in 20 μL of 1% (m/v) BOG with 20% (v/v) ACN in 0.1 M TEAB, and the proteins were reduced with 10 μL of 45 mM DTT at 56 °C for 15 min, cooled down to room temperature and alkylated with 10 μL of 100 mM IAA for 15 min in the dark. Samples were then digested with 0.5 μg of LysC/trypsin solution (5% (m/m), of total protein content) and incubated at 37 °C overnight in darkness. The digests were dried to remove ACN and resuspended in 70 μL of 0.1 M TEAB, and BOG was extracted with water-saturated ethyl-acetate (Yeung et al., 2010). Dimethyl labelling was performed according to Boersema et al. [20] (Boersema et al., 2009). Tryptic peptide mixtures were reconstituted in TEAB and LG-Normoxia samples were labelled as light (L) using regular formaldehyde (CH2O, 4% (v/v)), and HG-Hypoxia samples were labelled as medium (M) using deuterated formaldehyde (CD2O, 4% (v/v)). Technical replicates were included for each sample in a swap-labelling experiment form (LG-Normoxia samples labelled as M, and HG-Hypoxia samples labelled as L). Samples labelled as L and M were mixed together and desalted on Isolute C18 solid-phase extraction columns as specify by the manufacture (1 mL, 50 mg capacity, Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). After being desalted, peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) TFA prior to UHPLC–MS/MS analysis. Two replicates were analysed for each “Test” condition, and six replicates (considering biological and technical replicates) were analysed for the real samples at each time point, giving a total of 18 LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were collectively processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) using the Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and a minimum of two peptides with at least seven amino acid length was specified. MaxQuant scored peptides for identification based on a search with a maximal mass deviation of precursor and fragment masses of up to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against a concatenated forward and reversed version of the Uniprot human database (downloaded on April 24th, 2019 and containing 20,428 entries). Trypsin was selected as digestive enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as the fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine and protein N-acetylation were set as variable modifications. For dimethyl labeling, DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 were set as light labels, and DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4 were set as medium labels. A minimum peptide ratio count of two and at least one “razor peptide” was required for quantification

### Publication Abstract
During diabetes, renal proximal tubular cells (PTC) are exposed to a combination of high glucose and hypoxic conditions, which plays a relevant role in the development of diabetic kidney disease (DKD). In this work, a time-series proteomic study was performed to analyse the effect of a diabetic-like microenvironment induced changes on HK-2 cells, a human cell line derived from normal proximal tubular epithelial cells. Cells simultaneously exposed to high glucose (25 mM) and hypoxia (1% O2) were compared to cells in control conditions for up to 48 h. Diabetic conditions increased the percentage of death cells after 24 and 48 h, but no differences in the protein/cell ratio were found. The relative protein quantification using dimethyl-labeling and UHPLC-MS/MS analysis allowed the identification of 317, 296 and 259 proteins at 5, 24 and 48 h, respectively. The combination of statistical and time expression profile analyses indicated an increased expression of proteins involved in glycolysis, and a decrease of cytoskeletal-related proteins. The exposure of HK-2 cells to high glucose and hypoxia reproduces some of the effects of diabetes on PTC and, with the limitations inherent to in vitro studies, propose new mechanisms and targets to be considered in the management of DKD.

### Keywords
Hyperglycemia, Hk-2 cells, Proteomics, Hypoxia, Diabetic nephropathy, Proximal tubular cells

### Affiliations
Departamento de Química Analítica, Química Física e Ingeniería Química, Universidad de Alcalá, Ctra. Madrid-Barcelona, Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, España
Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Alberto Valdés

### Lab Head
Dr María Luisa Marina
Departamento de Química Analítica, Química Física e Ingeniería Química, Universidad de Alcalá, Ctra. Madrid-Barcelona, Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, España


