### Accession
PXD032350

### Title
In vivo prenylomic profiling in the brain of a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease reveals increased prenylation of a key set of proteins

### Description
Dysregulated prenylation has been implicated in the many diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Prenylomic analysis, the combination of metabolic incorporation of an isoprenoid analogue (C15AlkOPP) into prenylated proteins with a bottom-up proteomic analysis, has allowed identification of prenylated proteins in various cellular models. Here, transgenic AD mice were treated with C15AlkOPP through intracerebroventricular (ICV)  infusion over 13 days. Using prenylomic analysis, 37 prenylated proteins were enriched in the brains of AD mice . Importantly, the prenylated forms of 15 proteins were consistently upregulated in AD mice compared to non-transgenic wild-type controls. These results highlight the power of this in vivo metabolic labeling approach to identify multiple post-translationally modified proteins that may serve as potential therapeutic targets for a disease that has proved refractory to treatment thus far. Moreover, this method should be applicable to many other types of protein modifications, significantly broadening its scope.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations of brain tissue lysates  were determined with a BCA assay (Bio-Rad). Then 2 mg from each treatment was subjected to click reaction with biotin-N3 (BroadPharm) by sequentially adding 100 μM, biotin-N3 (10 µL), 1 mM TCEP (20 µL), 0.1 mM TBTA (10 µL), and 1 mM CuSO4 (20 µL). All samples were diluted to 1 mL with PBS containing 1%SDS, followed by a 120-min incubation at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated out using chloroform–methanol (1:4:3) extraction, and protein pellets were washed with methanol. Pellets were air dried and were then stored at -20 oC overnight followed by dissolution in 0.55 mL PBS containing 1%SDS. Protein concentrations were measured using a BCA assay. Biotinylated samples (1.2 mg) were incubated with pre-washed Neutravidin agarose beads (Thermo Scientific) in 500 µL of PBS containing 1%SDS for 120 min, then beads were washed with 3x 1 mL PBS + 1%SDS, PBS, 3x 1mL  8 M urea, and 3x 1 mL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Resin was resuspended in 100 µL of  50 mM TEAB buffer, and proteins were digested on-bead with trypsin (1.5 µg, in provided buffer, Promega Corp.) overnight at 37 °C, and peptides were collected from beads using spin columns by washing with 50 mM TEAB and dried by lyophilization. Peptides were dissolved in 50-60 µL and their resulting concentrations determined with BCA assay. Three 10 μg aliquots of peptides from each mouse were used as technical replicates. Samples were supplemented with 150 fmol of internal standard (yeast ADH1, Waters) and subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling using TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT 126-128 were used for the reference (Vehicle or WT) and TMT 129-131 were used for the APP/PS1 or C15AlkOPP WT samples. TMT-labeled samples were combined, dissolved in 200 mM NH₄HCO₂ (pH 10) (300 µL), then subsequently fractionated using a homemade stage tip (three layers of SDB-XC extraction disks, (3M, 1.07 mm x 0.50 mm i.d.)) in a 200 µL pipette tip. Peptides were then fractionated under high pH reverse phase conditions yielding 7 fractions of 60 µL in volume (5, 10, 15, 20, 22.5, 27.5, 80% ACN in 200 mM NH4HCO3, pH 10). The first two fractions were combined, then and all fractions were dried by lyophilization. Samples were then dissolved in 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS3 analysis. This method is based on a previously reported method. Data acquisition was performed as described previously. Briefly, TMT-labeled peptides were resolved at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC (Dionex) in a reversed-phase column (75 μm i.d., 45 cm) packed in-house75. Each fraction from the high pH prefractionation was subjected to varying gradients (7-34 %) of acetonitrile (with 0.1 % formic acid) in solvent (0.1% formic acid in water) for 80 min and sprayed directly into the Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 scans were collected at 120,000 resolutions in a 320–2,000 m/z range with 100 ms max injection time (IT) and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000. The subsequent data-dependent MS/MS scans were collected with collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% with 1.3 m/z isolation window, with max IT of 100 ms and AGC target of 5000. Acquisition at MS3 was done by selecting the top 10 precursors (SPS) for fragmentation by high-collisional energy dissociation (HCD) in the orbitrap with the following settings: 55% NCE, 2.5 m/z isolation window, 120 ms max IT, and 50,000 AGC target.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were uploaded into MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) and searched against a non-redundant mouse data base (UP0000000589) from Uniprot. For all but the following parameters, the default settings were kept. Trypsin/P was used for digestion with allowance for 3 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was set to 7, protein FDR was set to 0.5, modifications in search oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-Term), and unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. MaxQuant was run through the MaxQuantCmd.exc at the University of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute.  The proteingroup.txt file generated was uploaded into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Proteins that were potential contaminants and reverse peptides were removed by site identification. Raw intensities were transformed to log2 values, and proteins with more than 3 out of 6 values returning “NaN” after transformation were removed. Missing values were imputed from the normal distribution of the remaining values. Reported values (TMT) were normalized by subtracting rows by mean value and columns by median value. Statistical analysis was performed using a two-sample t-test FDR = 5 % and s0 = 0.1. Data was exported to excel for generation of plots and figures.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of protein prenylation has been implicated in many diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Prenylomic analysis, the combination of metabolic incorporation of an isoprenoid analogue (C15AlkOPP) into prenylated proteins with a bottom-up proteomic analysis, has allowed the identification of prenylated proteins in various cellular models. Here, transgenic AD mice were administered with C15AlkOPP through intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion over 13 days. Using prenylomic analysis, 36 prenylated proteins were enriched in the brains of AD mice. Importantly, the prenylated forms of 15 proteins were consistently upregulated in AD mice compared to nontransgenic wild-type controls. These results highlight the power of this in vivo metabolic labeling approach to identify multiple post-translationally modified proteins that may serve as potential therapeutic targets for a disease that has proved refractory to treatment thus far. Moreover, this method should be applicable to many other types of protein modifications, significantly broadening its scope.

### Keywords
Altzhimer's disease, Prenylation, Brain, Prenylomics, Mice

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota, United States
University of Minnesota 

### Submitter
Shelby Auger

### Lab Head
Dr Mark, D, Distefano
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota, United States


