### Accession
PXD033749

### Title
Sperm motility annotated genes: are they associated with impaired fecundity?

### Description
To determine whether Gene Ontology sperm motility annotated genes are differentially abundant in sperm collected from men with oligoasthenozoospermia and to gain further insight into molecular mechanisms underlying male infertility

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysate preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis       Purified sperm samples were thawed on ice and washed three times with Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS). These sperm samples were obtained from an independent cohort of 12 oligoasthenozoospermic men who attended the IVF center for infertility treatment. Another independent cohort of 12 age-matched normozoospermic volunteers served as controls. One hundred microliters of lysis buffer [4% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT] was added to each sample, and samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Then, the samples were sonicated at 20 joules for 2 seconds × 10 at intervals of 10 seconds, incubated on ice for 30 minutes, and centrifuged at 14000 x g for 10 minutes, after which the supernatant was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube. After that, an aliquot of protein lysate from each sample was subjected to enzymatic hydrolysis using a FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) enzymatic method as described by Wisniewski et al., 15 with a slight modification. Briefly, 90 µL of protein lysate was mixed in the Microcon-centrifugal filter unit (MRCF0R030, Merck-Millipore) with 600µL fresh prepared UA solution [8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5] and centrifuged at 14 000 x g for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT) to remove SDS. The residual amount of SDS was removed by washing the centrifugal filter unit two times with 200 μL of UA at 14 000 x g for 15 minutes at RT. Proteins were then alkylated with IAA solution [0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA] in the dark for 30 minutes at RT. Afterward, three washing steps with 100 μL of UA solution were carried out, followed by three washing steps with 100 μL of ABC buffer [0.05 M NH4HCO3 in H2O], each at 14 000 x g for 15 minutes at RT, to remove irrelevant substances. After the washing steps, proteins were digested with 40 μL ABC with trypsin (trypsin enzyme to protein ratio 1:100) overnight in a wet chamber at 37°C for ~18 hours. The next day, peptides were eluted from the centrifugal filter unit by centrifuging at 14 000 x g for 15 minutes at RT, followed by the addition of 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifugation at 14 000 x g for 15 minutes at RT. Then, digested peptides were acidified with CF3COOH [Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Final Conc. 1%)]. The acidity of the digested peptides was checked with pH paper. Samples were stage tipped ‘’Desalting of peptides’’ using self-made tips following a protocol recommended by Rappssilber et al. 16. Lastly, peptides were eluted, dried using vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted with 20 µL of 0.1% Formic Acid. Before applying the peptides from each sample to the Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap LC-MS/MS System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the concentration of peptides was determined using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific-Pierce).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) using the human reference proteome database (UniProt: UP000005640) with protein and peptide FDR < 1%. Protein groups were filtered to eliminate contaminants and reverse hits, and subsequently, the proteins were identified by site only. Protein groups that were identified more than three times in at least one group (oligoasthenozoospermic men /age-matched normozoospermic men) were kept for further processing. Missing values were imputed in Perseus (version 2.0.3.1) using the function “Imputation: Replace values from a normal distribution” (width=0.3, down shift=1.8). Obtained intensities were normalized using Label-free quantified (LFQ)18 and then log2-transformed. A two-sided modified T-Test implemented in the Perseus Software Package 19 was used to call proteins with significant enrichment in the oligoasthenozoospermic men the normozoospermic men. Adjusted P-values were calculated by using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure and Log2 Fold changes of the mean LFQ intensities of oligoasthenozoospermic men compared to the normozoospermic men were determined. The gene ontology (GO) annotations of the differentially and significantly genes were performed using the  ToppGene Suite 14 Gene Ontologies enrichment algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm motility is a prerequisite for achieving pregnancy, and alterations in sperm motility, along with sperm count and morphology, are commonly observed in subfertile men. The aim of the study was to determine whether the expression level of genes annotated with the Gene Ontology (GO) term 'sperm motility' differed in sperm collected from healthy men and men diagnosed with oligoasthenozoospermia. Reverse transcription quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR), quantitative mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), and enrichment analyses were used to validate a set of 132 genes in 198 men present at an infertility clinic. Out of the 132 studied sperm-motility-associated genes, 114 showed differentially expressed levels in oligoasthenozoospermic men compared to those of normozoospermic controls using an RT-qPCR analysis. Of these, 94 genes showed a significantly lower expression level, and 20 genes showed a significantly higher expression level. An MS analysis of sperm from an independent cohort of healthy and subfertile men identified 692 differentially expressed proteins, of which 512 were significantly lower and 180 were significantly higher in oligoasthenozoospermic men compared to those of the normozoospermic controls. Of the 58 gene products quantified with both techniques, 48 (82.75%) showed concordant regulation. Besides the sperm-motility-associated proteins, the unbiased proteomics approach uncovered several novel proteins whose expression levels were specifically altered in abnormal sperm samples. Among these deregulated proteins, there was a clear overrepresentation of annotation terms related to sperm integrity, the cytoskeleton, and energy-related metabolism, as well as human phenotypes related to spermatogenesis and sperm-related abnormalities. These findings suggest that many of these proteins may serve as diagnostic markers of male infertility. Our study reveals an extended number of sperm-motility-associated genes with altered expression levels in the sperm of men with oligoasthenozoospermia. These genes and/or proteins can be used in the future for better assessments of male factor infertility.

### Keywords
Fertility, Sperm motility

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics, Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, Technical University Kaiserslautern


