### Accession
PXD032831

### Title
Proteome comparison of Leptospira borgpetersenii serovar Hardjo strains cultured at different temperatures

### Description
Leptospirosis, caused by bacteria of the genus Leptospira, is a zoonotic disease affecting humans, companion animals, and all major livestock species. Typical propagation of the highly fastidious Leptospira borgepetesenii serovar Hardjo is limited to 29°C. However, newer culture media formulations now facilitate isolation and propagation at 37°C, a temperature that more closely emulates in vivo conditions and is hypothesized to regulate the expression of virulence factors during host infection. Since protein expression by leptospires is temperature dependent,  and therefore the proteome of bacterin vaccines can differ whether grown at 37°C compared to 29°C, we compared the proteome of strains of Leptospira borgpetersenii serovar Hardjo at each temperature; two well-established strains that causes acute (strain JB197) or chronic asymptomatic disease (strain HB203) in the hamster challenge model of leptospirosis and two more recently isolated strains designated TC129 and TC273 (both of which cause chronic asymptomatic disease in the hamster). We found proteomic expression differences within strains propagated at the routine temperature of 29°C, and compared to the newly achieved culture temperature of 37°C. Results highlight significant differential protein expression, including virulence factors, amongst identical serovars of L. borgpetersenii when propagated at 29oC, the collective variation of which can be diminished when propagated at 37oC. Collectively, there is increasingly more evidence available to suggest bacterin vaccine design would benefit from consideration of strains employed, and potential effects of growth temperature related to specific behavior of pathogens in vaccine composition.

### Sample Protocol
The L. borgpetersenii serovar Hardjo-bovis strains JB197, (Bioproject Accession PRJNA16148) Hb 15B 203 (strain HB203, Bioproject Accession: PRJNA384237), TC129 and TC273 (Bioproject PRJNA759631,) were cultured at 29°C and 37°C until they reached the mid-late log growth phase in HAN media. Samples were pelleted by centrifugation (4oC, 10,000 x g, 30 minutes), washed twice with ice-cold TE buffer, and frozen at -80°C until further processing and analysis. Four biological replicates were submitted for all conditions. Peptide chromatography utilized the Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, FL, USA). An Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column was used to chromatograph digests with a mobile gradient between phase A (95% H2O: 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and phase B (5% H2O: 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The column was fed into a Nanospray Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, FL, USA) and run with a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, FL, USA) mass spectrophotometer. Four biological replicates were run for each sample and data collection was achieved utilizing the following settings: 300 to 2000 m/z FTMS resolution was 30,000, MSMS scanning resolution was 15,000. For the FTMS Top 10, a signal minimum of 5000 was required, the duration of the repeated mass exclusion was 1 minute, and CID activation was used (collision energy of 35 used for normalization).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer data files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.7.0). Variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N term.), deamidation (NQ), and Phospho (STY), and the only fixed modification consisted of Carbamidomethyl (C). The L. borgpetersenii serovar Hardjo Bovis database from Uniprot (using the Uniref90, downloaded August 2020) was used as a reference. Following initial processing by MaxQuant, Perseus software (1.6.13) was used for additional analysis including removal of proteins identified by a single peptide, log2 transformation, and generation of Hawaii plots denoting proteins with significant abundance differences (FDR of P ≤ .01). Protein differential expression analysis was done with Perseus utilizing a P-value < 0.01 threshold for significance. Data were analyzed in two separate comparisons: 1) strain JB197 versus strain HB203 between temperatures, and 2) strains HB203 versus TC129 versus TC273 between temperatures. In the first comparison, data were normalized to JB197 for all contrasts where possible. In the second comparison, data were normalized to HB203 for comparison with TC129 and TC273 for both 29°C and 37°C. All within strain comparisons were done with the reference strain at 29°C.

### Publication Abstract
Leptospirosis is a global zoonotic disease affecting humans and livestock species. Bacterin vaccines lack cross protection between serogroups, and include multiple serovars propagated at 29&#xa0;&#xb0;C. Recent work demonstrated substantial variation in the transcriptome of identical species and serovars of Leptospira. Here, substantial differences in protein abundance profiles were identified in Leptospira borgpetersenii serovar Hardjo; strain HB203, which was isolated in the 1980s, compared to newer strains TC129 and TC273 isolated in 2016, and whether they were propagated at the routine temperature of 29&#xa0;&#xb0;C, compared to 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C which more closely emulates host infection. While 388 and 385 significantly differentially expressed (DE) proteins (FDR of 0.01) were identified in HB203 versus TC129, and HB203 versus TC273 when propagated at 29&#xa0;&#xb0;C respectively, only 66 and 4 DE proteins were identified in HB203 versus TC129, and HB203 versus TC273 when propagated at 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C respectively. Within each strain comparing temperatures, HB203 had 524 significantly DE proteins, TC129 had 347 DE proteins, and TC273 had 569 DE proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032831. Results highlight significant differential protein expression among identical serovars of L. borgpetersenii suggesting that bacterin vaccine design can benefit from consideration of strains employed and effects of temperature on growth. SIGNIFICANCE: Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease caused by spirochete bacteria of the genus Leptospira. While leptospirosis affects over one million people per year, symptoms range vastly in severity from completely asymptomatic, to flu-like, to multi-organ failure and death in severe cases. Incidental hosts become infected after encountering pathogens directly from contact with another host, including domestic or wildlife animals, or indirectly from contaminated environments. Though animal vaccines exist, they lack cross protection across serogroups, and instead rely on inclusion of multiple carefully selected serovars from laboratory strains prepared at ~29&#xa0;&#xb0;C. Recent interest in gene expression at the Leptospira strain level, along with a newly achieved culture temperature of 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C (which more closely resembles host body temperature), led us to investigate the proteomic profiles of an older, established challenge strain HB203 in comparison to TC129 and TC273, two strains isolated in 2016 from abattoir cattle in the central United States. Herein, we identify substantial proteomic differences not only between strains of the same species and serovar, but notably between growth temperatures, collectively suggesting that bacterin vaccine composition may benefit from investigating strain selection and the temperature employed for growth of the bacteria used in bacterin preparation.

### Keywords
Leptospirosis, Bovine, Hardjo, Borgpetersenii, Zoonosis

### Affiliations
USDA/ARS/NADC
Infectious Bacterial Disease Research Unit,USDA Agriculture Research Service,National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA, USA.

### Submitter
John Lippolis

### Lab Head
Dr Jarlath E. Nally
Infectious Bacterial Disease Research Unit,USDA Agriculture Research Service,National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA, USA.


