### Accession
PXD023354

### Title
Altered Transcription Factor Expression Responses to Exercise in Insulin Resistance

### Description
Purpose. Insulin resistant muscle is resistant to gene expression changes induced by acute exercise. This study was undertaken to identify transcription factors that differentially respond to exercise in insulin resistance. Candidate transcription factors were identified from analysis of 5’-untranslated regions (5’-UTRs) of exercise responsive genes and from analysis of the 5’-UTRs of genes coding for proteins that differ in abundance in insulin resistance.  Research design and methods. Muscle biopsies were obtained from lean and obese subjects before and after a single exercise bout. Euglycemic glucose clamps assessed insulin sensitivity. Global proteomics analysis identified differentially abundant proteins. The 5’-UTRs of genes coding for significant proteins were subjected to transcription factor enrichment analysis to identify candidate transcription factors. Q-rt-PCR to determine expression of candidate transcription factors was performed on RNA from resting and post-exercise muscle biopsies; immunoblots quantified protein abundance.  Results. Obese subjects were insulin resistant compared to lean but performed exercise at the same intensity. Proteins involved in mitochondrial function, protein targeting and translation, and metabolism were among those significantly different between the groups. Transcription factor enrichment analysis of genes coding for these proteins revealed new candidate transcription factors. Q-rt-PCR analysis of RNA and immunoblot analysis from pre- and post-exercise muscle biopsies revealed several transcription and growth factors that had altered responses to exercise in insulin resistant subjects.  Conclusions. These results confirm findings of an association between insulin sensitivity and transcription factor mRNA response to exercise and extend these results to show that obesity also may be a sufficient prerequisite for exercise resistance. Analysis of the muscle proteome together with determination of effects of exercise on expression of transcription factors suggests that abnormal responses of transcription factors to exercise may be responsible for differences in protein abundances in insulin resistant muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle samples were homogenized, as previously described (De Filippis et al., 2008). For this analysis, 7 of the 8 lean and 11 of the 12 obese subjects had sufficient biopsy material. Muscle samples were weighed while still frozen and were homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer (1:10 wt/vol) containing 50 mmol/l Hepes (pH 7.6), 150 mmol/l NaCl, 20 mmol/l sodium pyrophosphate, 20 mmol/l β-glycerophosphate, 10 mmol/l NaF,  2 mmol/l EDTA (pH 8.0), 1% Igepal CA-630, 10% glycerol, 1 mmol/l MgCl2, 1mmol/l CaCl2, 2 mmol/l sodium orthovanadate, 10 mg/l leupeptin, and 2 mmol/l phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride. Homogenates were incubated on ice for 30 min and then centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentrations were measured by the Lowry method. Supernatants were stored at -80°C until use.

### Data Protocol
Muscle lysate proteins were resolved by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (Hwang et al., 2010). Each lane was cut into 7 slices for the analysis. HPLC-ESIMS/ MS was performed in positive ion mode on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-Spray Source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). NanoLC was performed using a Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System with an EASY RSLC C18 LC column (Thermo Scientific, 50cm x 75 m inner diameter, packed with PepMap RSLC C18 material, 2 m, cat. # ES803). Spectra were acquired using Xcalibur, version 2.1.0 (Thermo Scientific). A “top 15” data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed (acquisition of a full scan spectrum followed by collision-induced dissociation mass spectra of the 15 most abundant ions in the survey scan). Dynamic exclusion was enabled. Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were then searched against the human SwissProt_2015_12 database (20,194 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.0; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). A Mascot ion score significance threshold of 25 was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Exercise, Insulin resistance, Gene expression, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Arizona College of Medicine
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Lawrence Mandarino
Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Arizona College of Medicine


