### Accession
PXD007727

### Title
Decayed wood - metagenomic - Proteomic characterization of proteins from organisms feeding on decayed wood from Montana

### Description
Proteomic characterization of proteins from organisms feeding on decayed wood from Montana

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from decayed wood substrate, digested and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.07). Mascot wasset up to search the ordered_GP-1A_wood_8505_ordered_1K database (50,586 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Decayed wood, Metagenomic, Orbitrap elite

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service Research and Development, Madison, WI

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Cullen
United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service Research and Development, Madison, WI


