### Accession
PXD038825

### Title
Being spontaneous has its costs! Characterization of the spontaneous phage ϕD5-resistant mutants of Dickeya solani strain IPO 2222

### Description
Lytic bacteriophages able to infect and kill Dickeya spp. can be readily isolated from virtually all Dickeya spp.-containing environments, yet little is known about the selective pressure those viruses exert on their hosts. Here, we identified two spontaneous phage-resistant D. solani IPO 2222 mutants, DsR34 and DsR207, resistant to infection caused by phage vB_Dsol_D5 (ΦD5) that expressed a reduced ability to macerate potato tuber tissues compared to the wild-type, phage-susceptible D. solani IPO 2222 strain. Genome sequencing revealed that mutants had point mutations in two genes encoding: secretion protein HlyD (mutant DsR34) and elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) (mutant DsR207). Both mutations impacted the proteoms of D. solani grown in rich and minimal media. Furthermore, DsR34 and DsR207 were characterized for features essential for their ecological success in a plant environment, including the ability to use various carbon and nitrogen sources, production of plant cell wall degrading enzymes, ability to form biofilms, siderophore production, swimming and swarming motility and virulence in planta. Compared to the wild-type ΦD5-susceptible D. solani strain, mutants DsR34 and DsR207 expressed reduced ability to macerate chicory leaves and to colonize and cause symptoms in growing potato plants. The implications of the ΦD5 resistance on the ecological performance of D. solani are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Dickeya solani cultures were dissolved in lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 50 mM DTT) and incubated in 95ºC for 10 minutes, followed by cooling down to room temperature. The lysate was sonicated in QSonica Q500 sonicator (Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA), for 5 min using 15 sec pulse, 10 sec rest and 100% amplitude. The protein concentration was determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm using μDrop plate. 100 µg of proteins from each sample was mixed with 200 µl of urea-containing solution (8 M urea, in 0.1 Tris/HCl pH 8.5), formerly digested with MS Grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) on 10 kDa Microcons (Merck-Milipore, Burlington, MA, USA) according to Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASPP) procedure (Wiśniewski et al., 2018). Final clean-up was done on the C18 resin in the STAGE Tips procedure (Rappsilber et al., 2007).

### Data Protocol
SWATH analysis: performed in a looped product ion and high sensitivity modes. A set of 25 transmission windows of variable width was constructed with SWATH variable window calculator, covering the precursors mass range of 400-1200 m/z. The collision energy for each window was calculated for +2 and +5 charged ions centered upon the window with a spread of five. The SWATH MS/MS survey scan was acquired in the range of 400-1200 m/z (acc. time 50 ms) followed by spectra scans in the range of 100-1800 m/z (acc. time 40 ms – total cycle time of 1.1 s).  Database search: ProteinPilot 5.0.2 software (AB SCIEX) using Paragon algorithm against the reviewed Dickeya solani database (18.11.2022, Unprot) with the following parameters: instrument TripleTOF5600, alkylation of cysteines by iodoacetamide, trypsin enzyme digestion, ID focus on biological modifications, search effort ‘through ID’, and detected protein threshold [Conf] > 10% automatic false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. Spectral library was created using PeakView 2.2 software (AB SCIEX) using set parameters: a maximum of 6 peptides per protein and 6 transitions per peptide; peptides with the cponfidence of at least 95% and an exctration window width of 15 min and 75 ppm XIC width.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Potato, Erwinia chrysanthemi, Fitness costs, Environmental fitness, Ecology, Phage resistance

### Affiliations
Lab head of Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology University of Gdańsk and Medical University of Gdańsk, Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland
Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology University of Gdańsk and Medical University of Gdańsk 

### Submitter
Inez Mruk

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska, Assoc. Prof.
Lab head of Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology University of Gdańsk and Medical University of Gdańsk, Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland


