### Accession
PXD016103

### Title
Phosphorylation sites of PTPN22 treated by Calyculin A in 293T cells

### Description
Phosphorylation sites of PTPN22 induced by Calyculin A treatment were identified by LC-MS

### Sample Protocol
For in gel digest, colloidal coomassie gel slices were destained 3 times by washing with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 5-15% acetonitrile (ACN) for 15 min. The gel pieces were dried in a speedvac, and subsequently reduced by mixing with 10 mM DTT in in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56°C for 30 min. The gel pieces were then incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to alkylate cysteine and then incubated in increasing concentrations of acetonitrile: 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (50%, 75%, 95%) to dehydrate the gel pieces. The solution was then removed and samples were dried in a speedvac. For digestion, samples were incubated with a solution of Arg-C (0.01 μg/μl) in buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.8], 5mM CaCl 2, 10mM DTT, and 2mM EDTA at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted twice by addition of 50 μL of 0.2% formic acid and 65% ACN and vortex mixing at room temperature for 30 min. The supernatant was dried in a speedvac. A total of 50 μL of 50% ACN-0.2% formic acid was added to the sample, which was vortexed again at room temperature for 30 min.

### Data Protocol
Arg-C-digested peptides were subsequently analyzed by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization. The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a TripleTOF 5600 hybrid mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Waters corporation nano ACQUITY) using a 20cm-75 micron ID glass capillary packed with 2.5-μm C18 (130) CSH™ beads (Waters corporation). Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5%–80%) of ACN at a flow rate of 250 μl/min for 1 hr. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA). MS/MS data were acquired in a data-dependent manner in which the MS1 data was acquired for 250ms at m/z of 400 to 1250 Da and the MS/MS data was acquired from m/z of 50 to 2,000 Da. The Independent data acquisition (IDA) parameters were as follows; MS1-TOF acquisition time of 250 ms, followed by 50 MS2 events of 48 ms acquisition time for each event. The threshold to trigger MS2 event was set to 150 counts when the ion had the charge state +2, +3 and +4. The ion exclusion time was set to 4 s. Finally, the collected data were analyzed using Protein Pilot 5.0 (ABSCIEX) for peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The hematopoietic-specific protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22) is encoded by a major autoimmunity risk gene. PTPN22 inhibits T cell activation by dephosphorylating substrates involved in proximal T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. Here, we found by mass spectrometry that PTPN22 was phosphorylated at Ser<sup>751</sup> by PKC&#x3b1; in Jurkat and primary human T cells activated with phorbol ester/ionomycin or antibodies against CD3/CD28. The phosphorylation of PTPN22 at Ser<sup>751</sup> prolonged its half-life by inhibiting K48-linked ubiquitination and impairing recruitment of the phosphatase to the plasma membrane, which is necessary to inhibit proximal TCR signaling. Additionally, the phosphorylation of PTPN22 at Ser<sup>751</sup> enhanced the interaction of PTPN22 with the carboxyl-terminal Src kinase (CSK), an interaction that is impaired by the PTPN22 R620W variant associated with autoimmune disease. The phosphorylation of Ser<sup>751</sup> did not affect the recruitment of PTPN22 R620W to the plasma membrane but protected this mutant from degradation. Together, out data indicate that phosphorylation at Ser<sup>751</sup> mediates a reciprocal regulation of PTPN22 stability versus translocation to TCR signaling complexes by CSK-dependent and CSK-independent mechanisms.

### Keywords
Ptpn22 phosphorylation

### Affiliations
UCSD
Department of Reumotology, Allegy and immunology

### Submitter
Shen Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Nunzio Bottini
Department of Reumotology, Allegy and immunology


