### Accession
PXD005787

### Title
Time-resolved metabolomics and proteomics of Brassica napus guard cells under low CO2 concentration

### Description
In order to discover new nodes and edges for low CO2-induced stomata closure, we applied hyphenated mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabolomics and proteomics approaches to analyze short-term low CO2 responses in B. napus (canola) guard cells. A total of 411 metabolites were quantified. We observed decreased trends of primary metabolites biosynthesis (e.g., most common amino acids, nucleotides, and sugars), and changes in the levels of osmoregulators such as sucrose, malate, and mannitol showed increased trends at both early and late time points. Unlike under elevated CO2 levels, JA biosynthesis was not altered. Instead, phytohormones that induces stomatal opening, including cytokinins, auxins, GA4, as well as melatonin increased at early time points. This study also highlights the utility of single cell-type metabolomics in discovering and testing new nodes and edges in cellular signaling and metabolic networks.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using phenol from enriched Brassica napus guard cell samples. Samples were digested with trypson and labled with TMT-10plex kit. Labled peptides were desalted with a C18 spin column then fractionated on a strong cation exchange column. Fractionated samples were then lyophylized and desalted with ZipTip then submited for detection on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus MS system (Thermo Fisher Scintific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using proteome discover 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), searched against a customized Brassica napus database. Brassica napus protein database was downloaded from Genescope (Chalhoub, Denoeud et al., 2014). Redundant sequences were first removed with patpd program from AB-BLAST 3.0 (Gish, 1996-2009). The filtered database was then subjected to redundant entry clustering using the perl script nrdb90 with an identity level at 95% (Holm and Sander, 1998). The final database contains 79366 non-redundant proteins. The annotation was done for the database by blasting against the non-redundant green plant database from NCBI using Blast2Go (Conesa and Götz, 2008). The protein quantification was done with the SEQUEST algorithm with the following parameters: 20 ppm tolerance for precursor mass tolerance, and 0.02 Dalton for fragment mass tolerance, allowing two missed cleavage sites, TMT10plex label on the N-terminal, carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), phosphoralation (S, T, Y), and deamidation on the N-terminal as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered using a stringent Xcorr value cut off at 2.31 for 2+, 2.41 for 3+, 2.6 for 4+ and 5+ peptides. Peptide quantification result was exported for further processing and statistical analysis. The peptide quantification was first normalized by the mean of each tag, then sum of the same peptide was calculated and used as the quantification for that peptide. Only peptides that were present in both biological replicates and were unique for their corresponding proteins were used for protein quantification. All identified peptide and proteins are listed in Supplemental Table S3. Ratios of 0 ppm CO2 treated sample to 400 ppm CO2 treated control were calculated for each timepoint (127C/127N for 5 min, 128C/128N for 10 min, 129C/129N for 30 min, 130C/120N for 60 min). Fold change for proteins were the means of all unique peptides identified from that protein filtered from the previous step. Student’s t-tests were then performed with the log2 transformed fold change for each time point. A singular enrichment analysis (SEA) was performed for proteins with a p-value less than 0.05 using agriGO (Du, Zhou et al., 2010). Since no Brassica napus reference database is available, Arabidopsis was used as a reference background.

### Publication Abstract
Stomatal guard cell response to various stimuli is an important process that balances plant carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) uptake and water transpiration. Elevated CO<sub>2</sub> induces stomatal closure, while low CO<sub>2</sub> promotes stomatal opening. The signaling process of elevated CO<sub>2</sub> induced stomatal closure has been extensively studied in recent years. However, the mechanism of low CO<sub>2</sub> induced stomatal opening is not fully understood. Here we report metabolomic and proteomic responses of <i>Brassica napus</i> guard cells to low CO<sub>2</sub> using hyphenated mass spectrometry technologies. A total of 411 metabolites and 1397 proteins were quantified in a time-course study of low CO<sub>2</sub> effects. Metabolites and proteins that exhibited significant changes are overrepresented in fatty acid metabolism, starch and sucrose metabolism, glycolysis and redox regulation. Concomitantly, multiple hormones that promote stomatal opening increased in response to low CO<sub>2</sub>. Interestingly, jasmonic acid precursors were diverted to a branch pathway of traumatic acid biosynthesis. These results indicate that the low CO<sub>2</sub> response is mediated by a complex crosstalk between different phytohormones.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Stomatal movement, Carbon dioxide, Proteomics, Phytohormones, Guard cell

### Affiliations
UF
University of Florida

### Submitter
Ning Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Zhu
University of Florida


