### Accession
PXD038765

### Title
Isolated anti-Ro52 identifies a severe subset of Sjögren’s syndrome patients

### Description
Serum autoantibodies targeting the SSA/Ro proteins are a key component of the classification criteria for the diagnosis of Sjögren’s syndrome (SS). Most patient serum reacts with both Ro60 and Ro52 proteins. Here we compare the molecular and clinical characteristics of patients diagnosed with SS with anti-Ro52 in the presence or absence of anti-Ro60/La autoantibodies. Patients in the SS biobank at Westmead Hospital that were positive for anti-Ro52 were included and stratified based on the absence (isolated) or presence (combined) of anti-Ro60/La, measured by line immunoassay. We examined clinical associations and the serological and molecular characteristics of anti-Ro52 using ELISA and mass spectrometry in serological groups. A total of 123 SS patients were included for study. SS patients with isolated anti-Ro52 (12%) identified a severe serological subset characterised by higher disease activity, vasculitis, pulmonary involvement, rheumatoid factor (RhF) and cryoglobulinaemia. Anti-Ro52 IgG titre was correlated with RhF. Serum antibodies reacting with Ro52 in the isolated anti-Ro52 subset displayed less isotype switching, less immunoglobulin variable region subfamily usage and a lower degree of somatic hypermutation than the combined anti-Ro52 subset. In our cohort of SS patients, isolated anti-Ro52 represents a severe subset of SS, and is independently associated with the presence of cryoglobulinaemia. We therefore provide clinical relevance to the stratification of SS patients by their sero-reactivities. It is possible that the autoantibody patterns may be immunological epiphenomena of the underlying disease process, and further work is required to unearth the mechanisms of the differential clinical phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Digested peptides were analysed with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Dionex, USA). Peptides were applied to a PepMap™ 100 trap cartridge (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm C18, Thermo Fischer) and separated on an inhouse 25 cm pulled column created from 75 µm inner diameter fused silica capillary packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany).  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. For each injection, approximately 1 µg peptides were loaded and separated using a 60-min gradient from 3 to 31.2% B, followed by a 25 min washing and re-equilibration step.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequence analysis was performed by de novo sequencing and ImMunoGeneTics (IMGT) database matching using Peaks studio XPro software (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Parameters for database searches, data refinement and Ig variable region subfamily assignments were described as follows. Briefly, a maximum of two missed cleavages, precursor tolerance of < 15 parts per million, product ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, precursor charge state of +2 to +4, fixed modification carbamidomethylation, variable modifications oxidation and deamidation, a maximum of three modifications allowed and non-specific cleavage at one end. High-quality de novo peptides were selected based on sequences having an average local confidence score threshold greater than or equal to 80% and inspected manually to ensure correct assignments. A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1.0% was applied at the peptide level to each data set. The Ig variable region subfamily is assigned from the presence of a unique peptide corresponding to the subfamily.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anti-ro52/trim21; autoantibodies; cryoglobulinaemia; rheumatoid factor; sjögren’s syndrome

### Affiliations
Flinders University
Immunology,College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University

### Submitter
Jing Jing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Jing Wang
Immunology,College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University


