### Accession
PXD000212

### Title
MCM9 is Required for Mammalian DNA Mismatch Repair

### Description
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is an evolutionarily conserved process that corrects innate DNA polymerase infidelities during replication to maintain genomic integrity. Defects in a subset of MMR genes are associated with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer and some other sporadic cancers, highlighting the crucial role for MMR in genome maintenance. In E. coli a helicase implicated in the MMR process is well characterized, and named UvrD, whereas in mammals it has not been identified yet, even though the eukaryotic DNA mismatch pathway is analogous to the bacterial one and uses a similar repair mechanism and key components. Here we identify MCM9 as a helicase playing a vital role in MMR in mammals. MCM9 is the last discovered member of the MCM2-9 family, and has been implicated in replication and homologous recombination processes. By an affinity-purification proteomic approach, we found that MCM9 interacts with the MMR initiation complex. Immortalized cells from MCM9 knockout mice showed clear length alterations in their microsatellites, and a dramatic MMR deficiency compared to wild-type cells. We also found that a helicase-dead form of MCM9 is totally unable to restore the MMR deficiency phenotype. Furthermore, using an siRNA approach in human cells, we demonstrated that MCM9 is regulated by MSH2, a protein responsible for mismatch recognition. Our results clearly reveal that MCM9 functions as a helicase for DNA mismatch repair in mammals, and thus is essential for the maintenance of genome stability. Proteomics analysis: FLAG-HA-tagged human MCM9 plus associated proteins were isolated by tandem affinity purification from nuclear extracts of stably-expressing HeLa S3 cells, then analysed by SDS-PAGE and silver staining. Gel lanes were cut into slices, which were processed and analysed separately. Proteins in each gel slice were digested with trypsin, extracted and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Velos mass spectrometer, generating a series of MS RAW files. Bioinformatics: Peptide and protein identification from MS data was performed using the Sequest program, with a human IPI sequence database (v.3.60). Trypsin was defined as the protease used, a peptide mass tolerance of 2.5 was specified, and all peptide matches have a Sequest Xcorr score ≥0.5.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially-growing cultures of HeLa S3 cells expressing FLAG-HA tagged MCM9 at the N- or C-terminus, or FLAG-HA were used to prepare soluble extracts of nuclear proteins according to the method described by Dignam. Tagged MCM9 and associated proteins were isolated from these extracts by using a tandem affinity-purification procedure based on immunoprecipitation of the FLAG and HA tags. Following peptide elution, MCM9-containing protein complexes were analyzed by SDS-PAGE on Novex NuPAGE 4-12% gradient gels, followed by silver staining using the SilverQuest system. The silver-stained gel was sent to the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility (Harvard Medical School) for proteomic analysis. Each SDS-PAGE gel lane was cut in slices, which were processed separately. Each gel slice was cut into pieces of approximately 1 mm3, which were subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a SpeedVac centrifugal evaporator. Gel pieces were rehydrated using a solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 12.5 ng/μl modified sequencing-grade trypsin at 4˚C. After 45 min, excess trypsin was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were incubated at 37˚C overnight. Peptides were then extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a SpeedVac for approximately 1 hour. Samples were stored at 4˚C until analysis. On the day of analysis, samples were reconstituted in 5-10 μl HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was prepared by packing 5 μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (125 μm inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After column equilibration, each sample was loaded onto the column using a FAMOS autosampler (LC Packings). A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Once eluted, peptides were directly subjected to electrospray ionization and injection into an LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were detected, isolated and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Initial identification of peptides and proteins were performed by the analysis pipeline of the Taplin Facility. MS data files were matched to entries in the human International Protein Index (IPI) database using the Sequest algorithm. All accepted peptides have a cross-correlation (Xcorr) score of at least 0.5. Identified peptides, proteins and Xcorr scores for each sample were presented as HTML tables accessible via a web browser, from which they were copied to Excel spreadsheets in Montpellier for further processing. Identified proteins were mapped from their IPI to equivalent Swiss-Prot identifiers using the ID mapping functionality of the UniProt website. Percentage sequence coverage and numbers of non-distinct and distinct peptides were calculated using the Protein Coverage Summarizer program from the Biological MS Data and Software Distribution Center of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. A subset of identified proteins was classified as being “background or contaminant” (at the level of gene symbols) based on two reference sources: the set of “contaminant” proteins published by the MitoCheck consortium, and the CRAPome database. Proteins classified as “background or contaminants” were then filtered from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is an evolutionarily conserved process that corrects DNA polymerase errors during replication to maintain genomic integrity. In E. coli, the DNA helicase UvrD is implicated in MMR, yet an analogous helicase activity has not been identified in eukaryotes. Here, we show that mammalian MCM9, a protein involved in replication and homologous recombination, forms a complex with MMR initiation proteins (MSH2, MSH3, MLH1, PMS1, and the clamp loader RFC) and is essential for MMR. Mcm9-/- cells display microsatellite instability and MMR deficiency. The MCM9 complex has a helicase activity that is required for efficient MMR since wild-type but not helicase-dead MCM9 restores MMR activity in Mcm9-/- cells. Moreover, MCM9 loading onto chromatin is MSH2-dependent, and in turn MCM9 stimulates the recruitment of MLH1 to chromatin. Our results reveal a role for MCM9 and its helicase activity in mammalian MMR.

### Keywords
Mcm9 human dna replication helicase mmr mismatch repair

### Affiliations
Institute of Human Genetics (IGH), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Montpellier, France

### Submitter
James Hutchins

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Mechali
Institute of Human Genetics (IGH), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Montpellier, France


