### Accession
PXD006562

### Title
Comparison of extracellular matrix in prostate tissue samples and in cultures of primary fibroblasts from prostate cancer patients

### Description
xtracellular matrix from prostate tissue samples and from cultures of primary fibroblasts of the same samples from individuals was analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve fibroblastic cell lines from both tumor and non-cancerous lobes of 6 prostates were allowed to produce ECM in culture conditions. The cultures were decellularized by hypotonic lysis and the ECM was collected from the culture plates. To obtain ECM directly from normal tissue samples, first the loosely bound ECM molecules were extracted from the tissue sample by 0.5 M NaCl solution. Then the cells were removed by 0.08% SDS, and the ECM molecules were extracted from the remaining tissue by guanidine hydrochloride. All ECM samples were separately acetone-precipitated, dissolved in urea/thiourea solution, alkylated, and digested by trypsin. The peptides were analyzed by HPLC-connected Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched by Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) that was set up to use Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4) for searching human SwissProt entries in UniprotKB database (release 2015_08) with a parent ion tolerance of 5.0 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M, P, K) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications were included. Maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Decoy database search using reversed human SwissProt sequences was used to assess false discovery rate. The result files were loaded into Scaffold software (version 3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) to align the MS runs by the detected proteins. The scaffold file was saved and re-opened in the Scaffold Viewer, version 4 (Proteome Software Inc.). The false discovery rate threshold for the protein identification was set to 0.01, and the aligned runs with the number of unique peptide identifications were exported to a tab-limited text file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Primary fibroblasts, Prostate tissue, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Biochemistry University of Turku Turku, FINLAND

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Biochemistry University of Turku Turku, FINLAND


