### Accession
PXD014356

### Title
Proteomic analysi of decellularized porcine pancreas

### Description
The extracellular matrix is an important part of the cellular microenvironment regulating various cellular functions. Decellularized matrices present a valuable strategy for recreating the cellular niche in vitro and implementing matrix signaling in cell culture models. However, the tissue-specificity of decellularized matrices is little considered in most in vitro models. Here, we present the generation of a porcine-derived pancreas-specific decellularized extracellular matrix scaffold (d-PanMa) and show the impact of scaffold-specific cues on stem cell culture.  The proteomic analysis in this work compare the proteome of porcine pancreas (PanMa), intestine (SISser) and lung (lungMa) both in its native and decellularized form.  The analysis verify the enrichment of important matrisome proteins in the decellular matrices and provide a detailed map of the protein composition and abundance across the matrices.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared using FASP, labelled (10 plex TMT), fractionated into 8 fractions and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF instrument. The experimental design included nine native samples and nine decellularized samples. We used 2 10-plex TMT sets. In order to link the two sets we included a reference mix as the 10th samples in each set. The reference mix was a mix of all 18 samples in the experiment.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mgf files using MSConvert, ProteoWizard and peak lists were identified using X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) [PMID 14976030]. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.1.4 [PMID  21337703]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy [PMID 20013364] version of the Sus scrofa uniprot database (October, 2016). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.002 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), TMT 10-plex of K (+229.162932 Da), and TMT 10-plex of peptide N-term (+229.162932 Da), variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), and Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da), fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), TMT 10-plex of K (+229.162932 Da), and TMT 10-plex of peptide N-term (+229.162932 Da).   Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.14.4 [PMID 25574629]. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score [PMID 23307401] and the phosphoRS score [PMID 22073976] as implemented in the compomics-utilities package [PMID 21385435]. A phosphoRS score above a threshold of 95.0 was considered as a confident localization.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix represents a dynamic microenvironment regulating essential cell functions in vivo. Tissue engineering approaches aim to recreate the native niche in vitro using biological scaffolds generated by organ decellularization. So far, the organ specific origin of such scaffolds was less considered and potential consequences for in vitro cell culture remain largely elusive. Here, we show that organ specific cues of biological scaffolds affect cellular behavior. In detail, we report on the generation of a well-preserved pancreatic bioscaffold and introduce a scoring system allowing standardized inter-study quality assessment. Using multiple analysis tools for in-depth-characterization of the biological scaffold, we reveal unique compositional, physico-structural, and biophysical properties. Finally, we prove the functional relevance of the biological origin by demonstrating a regulatory effect of the matrix on multi-lineage differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells emphasizing the significance of matrix specificity for cellular behavior in artificial microenvironments.

### Keywords
Porcine, Lc-msms, Pancreas

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, Haukeland university hospital, Norway

### Submitter
Yngvild Bjørlykke

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Ræder
Department of Clinical Science, Haukeland university hospital, Norway


