### Accession
PXD031804

### Title
Proteomics of Mouse Endothelial Cell Dysfunction in Sepsis

### Description
An early aspect of sepsis is dysregulated activation of endothelial cells (EC), initiating a cascade of inflammatory signaling leading to leukocyte adhesion/migration and organ damage. Therapeutic targeting of ECs has been hampered by concerns regarding ECs heterogeneity from different organs. Using a combination of in vitro and in silico analysis, we present a comprehensive analysis of proteomic changes in mouse lung, kidney and liver ECs following exposure to a clinically relevant cocktail of proinflammatory cytokines. Mouse lung, liver and kidney ECs were incubated with TNFα/IL-1β/IFNγ for 4 or 24 hrs to model inflammatory responses during sepsis. Quantitative label-free global proteomics was performed on the ECs to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEP). Proteins with an abundance ratio >2.0 or <0.5 and an adjusted p<0.05 were characterized as upregulated or downregulated respectively. Gene Ontology (GO) classification was used to determine biological processes that regulate EC function during sepsis and PANTHER was used to classify the molecular function of the identified proteins. Finally, an interactive pathway was developed to investigate signaling within ECs and across organs. Proteomic analysis identified both unique and shared DEPs between the ECs specific to lung, liver and kidney. Using GO, 5 Biological Processes (BP) for each of the organ specific ECs were identified. Interestingly, 4 of the top 5 GO BPs were observed in all 3 ECs at 4 and 24 hrs: defense response to other organism, innate immune response, response to bacterium and response to cytokine. However, these BPs were found to be differentially regulated. For example, at 4 and 24 hrs, lung ECs which have the highest number and highest fold expression of upregulated proteins (189 and 316 respectively), also have higher numbers of unique upregulated proteins (124 vs 194) compared to liver (98 vs 121) and kidney ECs (109 vs 136). The liver showed the greatest number of conserved proteins between 4 and 24 hrs (56) compared to lung (50) and kidney (51). The number of common proteins between all three ECs increases from 38 at 4 hrs to 79 at 24 hrs, indicating more uniformity in ECs proteomic expression during the progression of sepsis. The PANTHER database was used to classify proteins in different functional groups (e.g. defense/immunity) at 4 and 24 hrs. Thus, BPs and PANTHER hits can provide insight into why some organs are more susceptible to sepsis early on and show that as sepsis progresses, some protein expression patterns become more uniform while additional organ specific proteins are expressed. Proteomic analysis of organ-specific ECs provides further understanding of how sepsis affects multiple organs across time and supports future proteomic, temporal studies of EC dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free global proteomics studies, the proteins were extracted, and processed by modified IST (Quinn etal,2022). Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses were performed on the collected fractions using the Quadrupole Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Q Exactive - ThermoFisher Scientific). . The complete system was entirely controlled by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra processing was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.5. The generated de-isotoped peak list was submitted to an in-house Mascot server 2.2.07 for searching against the Swiss-Prot database (Release 2013_01, version 56.6, 538849 sequences), Amanda MS  and Sequest HT database. Mascot,  Amanda and Sequest search parameters were set as follows: species, homo sapiens; enzyme, trypsin with maximal two missed cleavage; fixed modification, cysteine carboxymethylation; 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor peptide ions; 0.02 Da tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
A key aspect of cytokine-induced changes as observed in sepsis is the dysregulated activation of endothelial cells (ECs), initiating a cascade of inflammatory signaling leading to leukocyte adhesion/migration and organ damage. The therapeutic targeting of ECs has been hampered by concerns regarding organ-specific EC heterogeneity and their response to inflammation. Using in vitro and in silico analysis, we present a comprehensive analysis of the proteomic changes in mouse lung, liver and kidney ECs following exposure to a clinically relevant cocktail of proinflammatory cytokines. Mouse lung, liver and kidney ECs were incubated with TNF-&#x3b1;/IL-1&#x3b2;/IFN-&#x3b3; for 4 or 24 h to model the cytokine-induced changes. Quantitative label-free global proteomics and bioinformatic analysis performed on the ECs provide a molecular framework for the EC response to inflammatory stimuli over time and organ-specific differences. Gene Ontology and PANTHER analysis suggest why some organs are more susceptible to inflammation early on, and show that, as inflammation progresses, some protein expression patterns become more uniform while additional organ-specific proteins are expressed. These findings provide an in-depth understanding of the molecular changes involved in the EC response to inflammation and can support the development of drugs targeting ECs within different organs. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD031804).

### Keywords
Proteomics, Sepsis, Inflamation, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Temple University
Temple University School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

### Submitter
Carmen Merali

### Lab Head
Dr Salim Merali, Ph.D.
Temple University School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA


