### Accession
PXD036152

### Title
Human serum samples proteomic analysis

### Description
Vitamin D deficiency affected the abnormal protein expression, resulting in the abnormal activation of complement system.

### Sample Protocol
The extract of each sample was reduced by DTT at 60 °C for 1 h. Then, iodoacetamide was added to alkylated cysteine, and incubated in a dark room at 20 °C for 1 h. The protein was diluted with NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 16 hours according to the protein/trypsin 50 (w/w) ratio.  The polypeptide was acidified with formic acid (FA) (10%, v/v), desalted by reverse phase extraction with the tip of C18 ZipTip pipette, and then re-suspended in 0.1% FA for high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) analysis.We used HPLC-MS/MS system coupled with QExactive mass spectrometer for label-free analysis (Thermo Scientific). The sample was injected by automatic injector in the way of programmed injection, and pre-concentrated on a self-made C18 trap column. Then, the samples were analyzed on a self-made analytical column, in which the mobile phases were solvent A and B. The isolated peptide fragments were identified by QExactive HF MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer (v2.1.0.81) was used to protein identification and label-free quantification. A similarity search was performed against the forward Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (UP000005640). The differentially expressed proteins between the A, B and C group with |fold change|> 1.2 and p-value < 0.05 as the inclusion criteria.The functional characteristics of differential proteins were comprehensively understood through the annotations of Gene Ontology (GO) protein, Protein homologous group, Kyoto Gene Genome Encyclopedia (KEGG) and Inter Pro. The functional processes of differential proteins in biological process (BP), cell composition (CC) and molecular function (MF) were determined by GO functional enrichment analysis. The signaling pathways related to differential proteins-induced by vitamin D deficiency were discussed by KEGG enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Vitamin D deficiency can damage the human immune system, and the complement system is a key component of the immune system. This study aimed to elucidate the mechanism by which vitamin D affects the immune system by analyzing the changes in the protein expression of the complement system under different vitamin D levels. We selected 40 participants and divided them into three groups according to their serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)VD): group A, 25(OH)VD&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;40&#xa0;ng/mL; group B, 30&#xa0;ng/mL&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;25(OH)VD&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;40&#xa0;ng/mL; and group C, 25(OH)VD&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;30&#xa0;ng/mL. Serum samples were subjected to biochemical analysis, followed by proteomic analysis using high-throughput untargeted proteomic techniques. Vitamin D deficiency increased the levels of fasting blood sugar, fasting serum insulin, and homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) of insulin resistance and decreased the secretion of HOMA of &#x3b2;-cell function, which led to insulin resistance and glucose metabolism disorder. Moreover, vitamin D deficiency resulted in the abnormal expression of 56 differential proteins, among which the expression levels of complement factor B, complement component C9, inducible co-stimulator ligand, and peptidase inhibitor 16 significantly changed with the decrease in vitamin D content. Functional enrichment analysis of these differential proteins showed that they were mainly concentrated in functions and pathways related to insulin secretion and inflammation. In conclusion, vitamin D deficiency not only contributes to insulin resistance and glucose metabolism disorder but also causes abnormal protein expression, resulting in the abnormal activation of the complement system. This study provides a novel theoretical basis for further studies on the relationship between vitamin D and the immune system.

### Keywords
Human, Proteomic, Serum, Label-free

### Affiliations
the First People's Hospital of Yinchuan

### Submitter
Xiaomin Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaomin Xie
the First People's Hospital of Yinchuan


