### Accession
PXD010007

### Title
The temporal profile of activity-dependent presynaptic phospho-signalling reveals long lasting patterns of post-stimulus regulation

### Description
Depolarization of presynaptic terminals stimulates calcium influx, which evokes neurotransmitter release and activates phosphorylation-based signalling. Here, we present the first global temporal profile of presynaptic activity-dependent phospho-signalling, which includes two KCl stimulation levels and analysis of the post-stimulus period. We profiled 1,917 regulated phosphopeptides and bioinformatically identified six temporal patterns of co-regulated proteins. The presynaptic proteins with large changes in phospho-status were again prominently regulated in the analysis of 7,070 activity-dependent phosphopeptides from KCl-stimulated cultured hippocampal neurons. Active zone scaffold proteins showed a high level of activity-dependent phospho-regulation that far exceeded the response from postsynaptic density scaffold proteins. Accordingly, bassoon was identified as the major target of neuronal phospho-signalling. We developed a probabilistic computational method, KinSwing, which matched protein kinase substrate motifs to regulated phosphorylation sites to reveal underlying protein kinase activity. This approach allowed us to link protein kinases to profiles of co-regulated presynaptic protein networks. CaMKIIα responded rapidly, scaled with stimulus strength and had long-lasting activity. MAPK/ERK was the main protein kinase predicted to control a distinct and significant pattern of post-stimulus up-regulation of phosphorylation. This work provides a unique resource of activity-dependent phosphorylation sites of synaptosomes and neurons, the vast majority of which have not been investigated with regard to their functional impact. This resource will enable detailed characterization of the phospho-regulated mechanisms impacting the plasticity of neurotransmitter release.

### Sample Protocol
Lys-C/trypsin digestion, quantitative reductive dimethylation or TMT10plex labelling, phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 and sequential elution from IMAC (SIMAC), pre-fractionation via hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC), followed by LC-MS/MS analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or Q Exactive Plus

### Data Protocol
Data was processed and searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Parameter Value Version 1.5.2.8 Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) Decoy mode revert Special AAs KR Include contaminants True MS/MS tol. (FTMS) 20 ppm Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da. (FTMS) 12 MS/MS deisotoping (FTMS) True MS/MS tol. (ITMS) 0.5 Da Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da. (ITMS) 8 MS/MS deisotoping (ITMS) False MS/MS tol. (TOF) 40 ppm Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da. (TOF) 10 MS/MS deisotoping (TOF) True MS/MS tol. (Unknown) 0.5 Da Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da. (Unknown) 8 MS/MS deisotoping (Unknown) False PSM FDR 0.01 Protein FDR 0.01 Site FDR 0.01 Use Normalized Ratios For Occupancy True Min. peptide Length 7 Min. score for unmodified peptides 0 Min. score for modified peptides 40 Min. delta score for unmodified peptides 0 Min. delta score for modified peptides 6 Min. unique peptides 0 Min. razor peptides 1 Min. peptides 1 Use only unmodified peptides and True Modifications included in protein quantification Acetyl (Protein N-term);Oxidation (M) Peptides used for protein quantification Razor Discard unmodified counterpart peptides True Min. ratio count 2 Re-quantify True Use delta score False iBAQ False iBAQ log fit False Match between runs True Matching time window [min] 0.7 Alignment time window [min] 20 Find dependent peptides False Fasta file C:\Users\kengholm-keller\Desktop\uniprot-proteome%3AUP000002494_rat_ref_proteome_plus_isoforms.fasta Labeled amino acid filtering True Site tables Oxidation (M)Sites.txt;Phospho (STY)Sites.txt Decoy mode revert Special AAs KR Include contaminants True RT shift False Advanced ratios True AIF correlation 0.47 First pass AIF correlation 0.8 AIF topx 20 AIF min mass 0 AIF SIL weight 4 AIF ISO weight 2 AIF iterative True AIF threshold FDR 0.01

### Publication Abstract
Depolarization of presynaptic terminals stimulates calcium influx, which evokes neurotransmitter release and activates phosphorylation-based signalling. Here, we present the first global temporal profile of presynaptic activity-dependent phospho-signalling, which includes two KCl stimulation levels and analysis of the poststimulus period. We profiled 1,917 regulated phosphopeptides and bioinformatically identified six temporal patterns of co-regulated proteins. The presynaptic proteins with large changes in phospho-status were again prominently regulated in the analysis of 7,070 activity-dependent phosphopeptides from KCl-stimulated cultured hippocampal neurons. Active zone scaffold proteins showed a high level of activity-dependent phospho-regulation that far exceeded the response from postsynaptic density scaffold proteins. Accordingly, bassoon was identified as the major target of neuronal phospho-signalling. We developed a probabilistic computational method, KinSwing, which matched protein kinase substrate motifs to regulated phosphorylation sites to reveal underlying protein kinase activity. This approach allowed us to link protein kinases to profiles of co-regulated presynaptic protein networks. Ca2+- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II&#x3b1; (CaMKII&#x3b1;) responded rapidly, scaled with stimulus strength, and had long-lasting activity. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) was the main protein kinase predicted to control a distinct and significant pattern of poststimulus up-regulation of phosphorylation. This work provides a unique resource of activity-dependent phosphorylation sites of synaptosomes and neurons, the vast majority of which have not been investigated with regard to their functional impact. This resource will enable detailed characterization of the phospho-regulated mechanisms impacting the plasticity of neurotransmitter release.

### Keywords
Depolarization, Pp1, Phosphorylation, Synaptosome, Neuron, Rat, Kinase, Post-stimulus, Phosphatase, Signalling, Presynaptic

### Affiliations
Synapse Proteomics Group, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Mark Graham

### Lab Head
Dr Mark E. Graham
Synapse Proteomics Group, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia


