### Accession
PXD021385

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondrial protein complexes to study the molecular consequences of DNAJC30 mutations

### Description
We identified the chaperone DNAJC30 as an important factor to maintain NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) activity. In this complexome analysis we detected DNAJC30 in substoichiometric amounts attached to respiratory supercomplexes (I/III2/IVn and demonstrate an accumulation of complex I containing respiratory supercomplexes in the patient cell line with DNAJC30 mutations compared to the control cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: Patient fibroblasts with a homozygous mutation in the DNAJC30 gene (sample 108718) and adult control fibroblasts (sample 97817) were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Life Technologies), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 200 μM uridine. The culture medium was replaced once every 2-3 days. Cell lines were grown at 37 ℃ in the presence of 5% CO2 to 70% confluence. Blue native electrophoresis: Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of cultured cell pellets were essential done as described in (Wittig et al., 2006). Briefly, cells were collected by scraping and centrifugation, further disrupted using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were centrifuged for 15 min at 600 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation of the supernatant for 15 min at 22´000g. Mitochondria enriched membranes from 20 mg cells were resuspended in 35 µl solubilization buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 10 µl 20% digitonin (Serva). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid).  Sample preparation for complexome profiling: Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling: Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives). MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 71785 entries, released in 2/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between controls and patients. Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial CIII dimer (483695 Da), CIV (220156 Da), CV (618824Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing CI, III dimer and one copy of CIV (1663827Da) was used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].  Wittig I1, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is the most frequent mitochondrial disease and was the first to be genetically defined by a point mutation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). A molecular diagnosis is achieved in up to 95% of cases, the vast majority of which are accounted for by 3 mutations within mitochondrial complex I subunit-encoding genes in the mtDNA (mtLHON). Here, we resolve the enigma of LHON in the absence of pathogenic mtDNA mutations. We describe biallelic mutations in a nuclear encoded gene, DNAJC30, in 33 unsolved patients from 29 families and establish an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance for LHON (arLHON), which to date has been a prime example of a maternally inherited disorder. Remarkably, all hallmarks of mtLHON were recapitulated, including incomplete penetrance, male predominance, and significant idebenone responsivity. Moreover, by tracking protein turnover in patient-derived cell lines and a DNAJC30-knockout cellular model, we measured reduced turnover of specific complex I N-module subunits and a resultant impairment of complex I function. These results demonstrate that DNAJC30 is a chaperone protein needed for the efficient exchange of complex I subunits exposed to reactive oxygen species and integral to a mitochondrial complex I repair mechanism, thereby providing the first example to our knowledge of a disease resulting from impaired exchange of assembled respiratory chain subunits.

### Keywords
Complex i maintenance, Oxidative phosphorylation system, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Complex i assembly

### Affiliations
Research Group of Mitochondrial Disorders, Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Prokisch
Research Group of Mitochondrial Disorders, Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, Germany


