### Accession
PXD021640

### Title
Proteome and SUMOylome of mouse heart tissue after ischemia and reperfusion

### Description
Here we provide proteome and SUMOylation patterns of proteins in the heart throughout ischemia and reperfusion. Moreover, we identify SUMO1 and SUMO2 target proteins in vivo

### Sample Protocol
Shortly, mouse hearts were pulverized in liquid nitrogen. Four mouse heart LVs (about 180-200 mg heart tissue) were pooled for each biological replicate for tissue homogenization and three replicates were used for each experimental condition (12 hearts/ condition (sham, isch, I/R1, I/R24)). The homogenization was done in 2 ml Eppendorf tubes in Retsch mixer mill (MM400) for 3 min at maximal speed (30 rpm). After centrifugation of the Eppendorf tubes at 18 000g for 15 min, supernatants were taken and protein concentration was measured as described. A small aliquot of each replicate input was taken for proteome analysis, the rest was further processed for SUMO proteome measurements. Half of each replicate (representing about 90-100 mg original heart tissue or 9-10 mg isolated protein) were taken for SUMO IP and the other half for IgG control IP. SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 IPs were performed from different experimental hearts.Input proteome samples as well as the immunoprecipitated SUMO proteome replicates were separated by gradient gels (4%–20%, BioRad or 4%–12% Bis-Tris gels, Invitrogen) followed by protein staining (Instant Blue, Expedeon). The individual gel lanes were cut into equal, small pieces and in-gel digestion with sequencing-grade trypsin was performed as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Finally, extracted peptides were collected, concentrated, and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique (Rappsilber et al., 2003).Peptides from individual gel bandes were analysed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 20 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur , Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 8-30% acetonitrile over 24 minutes (IPs) or 4-30% acetonitrile over 58 minutes (proteomes) and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode . Full-scan MS spectra of IPs/proteomic samples were acquired covering a mass range of 300-1650 m/z using 3E6 as AGC target with a resolution of 60.000 at 200 m/z and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The 15 most intense ions were fragmented by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) applying a normalized collision energy of 27. Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 30.000/15.000 at 200 m/z, AGC target to 1E5, maximal injection time to 64 ms/30 ms.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files of mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant Software (version 1.5.8.3, (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016)) and the implemented Andromeda database search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Fragmentation spectra were correlated with the Uniprot mouse Reference Proteome database (downloaded September 2017, ). To perform searches, tryptic digestion and default settings for mass tolerances of MS and MS/MS spectra were applied. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide-spectrum-match an protein level, minimal LFQ ratio count was set to 2 and FastLFQ option was enabled for relative label-free quantification of proteins using the in-build MaxLFQ algorithm(Cox et al., 2014). For both IP/MS screens the match between run feature was used.

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation is a reversible posttranslational modification pathway catalyzing the conjugation of small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) proteins to lysine residues of distinct target proteins. SUMOylation modifies a wide variety of cellular regulators thereby affecting a multitude of key processes in a highly dynamic manner. The SUMOylation pathway displays a hallmark in cellular stress-adaption, such as heat or redox stress. It has been proposed that enhanced cellular SUMOylation protects the brain during ischemia, however, little is known about the specific regulation of the SUMO system and the potential target proteins during cardiac ischemia and reperfusion injury (I/R). By applying left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery ligation and reperfusion in mice, we detect dynamic changes in the overall cellular SUMOylation pattern correlating with decreased SUMO deconjugase activity during I/R injury. Further, unbiased system-wide quantitative SUMO-proteomics identified a sub-group of SUMO targets exhibiting significant alterations in response to cardiac I/R. Notably, transcription factors that control hypoxia- and angiogenesis-related gene expression programs, exhibit altered SUMOylation during ischemic stress adaptation. Moreover, several components of the ubiquitin proteasome system undergo dynamic changes in SUMO conjugation during cardiac I/R suggesting an involvement of SUMO signaling in protein quality control and proteostasis in the ischemic heart. Altogether, our study reveals regulated candidate SUMO target proteins in the mouse heart, which might be important in coping with hypoxic/proteotoxic stress during cardiac I/R injury.

### Keywords
Sumo, Mouse, Ischemia, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


