### Accession
PXD021917

### Title
Proteome remodeling in LUC7L2-depleted and galactose-grown cells

### Description
Study of the proteome of K562 LUC7L2WT and LUC7L2KO cells grown for 14 days in DMEM media containing either 25mM glucose or 25mM galactose.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed at the Thermo Fisher Center For Multiplexed Proteomics, Harvard University. Briefly: - Protein abundance in sample was quantified using micro-BCA assay (Pierce) - Samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetimide.  - Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. - Pellets were resuspended in 200mM EPPS, pH 8.0 - Digestion was performed sequentially using LysC /1:5= and trypsin (1:100) based on protease to protein ratio. - Peptides were combined, desalted and dried by speedvac. - 14 fractions from the total proteome HPRP set were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer using a 180 minute method MS3 method with real-time search. - Peptides were detected (MS1) and quantified (MS3) in the Orbitrap - Peptides were sequenced (MS2) in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
- MS2 spectra were searched using the COMET algorithm against a Uniprot composite database derived from the human proteome containing its reversed complement and known contaminants. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis. - The proteins from the 14 runs were filtered to a <1% FDR - Proteins were quantified only from peptides with a summed SN threshold of >100

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Luc7l2 splicing glucose galactose metabolism mitochondria

### Affiliations
1.Department of Molecular Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA,  2.Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA,  3.Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
Broad Institute of MIT & Harvard 

### Submitter
Alexis Jourdain

### Lab Head
Dr Vamsi Krishna Mootha
1.Department of Molecular Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA,  2.Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA,  3.Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.


