### Accession
PXD033059

### Title
SDR enzymes oxidize specific lipidic alkynylcarbinols into cytotoxic protein-reactive species

### Description
Hundreds of cytotoxic natural or synthetic lipidic compounds contain chiral alkynylcarbinol motifs, but the mechanism of action of those potential therapeutic agents remains unknown. Using a genetic screen in haploid human cells, we discovered that the enantiospecific cytotoxicity of numerous terminal alkynylcarbinols, including the highly cytotoxic dialkynylcarbinols, involves a bioactivation by HSD17B11, a short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) known to oxidize the C-17 carbinol center of androstan-3-alpha,17-beta-diol to the corresponding ketone. A similar oxidation of dialkynylcarbinols generates dialkynylketones that we characterize as highly protein-reactive electrophiles. We established that, once bioactivated in cells, the dialkynylcarbinols covalently modify several proteins involved in protein-quality control mechanisms, resulting in their lipoxidation on cysteines and lysines through Michael addition. For some proteins, this triggers their association to cellular membranes and results in endoplasmic reticulum stress, unfolded protein response activation, ubiquitin-proteasome system inhibition and cell death by apoptosis. Finally, as a proof-of-concept, we show that generic lipidic alkynylcarbinols can be devised to be bioactivated by other SDRs, including human RDH11 and HPGD/15-PGDH. Given that the SDR superfamily is one of the largest and most ubiquitous, this unique cytotoxic mechanism-of-action could be widely exploited to treat diseases, in particular cancer, through the design of tailored prodrugs.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis of entire β-lactoglobulin (BLG) modified by DACone, 30 µM BLG was incubated for 40 min at 30 °C in 40 µL of MoD buffer containing 100 µM DACone 10 (or the same volume of acetonitrile (ACN) as control, 10% final concentration). Prior to MS analysis, unmodified and modified BLG samples were desalted in 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7 using BioRad Micro Bio-Spin 6 devices and diluted to ~4 μM in 50% ACN, 0.2% formic acid final. Samples were analyzed on a SYNAPT G2-Si (Waters, Manchester, UK) running in positive ion mode and coupled to an automated chip-based nano-electrospray source (Triversa Nanomate, Advion, USA). The voltage applied to the chip and the cone voltage were set to 1.6 kV and 150 V, respectively. The instrument was calibrated with a 2 mg/mL cesium iodide solution in 50% isopropanol. For target identification studies, two 140 mm dishes, seeded with 2.5x106 U2OS cells two days before, were treated for 2 h with 2 µM of DAC (S)-9 or (R)-9. At the end of treatment, cells were collected by trypsination and centrifugation (900 RPM 4°C 5 min). The cell pellet was washed with cold PBS before being lysed by sonication on ice (Vibracell, Bioblock Scientific, ten 2s-pulses, of amplitude 30) in 240 µL of IPL buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, HALT proteases and phosphatases inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). A centrifugation (15000 RPM 4°C 4 min) was used to remove insoluble material and the supernatant was used for click pull-down. A volume of lysate corresponding to 300 µg of proteins was diluted to 500 µL with IPD buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% IGEPAL CA-630, HALT inhibitors cocktail) bringing IGEPAL CA-630 concentration to 0.2-0.25%. The lysate was pre-cleared by incubation with 60 µL streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 1 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Then CuSO4, biotin-azido and sodium ascorbate were added to the pre-cleared lysate at 4 mM, 5 µM and 10 mM final concentration, respectively. The click-reaction was performed by incubation for 30 min at 20 °C in the dark with vigorous intermittent shaking and the free biotin was removed from the clicked extracts using PD MiniTrap G-25 column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with IPD buffer. The extracts were then complemented to 600µL with IPD buffer and incubated for 2 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel with 60 µL of streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The beads, corresponding to the proteins associated to (S)- or (R)-9, were then washed extensively with high-salt IPW buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 0.05% IGEPAL CA-630, HALT inhibitors cocktail), then with IPD buffer. For on-bead trypsic digestion, beads were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and then suspended in 7 M urea and 25 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich). After 60 min under agitation (850 rpm) at room temperature, the samples were alkylated by incubation in 90 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma-Aldrich) during 30 min in the dark. Samples were then washed twice as described above and submitted to overnight proteolysis in ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 1 μg of trypsin (Promega) per sample at 37°C. The supernatants were collected, dried in speed-vac and resuspended with 2% ACN and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), for MS analysis. The resulting peptides were analyzed with a NanoLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For isoDTB-ABPP experiments, two samples of total cell extracts from U2OS cells were treated with the indicated DACone probe and precipitated. The samples were re-dissolved and clicked to the heavy or light isoDTB tags, respectively. The light- and heavy-labeled samples were combined and precipitated. The protein precipitates were washed, re-dissolved and enriched on high capacity streptavidin agarose beads. After enrichment, the proteins were reduced and alkylated with IAA. The proteins were digested with trypsin. The beads were washed, the modified peptides eluted and dried under vacuum. The residues were re-dissolved and filtered. Samples were analysed using a Qexactive Plus coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column and separation was carried out on an AURORA series AUR2-25075C18A column. TOP10 data-dependent mode, scan range 300-1500 m/z, resolution of 70,000 and AGC target of 3e6 with 80ms maximum injection time (IT) were used for full scans. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement with the following criteria: Minimum AGC target 1e3, isotope exclusion and dynamic exclusion enabled and peaks with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 excluded. Resolution of 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximum IT 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, nCE 27%) were used for MS2 measurements.

### Data Protocol
For MS analysis of entire BLG, raw data were acquired with MassLynx 4.1 (Waters, Manchester, UK) and deconvoluted with UniDec using the following parameters: m/z range: 1,300-2,800 Th; subtract curved: 1; Gaussian smoothing: 10; bin every 1 Th; charge range: 5-15; mass range: 18,000-19,000 Da; sample mass: every 1 Da; peak FWHM: 1 Th; peak detection range: 50 Da, and peak detection threshold: 0.1. For target identification studies, raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 software for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against human entries in the Swissprot protein database. To perform relative quantification between proteins identified, we used the LFQ from the MaxQuant “protein group.txt” output. The experiment was repeated three times. For each protein identified, the ratio (S)-9 vs (R)-9 conditions was computed (fold change, FC) and a t-test was used to select proteins reproductively enriched (FC>2 and p < 0.05) in the (S)-9 vs (R)-9 condition. Cytoscape was used to generate a visual representation, in which the FC is color-coded, while the -log(p) was used to define protein box size (id large box means highly significant enrichment). For isoDTB-ABPP experiments, The experiments were analysed in three different ways: For analysis of the masses of modification, an Open Search was performed using MSFragger-based FragPipe. Replicates were analysed as the same experiment. For downstream data analysis, the "global.modsummary.tsv" file was loaded and the values for the number of PSMs ("default-ptmshepherd-dataset (PSMs)") were plotted against the "Theoretical Mass Shift" in the mass range between 400 and 1000 Da. For analysis of amino acid selectivity, an Offset Search was performed using MSFragger-based FragPipe. Replicates were analysed as the same experiment. For downstream data analysis, the two "*.tsv" files for the two experiments were individually processed. They were filtered to retain only entries that are present in the "psm.tsv" file. Only entries were retained that were localized to a unique residue as seen by containing one lower-case letter in the column "best locs". Next, the entries were filtered for a delta_score > 1. For each entry, the UniProt Code was isolated from the column "protein" and the full protein sequence was linked into the table. Based on this information, all peptide sequences that do not occur exactly once in the same protein were excluded and the residue number of the modified residue was determined. The amino acid at the modified residue was determined. If the N-terminus or the C-terminus were modified, this was only counted and labelled as modification of the terminus and not of the respective amino acid at that position. For each entry, an identifier was generated in the format "UniprotCode"_X_"residue number", where X is the one letter code of the modified amino acid or "N-terminal" or "C-terminal" for terminal modifications. Duplicates of entries with the same identifier were retained only once. The data of both experiments was combined and only residues were counted in the final analysis that were present in both replicates. For label quantification using IonQuant, a Closed Search was performed using MSFragger-based FragPipe. Replicates were analysed as separate experiments. For downstream data analysis, the "ion_label_quant.tsv" files of the two experiments were analysed separately. For each entry, the "Modified peptide" was generated as either the "Light Modified Peptide" or the "Heavy Modified Peptide" based on the entry with the higher "PeptideProphet Probability". The "Identifier" was generated in the format "UniprotCode"_X_"residue number", where X is the one letter code of the modified amino acid or "N-term" or "C-term" for terminal modifications. For each "Identifier", the averaged "Log2 ratio HL", was determined as average of the "Log2 ratio HL" of all corresponding ions weighted with the "Total intensity" of the ion. The value was disregarded if the standard deviation of the "Log2 ratio HL" values for all ions of the same "Identifier" was > 1.41. For all identifiers, the data for both replicates was now combined into one table. The average of the two "Log2 ratio HL" values was calculated. The value was disregarded, if the standard deviation between the replicates was > 1.41 or if the identifier was only quantified in one of the replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alkynylcarbinol, Isodtb, Sdr enzymes, Cancer

### Affiliations
IPBS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse


