### Accession
PXD001524

### Title
Human testicular matrix -  Derivation and characterization of a cytocompatible scaffold from human testis

### Description
ITo derive a scaffold from human testis for the purpose of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, we developed a method to produce a cytocompatible decellularized testicular matrix (DTM) while maintaining the native tissue-specific characteristics and components. The potential benefits of tissue-specific scaffolds consisting of naturally-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) have been demonstrated using a wide variety of animal and human tissue sources. However, so far, testis scaffolds have never been considered for constructive remodelling purposes. We have therefore developed a protocol for the preparation of cell-free extracellular matrix and characterized the material extensively using a combination of proteomics, immunohistochemsitry, and cell population assays. To prepare cell-free matrix, human cadaveric testicular tissue was exposed for 24 h or 48 h to 1% Triton X-100 and/or 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The extent of decellularization was evaluated by histology. Confirmation of cell removal in DTM was done by a DNA quantification technique. The protein composition was analysed by LC-MS/MS. The retention of testicular tissue-specific characteristics was evaluated by immunohistochemistry, Alcian blue staining and scanning electron microscopy. Soluble toxicity and testicular cell attachment was assessed to check the cytocompatibility of DTM scaffolds.  Histological analysis showed that DTM could be obtained by mechanical agitation in 1% SDS for 24 h. The resulting DTM was found to be clear of cells while retaining the typical three-dimensional structure. Proteomics analysis revelaed the presence of  the major components of the native tissue scaffold, including collagen type I and IV, fibronectin, laminin and glycosaminoglycans. In addition, numerous additional ECM proteins in DTM were detected, indicating its complex nature. Importantly, we demonstrated that DTM scaffolds are not cytotoxic, as evidenced by MTT assay showing a normal fibroblast proliferation activity after indirect exposure, and support testicular cell attachment and infiltration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Wet DTM (24 h - 1% SDS-treated) was incubated in 6 M urea with 1% β-mercaptoethanol for 6 days at 4 °C at a concentration of 10 mg/mL (Sigma-Aldrich). Insoluble material was removed by 10 min centrifugation at 14,000 × g. The concentration of the supernatant was assessed using the Pierce bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific). Then, 15 µg of extracted protein were further dissolved in 0.1% ProteaseMax, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile. Resulting protein solutions were incubated for 30 min at 50 °C. Samples were centrifuged and directly subjected to a tryptic digestion protocol carried out by a liquid handling robot (MultiProbe II, Perkin Elmer). This included protein reduction in 5 mM DTT at 56 °C and alkylation in 15 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:30 and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry Tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) and the resulting peptide mixture was injected into an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using an in-house packed column (C18-AQ ReproSil-Pur®, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with the following gradient: 5−35% acetonitrile for 89 min, 48−80% acetonitrile for 5 min and 80% acetonitrile for 8 min, all at a flow rate of 300nL/min.  The MS acquisition method was comprised of one survey full scan ranging from m/z 300 to m/z 1650 acquired with a resolution of R= 70‘000 at m/z 400, followed by data-dependent HCD scans from maximum ten most intense precursor ions with a charge state ≥ 2. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of R=17’500, a target value of 2e5, isolation width was set to 4 and normalized collision energy to 30.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using Raw2MGF (in-house developed software), and the resulting mascot generic files were searched against the concatenated human SwissProt protein database (vs. 2014_01) using the Mascot 2.3.0 (Matrix Science Ltd). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were defined as variable modifications. Data were visualized using the Scaffold software package (Proteome Software Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3d cell culture, Extracellular matrix, Testicular structure

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Michael Landreh

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Jornvall
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


