### Accession
PXD022501

### Title
Human trophectoderm extracellular vesicle proteome

### Description
Embryo implantation into maternal endometrium is critical for initiation and establishment of pregnancy, requiring developmental synchrony between endometrium and blastocyst. However, factors regulating human endometrial-embryo cross talk and facilitate implantation remain largely unknown. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are emerging as important mediators of this process. Here, human trophectomderm stem cell-derived EVs were shown to transfer to and regulate human endometrial cells towards processes associated with implantation.  Importantly, transfer of trophectoderm EV cargo proteins to endometrial cells to mediate changes in polarity is demonstrated.

### Sample Protocol
sEVs and cell lysates (trophectoderm CL, and endometrial UT, treated with sEVs) solubilised in 2% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM TEAB, reduction (DTT), alkylation (IAA), acetone precipitation, trypsin digestion. Peptides purified and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay and normalized to 1 µg per 3 µL. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3000 nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source in positive mode. Peptides were loaded (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 5 m beads with 100 Å pore-size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated (1.9-µm particle size C18, 0.075 × 200 mm, Nikkyo Technos Co. Ltd) with a gradient of 2–28% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350–1,650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 × 106 automatic gain control (AGC), 128 mseconds injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition (top 25) with collision-induced dissociation and detection in the ion trap (30,000 resolution, 1 ×105 AGC, 60 mseconds injection time, 28% normalized collision energy, 1.3 m/z quadrupole isolation width). Unassigned precursor ions charge states and slightly charged species were rejected and peptide match disabled. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.12.0) with Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome (74,811 entries, downloaded 12-2019) supplemented with common contaminants. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Trophectoderm, Embryo. extracellular vesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr david greening
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute


