### Accession
PXD030736

### Title
Proteomics and integrated techniques to characterize organic residues in funerary findings from Italic populations of the first millennium B.C.

### Description
Analysis of organic residues from different typologies of ancient funerary pottery found in graves at two archaeological sites of Campania Region in southern Italy and dating back to the age of the Italic populations during the first millennium BC. Several analytical techniques have been exploited. Proteomics was decisive for the characterization of the proteins and the assignment of the species of origin. Samples were encrustations on two bowls of the 3rd-4th century BC unhearted in Capua and one Phoenician-type amphora with unusual shape, found in a grave at the necropolis of the Greek colony in Cuma (7th century BC). Concretions on bowls were identified with the decisive contribution of proteomics as bovine bone. The amphora contained 2,500 years old bovine milk.

### Sample Protocol
Organic residues were extracted from powdered samples, scraped off of the bowls and of the amphora. For proteomic analysis, 20 mg aliquots of powdered samples were transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube, suspended in 300 μL of denaturing/reducing buffer (6 M guanidine HCl, 0.3 M tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8.0) and incubated at 56 °C for 1 h. After reduction, cysteines were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. The suspension was centrifuged (5000 g, 20 min, 4 °C), and the supernatant was fractionated by size exclusion chromatography prepacked spin columns with 7 kDa exclusion limit, according to the manufacturer's instructions. Proteins (fraction > 7 kDa) were eluted with 85 μL of 25 mM Ambic, pH 7.8, quantified with the Bradford assay, and digested overnight at 37 °C with modified proteomic grade trypsin at a 1/50 (w/w) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. Peptides were purified with C18 microcolumns and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) at an approximate concentration of 0.5 μg μL-1 for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS proteomic analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow ultrahigh performance liquid chromatograph (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded through Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm) trap columns (Thermo Scientific) using a Famos autosampler (Thermo Scientific) and separated using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column (2 μm, 25 cm × 75 μm) with 3 μm particles and 100 Å pore size (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with the Protein Prospector Batch-Tag Web tool (http://prospector2.ucsf.edu), using the mgf files generated from the LC-MS runs with the MS Convert tool of the open source ProteoWizard 3.0 software (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/). Searches in the Swiss-Prot database (release of February 2021) were not taxonomically restricted. Once the presence of bovine milk proteins in BS was ascertained, some sequences of the most frequent casein genetic variants were manually included in the database. The searching parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a static modification; methionine (Met) oxidation, pyroglutamic acid at N-terminus glutamine (Gln), Gln and asparagine (Asn) deamidation, and serine/threonine (Ser/Thr) phosphorylation, hydroxylation of Pro in Pro-Gly motifs as variable modifications; mass tolerance value of 8 ppm for precursor ion and 12 ppm for MS/MS fragments; trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme and possible semitryptic cleavage; and missed cleavage up to 2. To consider the possible presence of degraded proteins, a second search was repeated with nonspecific enzymatic cleavage, using all the same parameters otherwise. Searches arising from three replicate LC-MS/MS analyses were merged using the Protein Prospector Batch-Tag Web options. Protein identification scores were calculated by Target Decoy Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) filtering working at a 0.01 peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) that were matched to proteins identified at 1% protein-level FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple analytical techniques were combined to achieve a detailed characterization of organic residues in different typologies of funerary pottery, which were found at two separate archeological sites in the Campania Region (Italy) and both dated back to the first millennium BC. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis of lipids provided inconclusive results. The attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra of encrustation on two glazed bowls of the 3rd to 4th century BC were comparable to those of fresh bone, revealing the presence of hydroxyapatite and proteins, which were identified as bovine collagen chains by liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics. This finding confirmed that Italic populations used to inhume the dead along with votive meat offerings. Proteomics was decisive for identifying bovine milk in an unusually shaped amphora unearthed from a grave that belonged to a woman at the necropolis of the Greek colony in Cuma (7th century BC). Peptidomic analysis demonstrated that the genetic variant A<sup>1</sup> of &#x3b2;-casein was already present in the southern Mediterranean area at least 2500 years ago. Overall, these results depict an agropastoral system of Italic populations at the age of Magna Graecia based on a significant role of domesticated cattle.

### Keywords
Organic residue analysis; archaeological finds; proteomics; lc-ms/ms; bovine milk; bovine bone

### Affiliations
Institute of Food Sciences - National Research Council (CNR)
Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, Avellino, Italy

### Submitter
Gianluca Picariello

### Lab Head
Dr Gianluca Picariello
Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, Avellino, Italy


