### Accession
PXD008970

### Title
Protein citrullination in human tissues

### Description
Citrullination is a post-translational modification of arginine catalyzed by five peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs) in humans. The loss of a positive charge may cause structural or functional alterations and while the modification has been linked to several diseases including rheumatoid arthritis and cancer, its physiological or pathophysiological roles remain largely unclear. In part this is owing to limitations in available methodology able to robustly enrich, detect and localize the modification. As a result, only few citrullination sites have been identified on human proteins with high confidence. In this study, we mined data from mass spectrometry-based deep proteomic profiling of 30 human tissues to identify citrullination sites on endogenous proteins. Database searching of ~70 million tandem mass spectra yielded ~13,000 candidate spectra which were further triaged by spectrum quality metrics and the detection of the specific neutral loss of isocyanic acid from citrullinated peptides to reduce false positives. Because citrullination is easily confused with deamidation, we synthetised ~2,200 citrullinated and 1,300 deamindated peptides to build a library of reference spectra. This led to the validation of 375 citrullination sites on 209 human proteins. Further analysis showed that >80% of the identified modifications sites were new and for 56% of the proteins, citrullination was detected for the first time. Sequence motif analysis revealed a strong preference for Asp and Gly, residues around the citrullination site. Interestingly, while the modification was detected in 26 human tissues with the highest levels found in brain and lung, citrullination levels did not correlate well with protein expression of the PAD enzymes. Even though the current work represents the largest survey of protein citrullination to date, the modification was mostly detected on high abundance proteins arguing that the development of specific enrichment methods would be required in order to study the full extent of cellular protein citrullination.

### Sample Protocol
As part of a separate study, we have created deep proteome data sets from 30 human tissues. The details of this project will be published elsewhere (Wang et al, manuscript in preparation). Here, we describe the results of mining this data for the specific purpose of identifying endogenous protein citrullination. Briefly, tissues were lysed in urea and proteins were digested with trypsin. Digests of each tissue were separated into 36 fractions by strong anion exchange chromatography as described. Chromatographic fractions were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive+ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a 110 min gradient resulting in the identification of 9,049 to 82,257 peptides and 4,267 to 9,241   proteins per tissue.

### Data Protocol
The data processing steps are illustrated in Figure 1 and S1. Briefly, Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to process 1,116 Orbitrap .raw files into peak list files (.mgf). These were searched using Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against the UniProtKB-Swiss-Prot complete human proteome including canonical and isoforms database (download from www.uniprot.org, version August 2016, 42,158 entries) and supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. The search parameters were as follows: fixed modification of Cys (carbamidomethylation); variable modification of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal Gln to pyro-Glu conversion, deamidation of Arg (citrullination), Asn and Gln. The neutral loss of isocyanic acid (HNCO, 43.0058 Da) was added to the definition of citrullination in the search algorithm. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for up to two missed cleavage sites. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.05 Da. The target decoy option of Mascot was enabled. Mascot search results (DAT files) were imported into Scaffold (version _4.7.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identifications were initially accepted if they had greater than 90.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were initially accepted if they had greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Filters including removing PSMs with C-terminal citrullination (3,981 PSMs) and poor quality PSMs with low ion score below identity score (3,078 PSMs) were applied to decrease the number of spectra required to be manually inspected. Next, all spectra assigned to citrullinated PSMs were extracted from the mascot peak list files, these were searched again against Swissprot (see above) and the result file imported into Scaffold for visualization and further evaluation of spectra . Candidate citrullinated PSMs were inspected and validated manually placing emphasis on the overall spectrum quality, presence of modified fragment ions, and the detection of neutral loss ions. Based on these criteria, the citrullinated PSMs were categorized into poor quality, ambiguous and valid (MI, manual inspection). See Table 2 for a breakdown of PSMs assigned to the different categories.

### Publication Abstract
Citrullination is a posttranslational modification of arginine catalyzed by five peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs) in humans. The loss of a positive charge may cause structural or functional alterations, and while the modification has been linked to several diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and cancer, its physiological or pathophysiological roles remain largely unclear. In part, this is owing to limitations in available methodology to robustly enrich, detect, and localize the modification. As a result, only a few citrullination sites have been identified on human proteins with high confidence. In this study, we mined data from mass-spectrometry-based deep proteomic profiling of 30 human tissues to identify citrullination sites on endogenous proteins. Database searching of &#x223c;70 million tandem mass spectra yielded &#x223c;13,000 candidate spectra, which were further triaged by spectrum quality metrics and the detection of the specific neutral loss of isocyanic acid from citrullinated peptides to reduce false positives. Because citrullination is easily confused with deamidation, we synthetized &#x223c;2,200 citrullinated and 1,300 deamidated peptides to build a library of reference spectra. This led to the validation of 375 citrullination sites on 209 human proteins. Further analysis showed that &gt;80% of the identified modifications sites were new, and for 56% of the proteins, citrullination was detected for the first time. Sequence motif analysis revealed a strong preference for Asp and Gly, residues around the citrullination site. Interestingly, while the modification was detected in 26 human tissues with the highest levels found in the brain and lung, citrullination levels did not correlate well with protein expression of the PAD enzymes. Even though the current work represents the largest survey of protein citrullination to date, the modification was mostly detected on high abundant proteins, arguing that the development of specific enrichment methods would be required in order to study the full extent of cellular protein citrullination.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Post-translational modification, Peptidylarginine deiminase, Synthetic peptides, Human proteome

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Chien-Yun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Freising, Germany


