### Accession
PXD033984

### Title
Exploitation of the RNA interference pathway of the human fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
RNA-based therapeutics are an emerging class of drugs that are changing the way we treat infectious diseases. The versatility of this class is clearly on display in the rapid design and adaptation of the mRNA vaccines to SARS-CoV-2. Despite the success of these therapeutics against viruses, research into RNA-based therapeutics against human fungal pathogens, a major source of human morbidity and mortality, is lacking. Here, we provide proof-of-principle that RNA-based therapeutics hold potential against human fungal pathogens like Aspergillus fumigatus. We provide an improved mechanistic description of the RNA interference pathway of this important human pathogen by describing the genetic variation in RNAi-related genes using a large collection of environmental and clinical genomes, the proteins regulated by the system using advanced proteomics analysis, and the RNAi components essential for hairpin-induced silencing. We then exploit this pathway using a heterologously expressed hairpin RNA construct to silence the pabA gene of A. fumigatus to inhibit growth. The data presented here provide a foundation for a mechanistic description of novel RNA regulatory pathways in A. fumigatus and provide a first step towards the development of RNA-based therapeutics against this important human fungal pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
A. fumigatus strains (wildtype, ∆agoA/B, ∆dclA/B, ∆rdrp 1/2) were grown on Aspergillus minimal medium (AMM) agar plates. Spores were harvested after 5 days with 10 ml of sterile distilled water using a T-shaped inoculation spreader and spore suspensions were filtered through a 30-µm cell strainer (MACS, Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Germany) to exclude mycelia. A. fumigatus transformants were screened on AMM agar plates supplemented with 150 µg/ml of hygromycin, 0.1 µg/ml of pyrathiamine, or 160 µg/ml of phleomycin for selection. Spores were disrupted by mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen. Cell debris were homogenized in lysis buffer (1% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), one tablet of cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After addition of 0.5 µl Benzonase nuclease (250 U/μl) the samples were incubated at 37°C in a water bath sonicator for 30 min. Proteins were separated from insolubilized debris by centrifugation (15 min, 18000 × g). Each 100 µg of total protein per sample was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 100 µl. Subsequently, cysteine thiols were reduced and carbamidomethylated for 30 min at 70°C by addition of each 2 µl of 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). The samples were further cleaned up by methanol-chloroform-water precipitation using the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Protein precipitates were resolubilized in 5% trifluoroethanol of aqueous 100 mM TEAB and digested for 18 h with Trypsin+LysC (Promega) at a ratio of 25:1  protein:protease. Samples were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Tryptic peptides were resolubilized in 30 µl of 0.05% TFA and 2% ACN in H2O filtered through 10 kDa MWCO PES membrane spin filters (VWR) at 14,000×g for 15 min and transferred to HPLC vials. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µl/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm × 75 µm, 2 µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed using the following gradient: 0–5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65%, 210–215 min at 96% B, 215.1–240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometry instrument was operated in data dependent MS2 Top15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300–1500 at a resolution of 140,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3×10^6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2–5 were isolated at a width of m/z 1.6 amu for HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC= 2×10^5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the FungiDB database (https://fungidb.org/common/downloads/Current_Release/AfumigatusAf293/fasta/data/FungiDB-57_AfumigatusAf293_AnnotatedProteins.fasta) of Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 (2021/07/09; YYYY/MM/DD) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.4), MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 3.2. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, protein N-term Met-loss and/or acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and a search engine score of > 30 (Mascot), > 4 (Sequest HT), > 300 (MS Amanda) or > 8 (MS Fragger) was required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for q value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using the precursor abundance based on intensity and a signal-to-noise ratio > 5. Normalization was performed by using the total peptide amount method. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by using abundance values of 75% of the lowest abundance identified per sample. Differential protein abundance was defined as a fold change of > 4, ratio-adjusted p-value < 0.05 (p-value/log4ratio) and at least identified in 2 of 3 replicates of the sample group with the highest abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-based therapeutics, Filamentous fungi, Lc-ms/ms, Rna interference, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena (Leibniz-HKI) Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Brakhage
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena (Leibniz-HKI) Jena, Germany


