### Accession
PXD038271

### Title
The immunopeptidome and proteome of DIPG

### Description
DIPG is a devastating paediatric and young adult brainstem tumour with no cure and a median overall survival of 9 months. Cellular immunotherapy approaches require specific targeting of unique and tumour specific cell surface antigens, however, there is a paucity of known targets for DIPG. Here we used a proteomics platform approach to interrogate an array of patient derived DIPG cell lines to facilitate a multi-omics based approach to identify cell surface protein candidates enriched or unique to DIPG.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I peptides were pulled down using HLA specific antibodies such as anti HLA A2 (BB7.2), anti HLA A3 (GAPA3) and pan class I antibody (W6/32). Peptides were eluted using 10% acetic acid. B2M and heavy chain were separated from HLA peptides using either MWCO or HPLC. Samples were acquired using either QE plus or Tribrid Fusion

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw files generated on the Tribrid Fusion and QE Plus were exported and analysed using Peaks software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) searching against the human proteome (Uniprot, accessed 15/06/2017; 20,182 entries). The following search parameters were used: error tolerance of 10 ppm using monoisotopic mass for precursor ions and 0.02 Da tolerance for fragment ions; enzyme used was set to none with following variable modifications: oxidation at Met, deamidation at Asp and Gln and phosphorylation at Ser, Thr and Tyr. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using a decoy fusion method. For data processing a 5% FDR cut-off was applied. Peptides matched to decoy database, iRT peptides, duplicates, and those detected in blanks were removed. Secondly, only peptides with 8-12 amino acids (aa) were retained with modified versions of the peptides also removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Proteomics, Hla, Dipg

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Kirti Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia


