### Accession
PXD022581

### Title
Mass spectrometry data for Leishmania major proteins obtained by immunoprecipitation with anti-PUF1, anti-PUF3 or pre-immunization antibodies.

### Description
This project was aimed to the characterization of proteins interacting with the RNA binding proteins PUF1 and PUF3 of Leishmania major (Friedlin strain). For this purpose an immunoprecipitation (IP) strategy was followed. Firstly, protein extracts from L. major promastigotes were incubated with specific antibodies, raised in rabbits, against recombinant proteins PUF1 or PUF3. In parallel, a control IP using a pre-immune serum was performed. After affinity purification of the antibody-protein complexes, proteins were analyzed by Reverse phase- Liquid Chomatography/Mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests of IPs were characterized through RP-LC MS/MS in a Orbitrap System.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using PEAKS X+ software. Database search was performed against Uniprot-Leishmania major. The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. False  discovery  rates  (FDR)  for  peptide  spectrum  matches  (PSM) was  limited  to  0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania major; promastigote; puf1; puf3; immunoprecipitation; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid

### Submitter
Jose María Requena

### Lab Head
Dr Jose M. Requena
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid


