### Accession
PXD031591

### Title
Identification of Plin5 binding partners involved in lipid droplet-mitochondrial contacts

### Description
Perilipin 5 (Plin5) has been shown the induce contact between mitochondria and lipid droplets, though the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown. It has been shown that the unique C-terminal domain of Plin5 is responsible for inducing these contact sites. In this proteomics study, we identify binding partners which mediate this function by performing affinity purification-mass spectrometry using GFP-tagged Plin5 constructs where Plin5 is full length, lacking half of the c-terminal domain, or lacking the entire c-terminal domain. Of the several potential interactors, we validate Fatp4 as a direct interactor with the tether domain of Plin5.

### Sample Protocol
mEmerald protein complex isolation for mass spectrometry was performed utilizing GFP-Trap magnetic beads (Chromotek). mEmerld alone was used as the control. Immunoprecipitated samples (n=2) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and stained with coomassie. Lanes (1cm) for each sample were excised and the proteins were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 min at 55C, alkylated with 15mM IAA for 45 min in the dark at room temperature, and in-gel digested with trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were extracted, desalted with C18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -80˚C until further analysis. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 60 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–45% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1600) was set to 60,000, while MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD. Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database (containing 20,414 protein sequences, downloaded January 2019). appended with a common contaminants database. The following parameters were used to identify tryptic peptides for protein identification: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; 0.02 Da product ion mass tolerance; up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites; carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of was set as a variable modification. Scaffold (version 4.7.3, Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to provide relative quantitation. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.1% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. SAINT (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) (Choi et al., 2012) was used to identify Plin5 interactors. Proteins were identified as Plin5 interactors if they had a FC_A (Average enrichment relative to Em control) score greater than 2.0 and a SAINT score greater than 0.75. Relative quantitation was performed using the calculated quantitative values (normalized peak area) within Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Metabolism, Plin5

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cohen
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, UNC-Chapel Hill


