### Accession
PXD036148

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis of the Mitochondria of Menstrual Stem Cells and Ovarian Cancer Cells

### Description
Mitochondria transplantation is a hot spot in cell-free therapy. Menstrual stem cells (MenSCs) are potential donor cells to provide foreign mitochondria. This study aims to investigate the possible effects of MenSC-derived mitochondria on ovarian cancer from the perspective of protein expression profiling. MenSCs were harvested from menstrual blood. The mitochondria were isolated from MenSCs and ovarian cancer cell line-SKOV3. A label-free proteomics and analysis were performed by comparing the protein expression in the mitochondria of MenSCs and SKOV3 cells. The differentially expressed proteins with fold change higher than 2 were analyzed by Gene Ontology, KEGG pathway and protein domain enrichment analysis, protein interaction networks and PRM analysis. In total, 592 proteins which were up-expressed in the mitochondria of MenSCs were taken to be analyzed. Functional enrichment analysis revealed these proteins were enriched in metabolism-related pathway entries including oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway. Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) analysis confirmed that 4 out of 6 candidate proteins on OXPHOS pathway afforded similar trends. The protein domain enrichment analysis showed that the domains such as thioredoxin domain were significantly enriched. Based on these findings, we believed that the mitochondria from MenSCs might work to enhance the progression of ovarian cancer, which was probably mediated by the enrichment of OXPHOS-related metabolic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
We selected 10 healthy women as volunteers to provide menstrual blood, and menstrual blood stem cells were isolated by density gradient centrifugation. The mitochondria of MenSCs and ovarian cancer cells were extracted by a mitochondrial isolation kit. Then, protein extraction, trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (20,600 sequences, released at 2021/03) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 40 ppm in both first search and Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.04 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. Peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Menstrual stem cell, Proteomics, Mitochondria transplantation, Oxphos

### Affiliations
The 2nd affiliated hospital of Harbin medical university
Department of obstetrics and gynecology. Second affiliated hospital of Harbin Medical University. Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

### Submitter
wen zhong

### Lab Head
Dr Xiuhui Chen
Department of obstetrics and gynecology. Second affiliated hospital of Harbin Medical University. Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.


