### Accession
PXD025655

### Title
The choice of search engine affects sequencing depth and HLA allele-specific peptide repertoires.

### Description
Standardisation of Immunopeptidomics experiments across laboratories is a pressing issue within the field, and currently a variety of different methods for sample preparation and data analysis tools are applied. Here, we compared different software packages commonly used to interrogate immunopeptidomics datasets, in order to understand to which extent differences in performance can be observed. We found that a de novo-assisted database search reports substantially more peptide sequences (~30-70%) compared to three database search engines at a global FDR of <1%. This effect was reproducible across four immunopeptidomic datasets. We validated the results using data generated with a synthetic library of 2000 HLA-associated peptides from four HLA alleles, half of which were previously observed by LC-MS, and half were predicted only. Our investigation reveals that search engines create a bias in peptide sequence length distribution and peptide amino acid composition. Therefore, the choice of peptide identification method highly influences the proportion of peptide sequences identified for each HLA allele, and resulting data should be interpreted with caution.

### Sample Protocol
MHC class I immunoprecipitation  5x108 cells were pelleted and lysed in 10 ml lysis buffer (0.5% IGEPAL 630, 150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris (pH 8.0) plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) for 30 minutes. Lysates were centrifuged at 300g for 10 min and then at 15,000g for 60 min and incubated with 1 ml antibody-protein G-Sepharose beads (GE) (1ml) overnight. Beads were washed by 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0) containing first 150 mM NaCl, then 450 mM NaCl, and 50 mM Tris buffer. Complexes were eluted with 5 ml 10% acetic acid and dried. High performance liquid chromatography peptide fractionation MHC complexes were resuspended in 120 µl of loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 1% acetonitrile (ACN) in water) and fractioned by RP-HPLC using an Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Scientific) and 4.6x 50 mm ProSwift RP-1S column (Thermo Scientific) with 10 min gradient from 3% to 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA in water at a flow rate of 1 mL/min.  Alternate fractions containing peptides were separated into odd and even samples, dried, and resuspended in 20 ul of loading buffer and analysed by LC-MS. Protein lysate preparation for mass spectrometry DoTc2 and HEK293 cells were cultured to 80% confluence in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagler’s Medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum, 2 mM L-glutamine and 100U penicillin/ml, and was incubated at 37˚C in 5% CO2. Cell pellets were collected by centrifugation and lysed in lysis buffer (0.5% (v/v) IGEPAL 630, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 1 tablet cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA-free (Roche) per 10 ml buffer) at 4°C then centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 10 mins followed by a 20,000 × g spin step for 15 mins at 4°C. Supernatants were measure for protein content (BCA assay, ThermoFisher) and were purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were dissolved in 6M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HLC pH 7.4 and 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes. Next, cysteine residues were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 15 min followed by addition of DTT to 20 mM to react with residual IA for 15 min. Lysates were diluted to a final urea concentration of 2 M, and trypsin or elastase was added at a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, followed by incubation at 37°C for 16 hours. Sample clean-up was performed with a C18 column (Waters Oasis SPE kit). Synthesis of synthetic standard Synthetic peptides were individually synthesized by solid-phase synthesis on cellulose membranes as described previously {Zolg, 2017 #27}. During synthesis, a carboxyamidomethylated cysteine building block was used for cysteine to eliminate the need for cysteine modification before MS analysis. Peptides were cleaved from the membrane into pools of 250 peptides each.  Mass spectrometric analysis Peptide mixtures were dissolved in loading buffer (1% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Trifluroacetic acid), and 200 fmols/peptide were analysed by an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system coupled to a high field Q-Exactive (HFX) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped by PepMap 100 C18 columns (ThermoFisher Scientific) before reversed phase separation with a 60 min gradient of acetonitrile 2-25%, 1 % DMSO, 0.1% Formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min on a 75 µm × 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 EasySpray column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition involved one full-MS1 scan (120,000 resolution, 60 ms accumulation time, AGC 3×106) which was followed by 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (60,000 resolution, 120 ms accumulation time, AGC 5×105), with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and normalised HCD energy of 25%. Three method were utilised for analysis of the synthetic standard: (A) considered charge states of 2–4, (B) considered charge states of 1-4 whilst (C) involved one full scan 300-700 followed by 18 MS2 scans for charge states 2-4 followed by one full scan 700-1400 followed by two MS2 scans for charge states 1. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s. For enzymatic digests of S protein normalised HCD was increased to 28% and only 2-4 charge states were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were downloaded from the PRIDE partner repository or MassIVE from the following projects: PXD007635, PXD004894, PXD007635, PXD009531, MSV000080527. Data generated in this publication is available at PXD. Raw data files were converted to mzXML by MSConvert (v3.0.19014) analysed in COMET (2019013), Maxquant (v.1.6.1.0), MSGF+ (v.20181015) and PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions) using a protein sequence fasta file containing 20,606 reviewed human Uniprot entries downloaded on 24/05/2018 appended to the same (DECOY) entries after randomisation. No enzyme specificity was set, peptide mass error tolerances were set at 5 or 20 ppm for precursors depending on the dataset and 0.03 Da for MS2 fragments and only peptides of length 7-25 were considered. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database search approach. PSM’s were ranked by score best to worst (PEP, SpecEValue, Evalue and -10logP Score) for each search engine respectively. FDR was calculated as the cumulative sum of decoys as a fraction of all PSM’s as described further in the results section.

### Publication Abstract
Standardization of immunopeptidomics experiments across laboratories is a pressing issue within the field, and currently a variety of different methods for sample preparation and data analysis tools are applied. Here, we compared different software packages to interrogate immunopeptidomics datasets and found that Peaks reproducibly reports substantially more peptide sequences (~30-70%) compared with Maxquant, Comet, and MS-GF+ at a global false discovery rate (FDR) of &lt;1%. We noted that these differences are driven by search space and spectral ranking. Furthermore, we observed differences in the proportion of peptides binding the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles present in the samples, indicating that sequence-related differences affected the performance of each tested engine. Utilizing data from single HLA allele expressing cell lines, we observed significant differences in amino acid frequency among the peptides reported, with a broadly higher representation of hydrophobic amino acids L, I, P, and V reported by Peaks. We validated these results using data generated with a synthetic library of 2000 HLA-associated peptides from four common HLA alleles with distinct anchor residues. Our investigation highlights that search engines create a bias in peptide sequence depth and peptide amino acid composition, and resulting data should be interpreted with caution.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Fdr, Search engines

### Affiliations
The Jenner Institute
Jenner Institute

### Submitter
Robert Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
The Jenner Institute


