### Accession
PXD018386

### Title
Conditionally reprogrammed (CRC) and feeder free SMAD inhibited (SMADi) expanded human nasal epithelial cells label-free LC-MS/MS

### Description
Discovery of therapies that are able to correct defective CFTR requires patient derived in vitro pre-clinical cell models to be developed. Two main approaches exist to expand bronchial and nasal cultures, such as conditionally reprogrammed cells (CRC) and feeder free dual SMAD inhibition (SMADi) to overcome senescence, low cell count, and increase passages. To mimic airway epithelium the expanded cells are differentiated at air liquid Interface (ALI). This project focused to compare the global proteome of ALI differentiated CRC and SMADi expanded HNECs both treated and untreated with CFTR corrector VX-809.

### Sample Protocol
ALI differentiated HNEC cultures untreated or treated with VX-809 were harvested for mass spectrometry. Total protein was extracted by homogenizing the cells in RIPA buffer (Life Technologies 89900) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11836153001). Samples were sonicated using the Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode B01060010) for a total of 10 min using a 30 sec on/off cycle at 4C. Protein concentrations were determined using the 2-D Quant kit (GE Life Sciences 80648356). Samples were reduced (5 mM DTT, 37C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM IA, RT, 30 min) then incubated with trypsin at a protease:protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) at 37°C for 18 h, before being subjected to SCX clean-ups (Thermo Fisher, SP341) following manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides from each clean-up were evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 20 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Proteolytic peptide samples were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands. A micro C18 precolumn with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % TFA) at 15 µL/min and a fritless nano column (75 µm x 15 cm) containing C18-AQ media (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany) was used to concentrate and desalt samples. Peptides were eluted through a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 200 nL/min over 30 min. Eluted peptides were ionized using positive ion mode nano-ESI by applying 2000 volts to a low volume titanium union with the tip positioned ~0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=275°C) of a Tribrid Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired in the orbitrap (resolution = 120,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 400,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). Data dependant acquisition was used to sequentially select peptide ions (>2.5×104 counts, charge states +2 to +5) for MS/MS, with the total number of dependent scans maximized within 2 sec cycle times. Product ions were generated via higher energy collision dissociation (collision energy = 30; maximum injection time = 250 milliseconds; MSn AGC = 5×104; inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled) and mass analyzed in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to: n times =1, exclusion duration 20 seconds, ± 10ppm.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.2.10.43). Sequence database searches were performed using Andromeda. Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm [24]. Delayed normalizations were performed following sequence database searching of all samples with tolerances set to ±4.5 ppm for precursor ions and ±0.5 Da for peptide fragments. Additional search parameters were: carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications; and enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Peaks were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (August 2018 release), which contained 20333 sequences with the minimum peptide length set as 7. MaxLFQ analyses were performed using default parameters with “fast LFQ” enabled. Protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds were set at 1% and only non-contaminant proteins identified from ≥2 unique peptides were subjected todownstream analysis. Statistical analyses of protein abundances were performed with Perseus (version 1.6.5.0) (ref). Hits only identified by site, reverse hits and potential contaminants were filtered out. Only proteins that were present in 3 out of 6 replicates were retained. Protein intensities were log2-transformed. Missing values were added from normal distribution. Student’s t-tests were performed with Benjamini-Hochberg correction to identify differentially abundant proteins (q-value < 0.05). Volcano plots were constructed using t-test with 250 randomizations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human nasal epithelial cells, Conditionally reprogrammed cells, Label-free lc-ms/ms, Cystic fibrosis, Smad inhibition

### Affiliations
UNSW Australia
Molecular and Integrative Cystic Fibrosis (miCF) Research Laboratory, School of Women’s and Children’s Health, UNSW Medicine, UNSW Sydney

### Submitter
Alexander Capraro

### Lab Head
Dr Shafagh Waters
Molecular and Integrative Cystic Fibrosis (miCF) Research Laboratory, School of Women’s and Children’s Health, UNSW Medicine, UNSW Sydney


