### Accession
PXD004369

### Title
DSS-induced colitis proteomics after A. caninum ES treatment

### Description
Analysis of the effect of A. caninum ES proteins on a DSS-induced mouse model of colitis

### Sample Protocol
Intestinal Epithelial Cells (IEC) and Lamina Propria (LP) isolated form intestine. Proteins digested with trypsin, peptides labelled with iTRAQ and analysed on a 5600 AB Sciex

### Data Protocol
Data analysed by Mascot and X!Tandem and validated using Scaffold

### Publication Abstract
Different reports have highlighted the potential use of helminths and their secretions in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) conditions; however, no reports have investigated their effects at a proteome level. Herein, we characterise the protein expression changes that occur in lamina propria (LP) and the intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) of mice with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis treated with Ancylostoma caninum excretory/secretory (ES) products using a quantitative proteomic approach. We have shown how parasite products can significantly alter the expression of proteins involved in immune responses, cell death and with an antioxidant activity. Interestingly, significant changes in the expression levels of different mucins were observed in this study. MUC13, a mucin implicated in gastrointestinal homeostasis, was upregulated in the LP of mice with DSS-induced colitis treated with ES, while MUC2, a major component of mucus, was upregulated in the IEC. In addition, A. caninum proteins have an important effect on proteins with antioxidant functions and proteins involved in intestinal homeostasis and tissue integrity and regeneration. Understanding how parasites can ameliorate IBD pathogenesis can help us design novel treatments for autoimmune diseases.

### Keywords
Ancylostoma caninum, Dss, Proteomics, Ibd, Hookworm, Colitis

### Affiliations
Australian Institute of Tropical health and Medicine James Cook University
James Cook University

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Loukas
Australian Institute of Tropical health and Medicine James Cook University


