### Accession
PXD009426

### Title
Sample preparation for proteomics

### Description
Urea-containing buffer solutions are generally used in proteomic studies to aid protein denaturation and solubilisation during cell and tissue lysis.  It is well-known, however, that urea can lead to the carbamylation of peptides and proteins and; subsequently, incomplete digestion of proteins.   In our work, we sought for ways to retain urea in the digestion protocol to reduce sample handling, while minimizing urea-related drawbacks.

### Sample Protocol
Urea in-solution digestion  A lysate of SK-MEL cells containing 200 μg protein in 50 mM Ambic buffer and 6 M urea was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at RT.  The sample was diluted 2-fold with 50 mM Ambic and divided into 8 aliquots of 25 μg each for experimental replicates of the protein digests.  Three aliquots were digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix in a ratio 1:50 w/w (enzymes:protein)  for 6 h at 37°C.  The samples were then diluted 3-fold with 50 mM Ambic and further digested overnight by adding the same quantity of trypsin/Lys-C mix as before, at a total final ratio of 1:25 w/w (trypsin:protein).  Three other aliquots of the reduced and alkylated cell lysate were digested with Lys-C in a ratio 1:50 w/w for 6 h at 37°C.  The samples were then diluted 3-fold with 50 mM Ambic and further digested at 37°C overnight with trypsin at a ratio 1:50 w/w (trypsin:protein).  The remaining two aliquots of the reduced and alkylated cell lysate were digested as above and incubated at RT.  Standard room temperature in the laboratory was 24°C (±2°C). Tissue lysates in 50 mM Ambic buffer and 4 M urea were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark.  Each sample was diluted 4-fold with 50 mM Ambic and divided into 6 aliquots of 25 μg each for experimental replicates of the protein digests.  Three aliquots were digested with Lys-C at a ratio of 1:50 w/w (trypsin:protein) for 7 h at 37°C.  The samples were then diluted 2-fold with 50 mM Ambic and further digested at 37°C overnight with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 w/w (trypsin:protein).  The remaining three aliquots of the tissue lysates were digested as above and incubated at RT.   Digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%.  Peptides were desalted with ultra-microspin C18 columns according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer.  Desalted and dried peptides were resuspended in 50 μL 0.1% formic acid and the peptide concentration was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, lL).   LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS was performed using a ThermoEasy nLC 1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San José, CA).  The peptides (∼1 μg ) were initially loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim1 PepMap 100 pre-column, 75 µm i.d. × 2 cm, C18, 3 mm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific, San José, CA) and then separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 75 µm i.d. × 25 cm, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm, 100Å, ThermoFisher Scientific, San José, CA) using an 80 min acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate injections.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 using the Andromeda Search engine.  The raw files were searched against the UniProtKB human database (released 20160709, 20,129 sequences excluding isoforms).  The default contaminant protein database and the decoy database were used and matches from these databases were excluded.  The search implemented 20 ppm and 0.02 Da precursor and fragment ion tolerances, respectively.   Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was a fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine residues, carbamylation at protein N-termini, pyroglutamic acid and acetylation were dynamic modifications. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The ‘match-between-runs’ option was enabled.  Filters: high confidence at the peptide and protein level were applied (FDR 0.01).  The statistical analyses were performed in Perseus v1.5.6.0 and Graphpad Prism v7.

### Publication Abstract
Urea-containing buffer solutions are generally used in proteomic studies to aid protein denaturation and solubilization during cell and tissue lysis. It is well-known, however, that urea can lead to carbamylation of peptides and proteins and, subsequently, incomplete digestion of proteins. By the use of cells and tissues that had been lysed with urea, different solution digestion strategies were quantitatively assessed. In comparison with traditional proteolysis at 37 &#xb0;C, urea in-solution digestion performed at room temperature improved peptide and protein identification and quantitation and had a minimum impact on miscleavage rates. Furthermore, the signal intensities and the number of carbamylated and pyroglutamic acid-modified peptides decreased. Overall, this led to a reduction in the negative effects often observed for such modifications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009426.

### Keywords
Urea, Lc-ms/ms, Lys-c/trypsin

### Affiliations
Lund University
Div. Clinical Protein Science & Imaging  Dept. of Clinical Sciences (Lund) and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering Lund University

### Submitter
Lazaro Hiram Betancourt Nunez

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Div. Clinical Protein Science & Imaging  Dept. of Clinical Sciences (Lund) and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering Lund University


