### Accession
PXD030131

### Title
Global analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation during Fusarium graminearum infection in maize

### Description
Proteins post-translational modification (PTMs) is necessary in the whole life process of organisms. Among them, lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) plays an important role in protein synthesis, transcriptional regulation, and cell metabolism. Khib is a newly identified PTM in several plant species. However, the function of Khib in maize was unclear. In this study, 2,067 Khib modified sites on 728 proteins were identified in maize. Subcellular localization results showed that these Khib modified proteins were localized in cytoplasm, chloroplast, and nucleus. We found 24 Khib sites occurred on core histones. Comparative proteomic analysis of the defense response to F. graminearum infection showed that Khib modification participated in plant resistance to pathogen infection by regulating glycolysis, TCA cycle, protein synthesis, peroxisome, and secondary metabolic processes, such as benzoxazinoid biosynthesis, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, jasmonic acid synthesis, and tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
The maize inbred line B73 and HDA101 overexpression lane was grown in the greenhouse in Hebei Agricultural University (Baoding, Hebei province, China). F. gramincarum PH-1 were grown on PDA plates at 28℃ for 6 days. Conidial suspensions were harvested by adding sterile distilled water containing 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 and scraping the plates using a glass spreader. The concentration of F. gramincarum conidia was quantified using a hemocytometer and diluted to 1×106 spores/mL for inoculation. A micropipette was used to inoculate the second or third internodes of maize stems above the soil surface, and then 30 μL conidial suspension was injected. Wounds are covered with sterile gauze to retain moisture and avoid contamination by other organisms.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were processed by Maxquant search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against MaizeGDB (V4) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was designated as lyase, allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance of precursor ions is set to 20 ppm in the first search, 5 ppm in the main search and 0.02 Da in the fragment ions. The aminoformyl methyl on Cys was designated as a fixed modification, and the oxidation on Met was designated as a variable modification. Minimum score for peptides was set > 40 and FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maize; proteomic; lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; fusarium graminearum

### Affiliations
Hebei Agricultural University

### Submitter
Kang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kang Zhang
Hebei Agricultural University


