### Accession
PXD005126

### Title
Proteome data on the microbial microbiome of grasshopper feces

### Description
For phytophagous insects, the efficiency of utilization of hemicellulose and cellulose depends on the gut microbiota. Shifts in environmental and management conditions alter the presence and abundance of plant species which may induce adaptations in the diversity of gut microbiota. To test the adaptation of the microbiota to a shift from a natural diverse to a monocultural meadow with Dactylis glomerata the highly abundant grasshopper species, Chorthippus dorsatus, was taken from the wild and kept in captivity and were fed with Dactylis glomerata for five days. The feces were collected and analyzed by metaproteomics. After the diet shift from a diverse source to the single source, the microbiota composition stays relatively stable. The Bacilli as the group of highest abundance did not change on the functional level. In contrast, pronounced shifts of amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism in Clostridia and Proteobacteria were observed. Hence, the adaptation upon short-term change of food source in this grasshopper species is dominated by functional adaptations and not by shifts in the community structure of the microbiota. This suggests that the microbiota of grasshoppers is capable to cope also with the loss of diverse feeding plants at least for a shorter time period.

### Sample Protocol
Grasshopper culture and feces sampling For the short-term experiment we selected Chorthippus dorsatus that was at that time the most dominant grasshopper species on a ruderal meadow that has been under this type of land use for 20 years. The meadow was dominated by grasses, namely Poa pratensis, Dactylis glomerata, Festuca pratensis, and Bromus sterilis, which are all potential food plants for the generalist herbivores in grasslands (Franzke et al., 2010, Ingrisch & Köhler, 1998, Köhler & Fritzlar, 2001). Three days before the start of the experiment we caught female and male grasshoppers with sweep nets and kept them separately in cages with a mixed grass diet from the meadow until the start of the experiment. In August 2014, 2 male and 2 female grasshoppers were transferred to a cage without food for 1 day to synchronize for gut content. On the following day Dactylis glomerata, which was grown in a climate chamber under standardized and controlled soil and moisture conditions for about 2.5 months, was added to the cage. Excrements were sampled before (d0) and after adding Dactylis glomerata at day 1, 3, and 5 (day 1, day 3 and day 5) for one week and frozen at -80°C.  Protein extraction and sample preparation After the sampling of feces (day 0, 1, 3, 5 and 6), three feces were pooled and were considered as one replicate. For protein extraction, to the feces 4 glass beads (3 mm, Carl Roth GmbH), two spatula tips of zirconium beads (0.1 mm diameter, Biospec.) and 800 µL of lysis buffer (500 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH8, 50 mM EDTA, 4 % (w/v) SDS) were added. Feces were disrupted by FastPrep (3 x 1 min, 5.5 ms-1, MP Biomedicals) and incubated for 15 min at 95°C. After centrifugation (14,000 rpm, 5 min, 4°C), the supernatant was taken. To the pellets 300 µL of lysis buffer were added and the procedure with FastPrep and heating was repeated exclusively for the pellet. The supernatant was precipitated over night at -20°C with acetone (2.5 fold of ice-cold acetone). Protein pellets were harvested by centrifugation (14,000 rpm). Dried pellets were dissolved in 20 µL of SDS sample buffer (2% w/v SDS, 2 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, 4% v/v glycerol, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 0.01% w/v bromophenol blue), heated to 90°C for 4 min and separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were stained in gel with Coomassie G-250 (Merck). Gel was cut into small pieces (band per samples), destained, dehydrated and proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37°C trypsin (Promega) (Jehmlich et al., 2008). Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTip column (Merck Millipore). Peptide lysates were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry data were analysed using SEQUEST HT algorithm in Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against database created from grasshopper faeces 16S rRNA sequencing data. The database search was performed with carbamidomethyl on cysteine as a static modification and oxidation on methionine as a dynamic modification. Trypsin was selected as a cleavage enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Da was applied. Peptides were considered as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01. In order to assign the protein groups to their phylogenetic origin and to evaluate the microbial composition of community was applied searching engine PROPHANE (“PROteomics results Pruning & Homology group ANotation Engine”) (Schneider et al., 2011). Protein abundances were calculated based on the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF). To assess the protein functions of the different bacterial community members, we assigned the identified proteins to clusters of orthologous groups (COGs). A principal component analysis (PCA) was applied as classical means of dimensionality reduction and visualization of multivariate data. PCA was assessed of log-transformed and normalized protein abundance profiles along the time scale.

### Publication Abstract
We present proteome data from the microbiota (feces) after a diet shift from a natural diverse to a monocultural meadow with <i>Dactylis glomerata.</i> The abundant grasshopper species, <i>Chorthippus dorsatus,</i> was taken from the wild and kept in captivity and were fed with <i>Dactylis glomerata</i> for five days. For phytophagous insects, the efficiency of utilization of hemicellulose and cellulose depends on the gut microbiota. Shifts in environmental and management conditions alter the presence and abundance of plant species which may induce adaptations in the diversity of gut microbiota. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD005126.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Feces, Grasshoppers

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen Head of Department of Molecular Systems Biology                 Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ    Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 1211 Martin.vonbergen@ufz.de, http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=40881
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen Head of Department of Molecular Systems Biology                 Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ    Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 1211 Martin.vonbergen@ufz.de, http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=40881


