### Accession
PXD013455

### Title
The landscape of protein expression in cancer based on public proteomics data

### Description
This project contains raw data, intermediate files and results used to create the integrated map of protein expression in human cancer (including data from cell lines and tumours). The map is based on joint reanalysis of 11 large-scale quantitative proteomics studies. The datasets were primarily retrieved from the PRIDE database, as well as MassIVE database and CPTAC data portal. The raw files were manually curated in order to capture mass spectrometry acquisition parameters, experimental design and sample characteristics. The raw files were jointly processed with MaxQuant computational platform using standard settings (see Data Processing Protocol). Due to size of the data, the processing was done in two batches denoted as “celllines” and “tumours” analysis. In total, using a 1% peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rates, the analysis allowed identification of 21,580 protein groups in the cell lines dataset (MQ search results available in ‘txt-celllines’ folder), and 13,441 protein groups in the tumours dataset (MQ search results available in ‘txt-tumours’ folder).

### Sample Protocol
Authors of the original studies included in this analysis performed sample preparation, processing and acquired mass spectrometry data. Only files where MS-1 based quantification could be obtained were selected, this means either label-free or SILAC-based experiments. Detailed experimental protocols should be accessed under the relevant public repository identifier or the original publication. The following datasets were used in this analysis: Bekker-Jensen_CellSystems_2017 (PubMed ID: 28601559, PXD004452), Coscia_NComms_2016 (PubMed ID: 27561551, PXD003668), Frejno_MolSysBiol_2017 (PubMed ID: 29101300, PXD005354, PXD005355), Geiger_MCP_2012 (PubMed ID: 22278370, PXD002395), Gholami_CellReports_2013 (PubMed ID: 23933261, PXD005940, PXD005942, PXD005946), Iglesias-Gato_EurUrology_2016 (PubMed ID: 26651926, PXD003636, PXD003430, PXD003452, PXD003515, PXD004132, PXD003615, PXD004159), Lawrence_CellReports_2015 (PubMed ID: 25892236, PXD008222), Pozniak_CellSystems_2016 (PubMed ID: 27135363, PXD000815), Tyanova_NComms_2016 (PubMed ID: 26725330, PXD002619), Wang_Gastroenterology_2017 (PubMed ID: 28625833, MSV000080374), Zhang_Nature_2014 (PubMed ID: 25043054, CPTAC data portal).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (MQ) computational platform using default settings. Specifically, files were assigned to parameter groups depending on the experimental design, instrument type, and methods used in individual studies (details of all parameter groups can be found in the mqpar.xml files). Data from cell line and tumour studies was searched using the MQ integrated Andromeda search engine, against the UniProt Human Reference Proteome, containing canonical and isoform sequences (71,591 sequences, accessed June 2017). These were also supplemented with common laboratory contaminants provided by MQ.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and peptides were allowed to have a maximum of two missed-cleavages. All of the MS assays used here were acquired using various Orbitrap instruments (THERMO raw files). For these raw files, the precursor mass tolerance was set to the default value of 20 ppm for the first search, and 4.5 for the main search. Fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for FT and IT detectors respectively. All other mass tolerance setting were kept at default values (see mqpar.xml file for more details). We performed two runs on the data: files from cancer cell line studies searched together (results in ‘txt-celllines’ folder), and files from tumour studies searched together (‘txt-tumours’ folder).

### Publication Abstract
The genomic and transcriptomic landscapes of breast cancer have been extensively studied, but the proteomes of breast tumors are far less characterized. Here, we use high-resolution, high-accuracy mass spectrometry to perform a deep analysis of luminal-type breast cancer progression using clinical breast samples from primary tumors, matched lymph node metastases, and healthy breast epithelia. We used a super-SILAC mix to quantify over 10,000 proteins with high accuracy, enabling us to identify key proteins and pathways associated with tumorigenesis and metastatic spread. We found high expression levels of proteins associated with protein synthesis and degradation in cancer tissues, accompanied by metabolic alterations that may facilitate energy production in cancer cells within their natural environment. In addition, we found proteomic differences between breast cancer stages and minor differences between primary tumors and their matched lymph node metastases. These results highlight the potential of proteomic technology in the elucidation of clinically relevant cancer signatures.

### Keywords
Quantification, Tumours, Cell lines, Reanalysis, Meta-analysis, Public data reuse

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)
EBI

### Submitter
Andrew Jarnuczak

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Antonio Vizcaíno
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)


