### Accession
PXD016060

### Title
Identification of tumor antigens in the HLA peptidome of patient-derived xenograft tumors in mouse

### Description
Personalized cancer immunotherapy targeting patient-specific cancer/testis (CTA) antigens and neoantigens may benefit from large-scale tumor HLA peptidome (immunopeptidome) analysis, which aims to accurately identify antigens presented by tumor cells. While significant efforts have been invested in analyzing the HLA peptidomes of fresh tumors, it is often impossible to obtain sufficient volumes of tumor tissues for comprehensive HLA peptidome characterization. This work attempted to overcome some of these obstacles by using patient-derived xenograft tumors (PDX) in mice as the tissue sources for HLA peptidome analysis. PDX tumor provide a proxy for expansion of the patient tumor by re-grafting them through several passages to immune compromised mice. The HLA peptidomes of human biopsies were compared to those derived from PDX tumors. Larger HLA peptidomes were obtained from the significantly larger PDX tumors as compared to the patient biopsies. The HLA peptidomes of different PDX tumors derived from the same source tumor biopsy were very reproducible, even following subsequent passages to new naïve mice. A large number of CTA-derived HLA peptides were discovered, as well as several neoantigens. Taken together, use of PDX tumors for HLA peptidome analysis serves as a highly expandable and stable source of reproducible and authentic peptidomes, opening up new opportunities for defining large HLA peptidomes when only small tumor biopsies are available. This approach provides a large source for tumor antigens identification potentially useful for personalized immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
The HLA peptidomes of 8 different human tumor biopsies and 19 of their derived PDX tumors were purified by immunoaffinity using the W6/32 pan-HLA mAb, and the purified peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Some of the tumor biopsies and the PDX tumors were analyzed by separate biological replica (when sample sizes were sufficient). The recovered peptides were further desalted and separated from the protein subunits by disposable reverese phase columns. The heavy chains of the HLA of each immunoaffinity-purified sample as well as the tumor extracts taken from the immunoaffinity column's flow-through were recovered and analyzed by trypsin digest, followed by LC-MS/MS of the resulting peptides. All analyses were performed using a Q-Excative-Plus mass spectrometer. Furthermore, exome analysis was performed on the human biopsy to search for cancer-specific point mutation.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed by MaxQuant, and the Andromeda search was performed with both the human and mouse protein databases and the cancer-specific point mutation database derived from exome anlysis data, followed by statistical analysis using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Personalized cancer immunotherapy targeting patient-specific cancer/testis antigens (CTA) and neoantigens may benefit from large-scale tumor human leukocyte antigen (HLA) peptidome (immunopeptidome) analysis, which aims to accurately identify antigens presented by tumor cells. Although significant efforts have been invested in analyzing the HLA peptidomes of fresh tumors, it is often impossible to obtain sufficient volumes of tumor tissues for comprehensive HLA peptidome characterization. This work attempted to overcome some of these obstacles by using patient-derived xenograft tumors (PDX) in mice as the tissue sources for HLA peptidome analysis. PDX tumors provide a proxy for the expansion of the patient tumor by re-grafting them through several passages to immune-compromised mice. The HLA peptidomes of human biopsies were compared with those derived from PDX tumors. Larger HLA peptidomes were obtained from the significantly larger PDX tumors as compared with the patient biopsies. The HLA peptidomes of different PDX tumors derived from the same source tumor biopsy were very reproducible, even following subsequent passages to new na&#xef;ve mice. Many CTA-derived HLA peptides were discovered, as well as several potential neoantigens/variant sequences. Taken together, the use of PDX tumors for HLA peptidome analysis serves as a highly expandable and stable source of reproducible and authentic peptidomes, opening up new opportunities for defining large HLA peptidomes when only small tumor biopsies are available. This approach provides a large source for tumor antigens identification, potentially useful for personalized immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Patient derived xenograft, Tumor antigen, Hla, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Nataly Rijensky

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Department of Biology, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel


