### Accession
PXD033201

### Title
On the compatibility of fish meal replacements in aquafeeds for rainbow trout. A combined metabolomic, proteomic and histological study.

### Description
The sustainable development of modern aquaculture must rely on a significant reduction of the fish meal (FM) used in aquafeed formulations. However, FM substitution with alternative ingredients in diets for carnivorous fish species often showed reduced nutrient absorption, significantly perturbed metabolisms and histological changes at both hepatic and intestinal level. In the present study, adult rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) were fed three different experimental aquafeed formulations. A control diet with higher FM content (27.3%) than two test formulations in which fish meal was substituted with two more sustainable and promising alternatives: insect meal (Hermetia illucens larvae=10.1%, FM=11.6%) and poultry by-products meal (PBM=14.8%; FM=11.7%). Combined metabolomics and proteomics analyses of fish liver, together with histological examination of liver and intestine demonstrated that a well balanced formulation of nutrients in the three diets allowed high metabolic compatibility of either substitutions, paving the way for innovative and sustainable use of novel raw materials for the fish feed industry. Results show that the main metabolic pathways of nutrient absorption and catabolism were essentially unaltered by alternative feed ingredients, and also histological alterations were negligible. It is demonstrated that substitution of fish meal with sustainable alternatives does not impact on fish metabolism, given proper efforts are put in fulfilling nutritional requirements of rainbow trout.

### Sample Protocol
A small portion of liver samples from 6 rainbow trouts  for each group (200 mg) was placed in a 2 ml Eppendorf safe-lock tube and immersed in lysis buffer (0.065 M Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 1% dithiothreitol, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate) in 1:4 (w/v) ratio, plus protease inhibitor cocktail as indicated in the manufacturer instructions. Samples were then subjected to three cycles of bead beating for 5 min at 30 oscillations/s in a mechanical homogenizer, and frozen between homogenization cycles to facilitate tissue disruption and prevent excessive sample heating. Samples were then centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 × g at 4 °C. The final supernatants were collected as the liver protein extracts diluited 1:50 in lysis buffer and quantified. Protein extracts were stored at −80 °C until use. Samples were investigated by shotgun proteomics analysis. More in detail, 100 µg of protein extracts were subjected to on-filter reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units with molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa. After digestion, peptide concentration was extrapolated measuring the absorbance at 280 nm and building a calibration curve with a peptide standard. Protein digests were analyzed by Liquid Chromatography (LC)–tandem Mass Spectrometry (MS/MS) on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnanoLC system (Thermo Scientific). Specifically, 4 µg of each peptide mixtures were concentrated onto a trapping precolumn (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm × 2 cm nanoViper, 3 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a C18 RP column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm × 50 cm nanoViper, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a linear gradient of 245 min from 5% to 37.5% of eluent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) in eluent A (0.1% formic acid). Full-scans were performed in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 at 445.12 m/z, and the 10 most intense ions of every scan were selected and fragmented. Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation, performed at the far side of the C-trap, was used as fragmentation method by applying a 35% value for normalized collision energy, MS/MS resolution of 7.500, an isolation width of m/z 3.0, a Q-value of 0.25, and an activation time of 0.1 ms. Nitrogen was used as collision gas.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification were carried out using Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 1% within the Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4.1.15 Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. Protein and peptide identifications were obtained using as database protein sequences belonging to genus Oncorhynchus, downloaded from UniProt website (https://www.uniprot.org/) on January 2021. Protein and peptide quantification was performed by an MS1-based label-free approach, considering the integrated peak area of the most abundant peak at the apex of the chromatographic profile.

### Publication Abstract
The sustainable development of modern aquaculture must rely on a significant reduction of the fish meal (FM) used in aquafeed formulations. However, FM substitution with alternative ingredients in diets for carnivorous fish species often showed reduced nutrient absorption, significantly perturbed metabolisms, and histological changes at both hepatic and intestinal levels. In the present study, rainbow trout (<i>Oncorhynchus mykiss</i>) were fed three different experimental aquafeeds. A control diet with higher FM content (27.3%) than two test formulations in which FM was substituted with two more sustainable and promising alternatives: insect meal (<i>Hermetia illucens</i> larvae = 10.1%, FM = 11.6%) and poultry by-products meal (PBM = 14.8%; FM = 11.7%). Combined metabolomics and proteomics analyses of fish liver, together with histological examination of liver and intestine demonstrated that a well-balanced formulation of nutrients in the three diets allowed high metabolic compatibility of either substitution, paving the way for a deeper understanding of the impact of novel raw materials for the fish feed industry. Results show that the main metabolic pathways of nutrient absorption and catabolism were essentially unaltered by alternative feed ingredients, and also histological alterations were negligible. It is demonstrated that the substitution of FM with sustainable alternatives does not have a negative impact on fish metabolism, as long as the nutritional requirements of rainbow trout are fulfilled.

### Keywords
Insect meal, Nmr-based metabolomics, Hepatic metabolism, Sustainable aquaculture., Proteomics, Poultry by-products meal

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche s.r.l., Alghero (SS), Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Antonio Palomba

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Pisanu
Porto Conte Ricerche s.r.l., Alghero (SS), Italy


