### Accession
PXD010397

### Title
Quantitative proteomes of Imp2 KO mouse 2-cell-stage embryos

### Description
Data showing the late 2-cell-stage, control embryos (Imp2♀+/♂+) and Imp2-knockout embryos (Imp2♀−/♂+) for HPLC MS/MS analysis. 3 replicates were performed using 330 embryos per group.

### Sample Protocol
After digestion of extracted proteins with trypsin, purified Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 6-plex-labelled peptides were pooled.All samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry, and raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5.

### Data Protocol
The spectra file were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5 to generate the result file.

### Publication Abstract
A number of genes involved in zygotic genome activation (ZGA) have been identified, but the RNA-binding maternal factors that are directly related to ZGA in mice remain unclear. The present study shows that maternal deletion of <i>Igf&#x200a;&#x200a;2bp2</i> (also commonly known as <i>Imp2</i>) in mouse embryos causes early embryonic developmental arrest in vitro at the 2-cell-stage. Transcriptomics and proteomics analyses of 2-cell-stage embryos in mice reveal that deletion of IMP2 downregulates the expression of <i>Ccar1</i> and <i>Rps14</i>, both of which are required for early embryonic developmental competence. IGF2, a target of IMP2, when added in culture media, increases the proportion of wild-type embryos that develop successfully to the blastocyst stage: from 29% in untreated controls to 65% (50 &#xd7; 10<sup>-9</sup> m IGF2). Furthermore, in an experiment related to embryo transfer, foster mothers receiving IGF2-treated embryos deliver more pups per female than females who receive untreated control embryos. In clinically derived human oocytes, the addition of IGF2 to the culture media significantly enhances the proportion of embryos that develop successfully. Collectively, the findings demonstrate that IMP2 is essential for the regulation and activation of genes known to be involved in ZGA and reveal the potential embryonic development-related utility of IGF2 for animal biotechnology and for assisted reproduction in humans.

### Keywords
Imp2, Tmt, 2-cell-stage embryos, Quantitative

### Affiliations
Nanjing medical university
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.


