### Accession
PXD009996

### Title
Proteogenomic systems analysis identifies targeted therapy resistance mechanisms in EGFR-mutated lung cancer

### Description
Cancer precision medicine largely relies on knowledge about genetic aberrations in tumors and next-generation-sequencing studies have shown a high mutational complexity in many cancers. Although a large number of the observed mutations is believed to be not causally linked with cancer, the functional effects of many rare mutations but also of combinations of driver mutations are often unknown. Here, we perform a systems analysis of a model of EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer resistant to targeted therapy that integrates whole exome sequencing, global time-course discovery phosphoproteomics and computational modeling to identify functionally relevant molecular alterations. Our approach allows for a complexity reduction from over 2,000 genetic events potentially involved in mediating resistance to only 44 phosphoproteins and 35 topologically close genetic alterations. We perform single- and combination-drug testing against the predicted phosphoproteins and discovered that targeting of HSPB1, DBNL and AKT1 showed potent anti-proliferative effects overcoming resistance against EGFR-inhibitory therapy. Our approach may therefore be used to complement mutational profiling to identify functionally relevant molecular aberrations and propose combination therapies across cancers.

### Sample Protocol
At least three independent biological experiments were performed. Lung cancer cell lines HCC827 and H1650 grown to 75% confluence were serum starved for 24h. Then, cells were treated with 1µM Gefitinib for 0min, 1min, 5min, 10min and 30min. Subsequently cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed with 7M Urea/2M Thiourea/50mM Tris-HCl (pH8) containing Complete EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics GmbH). 2mg of total protein per sample was reduced and alkylated prior to proteolytic cleavage (100µg trypsin, Promega) overnight. Following acidification, peptide mixes were desalted and dimethyl labeled on OASIS HLB (Waters) cartridges as previously described (Boersema PJ, Raijmakers R, Lemeer S, Mohammed S, Heck AJ. Multiplex peptide stable isotope dimethyl labeling for quantitative proteomics. Nat Protoc 2009;4: 484-94). To compare all time points for each cell line triplets with overlapping time points were prepared, e.g. with 0min (light), 1min (medium) and 5min (heavy) in the first and 5min (light), 10min (medium) and 30min (heavy) in the second triplett. Labeled peptides were eluted with 0.1% FA/80% ACN, concentrated in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C. Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides was performed using a previously described TiO2 protocol (Thingholm TE, Jorgensen TJ, Jensen ON, Larsen MR. Highly selective enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using titanium dioxide. Nat Protoc 2006;1: 1929-35) with modifications. 160mg/mL GA/80% ACN/2% TFA was added 1:1 to the labeled peptides solution and pooled as mentioned above. Pooled peptide mixes were incubated with 500mg/mL TiO2 slurry (GL Sciences Inc.) for 2h. TiO2-peptide solution was loaded onto a TiO2 micro-column and washed. Phosphopeptides were eluted three times with 30µL of 0.6% ammonia solution and acidified with 0.9% TFA. The procedure was repeated with the flow through. The first flow through was incubated with 500mg/mL TiO2 slurry for 1h, the second, third and fourth was incubated with 100mg/mL TiO2 slurry once for overnight and after that twice for 1h for total of five TiO2 incubations for each sample. All eluents from the same sample were pooled, concentrated in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C. Samples were desalted using C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in technical replicates using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and a U3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex) coupled to a 50cm long by 75 micron internal diameter EASYspray column. Samples were resolved using a 4 hour gradient with the mass spectrometer run in Data Dependent Analysis mode in which the 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. The mass spectrometer settings were as follows: Precursor resolution: 70000; AGC target setting for MS1:  3e6; AGC target setting for MS2:  5e4; Maximum fill time: 250 ms; MSMS resolution: 17500; AGC target 100000' Maximum fill time was 120 ms; Isolation window: 3 Da; NCE: 30; underfill ratio 10%; m/z range used for MS scan acquisition:  350 to 1500 m/z; isolation width:   1.5 m/z . Data were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot 2.5.1 (MatrixScience). Search parameters in Mascot (via PD) were as follows – Enzyme (trypsin), Dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY), Dimethyl light, intermediate or heavy of (K) and (N-term); Static modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); Precursor  Mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment Mass tolerance 0.02 Da; Missed Cleavages: 2.  Data were searched against the UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome version 2.5 (retrieved 08/12/2013). Site localization probabilities were calculated by PhosphoRS 3.154 which is implemented in Proteome Discoverer. The statistical programming language R (https://www.r-project.org) was used for subsequent data analysis and visualization. Peptide-spectrum matches were filtered at 1% False Discovery Rate (sequence identification); the list of phosphorylated peptides was then further filtered to have a site localization score of at least 0.75. Mass spectrometer and subsequent analyzing settings were the same for untreated non-phosphopeptide-enriched samples but missed the phospho specific settings (Qex01_SVH_180511_DenisTreue_1_H1650_HCC_LS_I_001, Qex01_SVH_180511_DenisTreue_1_H1650_HCC_LS_II_003).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer precision medicine largely relies on knowledge about genetic aberrations in tumors and next-generation-sequencing studies have shown a high mutational complexity in many cancers. Although a large number of the observed mutations is believed to be not causally linked with cancer, the functional effects of many rare mutations but also of combinations of driver mutations are often unknown. Here, we perform a systems analysis of a model of EGFR-mutated nonsmall cell lung cancer resistant to targeted therapy that integrates whole exome sequencing, global time-course discovery phosphoproteomics and computational modeling to identify functionally relevant molecular alterations. Our approach allows for a complexity reduction from over 2,000 genetic events potentially involved in mediating resistance to only 44 phosphoproteins and 35 topologically close genetic alterations. We perform single- and combination-drug testing against the predicted phosphoproteins and discovered that targeting of HSPB1, DBNL and AKT1 showed potent antiproliferative effects overcoming resistance against EGFR-inhibitory therapy. Our approach may therefore be used to complement mutational profiling to identify functionally relevant molecular aberrations and propose combination therapies across cancers.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Proteomic, System biology, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute of Pathology, Berlin, Germany.
Charité Berlin

### Submitter
Daniel Heim

### Lab Head
Dr Frederick Klauschen
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute of Pathology, Berlin, Germany.


