### Accession
PXD004272

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the immune response to dsRNA in B.dorsalis

### Description
Proteomic analysis of a mixed sample from 8, 12 and 24 h (early set) post first exposure to dsRNA and a sample from 5 days (late set) post first exposure to dsRNA to identify differentially expressed proteins which were responsible to the immune response to dsRNA in B.dorsalis.

### Sample Protocol
After extracted, total protein (100μg) was taken out of each sample solution and then the protein was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with the ratio of protein : trypsin =30 : 1 at 37°C for 16 hours. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB and processed according to the manufacture’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems).SCX chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6×250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1mL/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5-60% buffer B (25mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 27 min, 60-100% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100% buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min, the final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 μg/μl on average. 10μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4min, then the 35min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 to 35% B (95%ACN, 0.1%FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 60%, then, followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80%, and maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, and finally return to 5% in 1 min.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a mass tolerance of 0.1 Da(ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and 0.05 Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavages in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides at the 95% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. And each confident protein identification involve at least one unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Exogenous double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) can trigger gene silencing through the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. Our previous research established that Bactrocera dorsalis can block RNAi after an initial priming of exposure to dsRNA. However, the mechanism underlying this phenomenon is not yet fully understood. Here, we demonstrate that fatty acid biosynthesis and metabolism pathways play important roles in the blockage of RNAi induced by dsRNA priming. The ratio of linoleic acid (LA) to arachidonic acid (AA) was significantly increased in the hemolymph of B. dorsalis following dsRNA priming, and further, the endocytosis of dsRNA into the midgut cells of B. dorsalis was inhibited in these samples. The expression levels of most genes involved in the fatty acid biosynthesis and metabolism pathways were altered following priming with dsRNA. Furthermore, altering the composition of fatty acids via the injection of AA can facilitate the uptake of ingested dsRNA into the midgut cells of Drosophila melanogaster and successfully induce an RNAi effect, which cannot be achieved via feeding in fruit flies. Our results suggest that polyunsaturated fatty acids are involved in the regulation of the dsRNA-endocytic ability in B. dorsalis.

### Keywords
Dsrna, B.dorsalis, Rnai, Immune, Itraq

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agriculture University
College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, People’s Republic of China.

### Submitter
Xiaolong Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaolong Dong
College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei, People’s Republic of China.


