### Accession
PXD012347

### Title
Natural variation of H3K27me3 determines genes important for cell fate in the unicellular eukaryotic model Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Description
In multicellular organisms, tri-methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) was shown to be deposited by Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) to establish and maintain silencing, critical for cell fate and developmentally regulated processes. PRC2 complex is absent in both yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. pombe which initially suggested that PRC2 arose with the emergence of multicellularity. However, its discovery in several microalgae questions its role in this important class of organisms. Here, we show using mutants of the homologue of catalytic unit of PRC2, enhancer of zeste E(z) in the model diatom P. tricornutum (Pt), which presents different morphotypes (fusiform, triradiate, oval and cruciform) that Pt E(z) is responsible of di and tri-methylation of lysine 27. Indeed, H3K27me3 depletion causes the distortion of the morphology providing evidence for a role of H3K27me3 in cell differentiation in unicellular species. H3K27me3 genome wide profiling in fusiform and triradiate further revealed genes important for cell identity. These results suggest a role of PRC2 and its associated mark in cell fate in unicellular species and their ancestral function in a broad evolutionary context.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent histone purifications recovered from Pt 18.6 wild type cells as well as enhancer of zeste knockout mutant Del6 in Pt 18.6 genetic background were simultaneously separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal blue (LabSafe Gel Blue GBiosciences). Three gel slices were excised for each purification and in-gel digested by using trypsin/LysC (Promega). Peptide extracted from each set were pooled and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a TripleTOFTM 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). Peptides were first  trapped onto a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 2.5 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 µm C18 column (nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific) regulated to 50°C and with a linear gradient from 1% to 30% buffet B (100 MeCN in 0.085% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min over 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in PRM top30 high sensitivity mode with 100 ms acquisition time for MS1 and MS2 scans respectively with included precursor mass list for 600 sec.

### Data Protocol
The PRM data were analyzed using Skyline version 3.7.0.11317 MacCoss Lab Software, Seattle, WA; https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view, fragment ions for each targeted mass were extracted and peak areas were integrated. The peptide areas were log2 transformed and the mean log2- area was normalized by the mean area of peptide STDLLIR using software R version 3.1.0. On each peptide a linear model was used to estimate the mean fold change between the conditions, its 95% confidence interval and the p-value of the two sided associated t-test. The p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k27me2, H3k27me3, Enhancer of zeste, Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


