### Accession
PXD038206

### Title
Small intestinal submucosa-derived extracellular matrix as heterotopic scaffold for cardiovascular applications

### Description
Structural cardiac lesions are often surgically repaired using prosthetic patches, which can be of biological or synthetic nature. In the current clinical scenario, amongst biological patches, are gaining very much interest those derived from decellularization of xenogeneic scaffold. These patches maintain their natural architecture of the extracellular matrix (ECM) after the removal of their native cells. Moreover, once implanted in the host, they promote tissue regeneration and repair, encourage angiogenesis, migration, proliferation, and host’s cell differentiation mechanisms. Finally, in the host, decellularized xenogeneic patches, after cells repopulation, reduce immuno-mediated response against the graft thus preventing device failure. Small intestinal submucosa (SIS) from porcine showed such properties in alternative clinical scenarios. The US FDA approved its use in humans for urogenital procedures, such as hernia repair, cystoplasties, ureteral reconstructions, stress incontinence, Peyronie’s disease, penile chordee, and urethral reconstruction for hypospadias and strictures. In addition, it has also been successfully used for the skeletal muscle tissue reconstruction in young patients. However, for cardiovascular applications, the results are still controversial. In this study, we aimed to validate our decellularization protocols for SIS, which is based on the use of Tergitol 15 S 9, by comparing it to our previous and efficient method (Triton X 100) which is not more available on the market. For both treatments, we evaluated the preservation of the ECM ultrastructure, mechanics, biocompatibility and final bioinductive capabilities. The overall analysis shows that the SIS tissue is macroscopically distinguishable into two regions, smooth or wrinkle, which are equivalent for ultrastructure and biochemical profile. Furthermore, Tergitol 15 S 9 treatment do not modify the mechanics of the tissue, resulting comparable to the native one and confirming the superior preservation of the collagen fibers. In summary, our study showed that the SIS decellularized with Tergitol 15 S 9 guarantees higher performance compared to Triton X 100 in all the fields of characterization explored and for all the components of the SIS: wrinkled and smooth.

### Sample Protocol
All the experiments have been performed in a labeling free setting. Biopsies from tissues were lysate in RIPA buffer implemented with protease inhibitors. Thirty micrograms of total protein lysate were precipitate with cold acetone and then reduced and alkylated in a solution of 6M Guanidine-HCl, 5mM TCEP, and 55mM chloroacetamide. Peptides were obtained digesting proteins with LysC (WAKO) for 3h at 37°C and with the endopeptidase sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Collected peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique. Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a home-made chromatographic column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, 350mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size, using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 120 min after loading were used for proteome samples, with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. After sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data dependent Top20 mode with sub sequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 15,000 at 200m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.6Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry, all acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt Sus scrofa database including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 1 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The LFQ intensityes were logarithmized and data visualization was done in the statistical environment R.

### Publication Abstract
Structural cardiac lesions are often surgically repaired using prosthetic patches, which can be biological or synthetic. In the current clinical scenario, biological patches derived from the decellularization of a xenogeneic scaffold are gaining more interest as they maintain the natural architecture of the extracellular matrix (ECM) after the removal of the native cells and remnants. Once implanted in the host, these patches can induce tissue regeneration and repair, encouraging angiogenesis, migration, proliferation, and host cell differentiation. Lastly, decellularized xenogeneic patches undergo cell repopulation, thus reducing host immuno-mediated response against the graft and preventing device failure. Porcine small intestinal submucosa (pSIS) showed such properties in alternative clinical scenarios. Specifically, the US FDA approved its use in humans for urogenital procedures such as hernia repair, cystoplasties, ureteral reconstructions, stress incontinence, Peyronie's disease, penile chordee, and even urethral reconstruction for hypospadias and strictures. In addition, it has also been successfully used for skeletal muscle tissue reconstruction in young patients. However, for cardiovascular applications, the results are controversial. In this study, we aimed to validate our decellularization protocol for SIS, which is based on the use of Tergitol 15&#xa0;S 9, by comparing it to our previous and efficient method (Triton X 100), which is not more available in the market. For both treatments, we evaluated the preservation of the ECM ultrastructure, biomechanical features, biocompatibility, and final bioinductive capabilities. The overall analysis shows that the SIS tissue is macroscopically distinguishable into two regions, one smooth and one wrinkle, equivalent to the ultrastructure and biochemical and proteomic profile. Furthermore, Tergitol 15&#xa0;S 9 treatment does not modify tissue biomechanics, resulting in comparable to the native one and confirming the superior preservation of the collagen fibers. In summary, the present study showed that the SIS decellularized with Tergitol 15&#xa0;S 9 guarantees higher performances, compared to the Triton X 100 method, in all the explored fields and for both SIS regions: smooth and wrinkle.

### Keywords
Tergitol, Decellularization, Small intestinal submucosa (sis), Extracellular matrix (ecm), Triton x 100, Cardiac repair, Cardiac surgery

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy

### Submitter
Anna Maria Tolomeo

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Maria Tolomeo
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy


