### Accession
PXD008884

### Title
Data in support of the equine mesenchymal stem cell surface proteome for mining for new surface markers

### Description
Regenerative medicine in aims to restore structure and function to tissues or organs damaged by time, disease or injury. Stem cells have great potential for tissue repair and regeneration, why they are intensely investigated in equine clinical research. However, before any type of stem cell can be applied in practice, it is crucial that the isolated stem cells have been definitively characterised by a set of specific functional or phenotypic markers. This project includes a surface mapping of equine mesenchymal (MSC) stem cell surface proteome.

### Sample Protocol
AT-MSC were isolated from adipose tissue(AT) and BM-MSC were isolated from sternal bone marrow (BM) aspirates.MSC cells were isolated to high ourity and either used for cell differentiation into mesodermal lineages (chondrogenic and osteogenic), biotinylation of cell surface proteins. Cell surface proteins were biotinylated and isolated according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce cell surface protein isolation kit, Thermo Fisher scientific, catalog no. 89881). Proteins were isolated by SDS PAGE and iplated into one single gelband subjected to in-gel digestion. The peptides were analyzed by nanoflowLC-MS using QExactive HF and 75cm ID columns and 40min gradients.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed by MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 using equine reference proteome data base (Uniprot; May 2017) and further processed by Peresus v. 1.6.0.2. All provided into folder MaxQ_LFQ_txt.zip MS RAW data is named BM6,9,10 and AT6,10,11 (n=3) for biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Horse stem cells membrane

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University Laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry


