### Accession
PXD026386

### Title
Alternative splicing modulation mediated by G-quadruplex structures in MALAT1 lncRNA

### Description
MALAT1, an abundant lncRNA specifically localized to nuclear speckles, regulates alternative-splicing (AS). The molecular basis of its role in AS remains poorly understood. Here, we report three conserved, thermodynamically stable, parallel RNA-G-quadruplexes (rG4s) present in the 3’ region of MALAT1 which regulates this function. Using rG4 domain specific RNA-pull-down followed by mass-spectrometry, RNA-immuno-precipitation and imaging, we demonstrate the rG4 dependent localization of Nucleolin (NCL) and Nucleophosmin (NPM) to nuclear speckles. Specific G-to-A mutations that abolish rG4 structures, results in the localization loss of both the proteins from speckles. Functionally, disruption of rG4 in MALAT1 phenocopies NCL knockdown resulting in altered pre-mRNA splicing of endogenous genes. These results reveal a central role of rG4s within the 3’ region of MALAT1 orchestrating AS.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins interacting with RNAs Q1, Q2, Q3 and their mutated counter parts obtained from the pulldown experiment were loaded in 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie blue G250 (Biorad). For each sample, bands higher than 10 kDa were excised into small pieces and placed into 1.5 ml tube. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed according to the standard protocol [PMID: 21931718]. Briefly, gel pieces were destained and shrinked, protein reduction was performed by treatment with 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 degrees Celsius for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) by incubation in dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Protein digestion were performed using trypsin (V511A, Promega) at 37 degrees Celsius overnight and extraction of tryptic peptides were carried out using 60% acetonitrile with 1% TFA. Peptide clean-up was performed using C18 Ziptip (Merck) as per manufacturer’s protocol before LC-MS acquisition. Samples were acquired on a quadrupole-TOF hybrid mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 6600, SCIEX, USA) coupled to a nano-LC system (Eksigent NanoLC-425, SCIEX, USA).For each sample, peptides were loaded on a trap-column (ChromXP C18CL 5 μm 120 Å, Eksigent) where desalting was performed using 0.1% formic acid in water with a flow rate of 10 μl per minutes for 10 min. Peptides were then separated on a reverse-phase C18 analytical column (ChromXP C18, 3 μm 120 Å, Eksigent) in a 57 minutes gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 μl/minute.Data acquisition was performed using Analyst TF 1.7.1 Software (SCIEX) using optimimized source parameters. Ion spray voltage was set to 5.5 kV, 25 psi for the curtain gas, 20 psi for the nebulizer gas and 250 °C as source temperature. For DDA, a 1.8 s instrument cycle was repeated in high sensitivity mode throughout the whole gradient, consisting of a full scan MS spectrum (350–1250 m/z) with an accumulation time of 0.25 s, followed by 30 MS/MS experiments (100–1500 m/z) with 0.050 s accumulation time each, on MS precursors with charge state 2 + to 5 + exceeding a 120 cps threshold. Rolling collision energy was used and former target ions were excluded for 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by searching the .wiff format DDA mode LC-MS/MS acquisition files against UniProtKB human FASTA database (Swissprot, 20394 proteins entries) using ProteinpilotTM Software 5.0.1 (SCIEX). Paragon algorithm was used to get protein group identities. The search parameters were set as follows: sample type- identification, cysteine alkylation-iodoacetamide, digestion-trypsin. Biological modification was enabled in ID focus. The search effort was set to ‘Thorough ID’ and detected protein threshold [ Unused ProtScore (Conf)] was set to >0.05 (10.0%). False discovery rate (FDR) analysis was enabled. Only proteins identified with 1% global FDR were considered.

### Publication Abstract
MALAT1, an abundant lncRNA specifically localized to nuclear speckles, regulates alternative-splicing (AS). The molecular basis of its role in AS remains poorly understood. Here, we report three conserved, thermodynamically stable, parallel RNA-G-quadruplexes (rG4s) present in the 3' region of MALAT1 which regulates this function. Using rG4 domain-specific RNA-pull-down followed by mass-spectrometry, RNA-immuno-precipitation, and imaging, we demonstrate the rG4 dependent localization of Nucleolin (NCL) and Nucleophosmin (NPM) to nuclear speckles. Specific G-to-A mutations that abolish rG4 structures, result in the localization loss of both the proteins from speckles. Functionally, disruption of rG4 in MALAT1 phenocopies NCL knockdown resulting in altered pre-mRNA splicing of endogenous genes. These results reveal a central role of rG4s within the 3' region of MALAT1 orchestrating AS.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, G-quadruplex, Malat1, Lncrna, Nucleolin

### Affiliations
CSIR-Institute of Genomics & Integrative Biology, Mathura Road, Delhi 110025, India.

### Submitter
Arpita Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Souvik Maiti
CSIR-Institute of Genomics & Integrative Biology, Mathura Road, Delhi 110025, India.


