### Accession
PXD031228

### Title
Vascular bed systematic profiling unravels endothelial and glycocalyx dysregulations in experimental high salt hypertension

### Description
Objective: Considerable evidence links dietary salt intake with the development of hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, and increased risk of stroke and coronary heart disease. Despite extensive epidemiological and basic science interrogation of the relationship between high salt (HS) intake and blood pressure, it remains unclear how HS impacts endothelial cell (EC) and vascular structure in vivo.  This study aims to uncover the HS-induced vascular pathologies using a differential systemic decellularization in vivo (DISDIVO) approach.

Approach and Results: We performed systematic molecular characterization of the endothelial glycocalyx (eGC) and EC proteomes in mice with HS (8%) diet-induced hypertension versus healthy control animals. Isolation of eGC and ECs compartments was achieved using the DISDIVO approach. Altered protein expression in hypertensive compared to normal mice was characterized by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Proteomic results from eGC fractions revealed a significant downregulation of eGC and associated proteins in HS diet-induced hypertensive mice. Among 1696 proteins identified in this group, 723 were markedly downregulated while 168 were upregulated, bioinformatic analysis indicates critical damage and derangement of eGC layer. In the ECs fraction HS-induced hypertension significantly altered protein mediators of contractility, metabolism, mechanotransduction, renal functions, and coagulation cascades. In particular, we observed dysregulation of integrin subunits alpha2, alpha2b, and alpha5, which relay external signals to the actin cytoskeleton.

Conclusion: These findings provide novel molecular insight on HS-induced structure changes in eGC and ECs that may increase cardiovascular risk and potentially guide the development of new diagnostics and therapeutic interventions.


### Sample Protocol
Raw samples were concentrated with ultrafiltration unit (3K MWCO) at 5000 ×g for 1 h to the final volume of 200 µl. Acetone precipitation was performed using ice-cold acetone (1:4 v/v) to desalt the sample solutions. After 4 h incubation at -20°C, samples were pelleted down by centrifugation at 15000 ×g for 15 min at 4°C. For in-solution digestion of DISDIVO fractions, both glycocalyx and EC pelleted fractions were resuspended with 250 µl of 100 mM ammonium acetate. 10% SDC was then added to the samples to the final concentration of 1%. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) to the final concentration of 10 mM for 30 min at 60°C. The proteins were subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide to the final concentration of 20 mM for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Samples were then diluted 2-fold with 100 mM ammonium acetate prior to tryptic digestion (1:50 w/w). The enzymatic reaction was carried out overnight for 16 h, and the reaction was quenched by an addition of formic acid (FA) to the final concentration of 5%. To remove SDC prior to mass spectrometry, digested protein samples were then vortex and centrifuged at 12000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatant was then collected into a new tube. Digested peptides were desalted using a C18 Sep-pack 50 mg cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA). Eluates were finally dried in the vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).  Liquid Chromatography Tandem-Mass Spectrometry For LC-MS/MS, dried sample fractions were carefully reconstituted in mobile phase A (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) before peptide analysis by LC-MS/ MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Inc, Bremen, Germany).18,19 Spray was generated using a Michrom Thermo CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker-Michrom, Inc, Auburn, AL) working at 1.5 kV. Peptide separation was performed using a reverse-phase Acclaim PepMap RSL column (75 μm ID × 15 cm, 2-μm particle size; Thermo Scientific, Inc) maintained at 35°C and working at 300 nL/min. The 60-minute gradient used for peptide separation was as follows: 3% mobile phase B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) for 1 minute, 3% to 35% for 47 minutes, 35% to 50% for 4 minutes, 80% for 6 seconds, 80% (isocratic) for 78 seconds, 80% to 3% for 6 seconds, and then maintained at 3% (isocratic) for 6.5 minutes. Orbitrap Elite data acquisition was performed in positive mode using Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc, Bremen, Germany) alternating between full Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FT-MS; 350−2000 m/z, resolution 60000, with 1 μscan per spectrum) and FT-MS/MS (150−2000 m/z, resolution 30000, with 1 μscan per spectrum). Fragmentation of the 10 most intense precursors with charge >+2 and isolated within a 2 Da window was performed using high-energy collisiona.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from 9 replicates per group were analyzed. Peptides from proteomic samples were identified and quantified (label-free) from MS/MS spectra by searching against the recent Uniprot mouse protein database (2021–10, 88,840 protein sequences) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.1. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues, whereas variable modifcation was oxidation at methionine residues. Only two missed trypsin cleavage was allowed, and peptide mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da were allowed for MS/MS ions search. The target false discovery rate (FDR) was analysed by performing a concatenated decoy database search. Total number of proteins for subsequence bioinformatics analysis were filtered using a q-value threshold of 0.01 (false discovery rate of 1%).

### Publication Abstract
Vascular dysfunction underlies the onset and progression of many life-threatening diseases, highlighting the need for improved understanding of its molecular basis. Here, we present differential systemic decellularization in&#xa0;vivo (DISDIVO), a protocol that enables systemic and independent study of the molecular changes in each vasculature layer in murine models of disease. We describe steps for anesthesia, perfusion surgery, and exsanguination. We then detail detachment and collection of glycocalyx and decellularization and collection of both endothelial and smooth muscle cells. For complete details on the use and execution of this protocol, please refer to Serra et&#xa0;al., Gallart-Palau et&#xa0;al., and Vinaiphat et&#xa0;al.<sup>1</sup><sup>,</sup><sup>2</sup><sup>,</sup><sup>3</sup>.

### Keywords
Cardiovascular disease; endothelial cell dysfunction; glycocalyx; high salt diet; hypertension; mass spectrometry; proteomics  

### Affiliations
Siu Kwan SZE, PhD, Associate professor School of Biological Sciences Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry  Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551  **Current affilliation Newman S-K. Sze, PhD Professor, Department of Health Sciences CIHR Tier1 Canada Research Chair in Mechanisms of Health and Disease  Brock University | Faculty of Applied Health Sciences Niagara Region   | 1812 Sir Isaac Brock Way | St. Catharines, ON L2S 3A1
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
SoFong Cam Ngan

### Lab Head
Dr Sze Sui Kwan, Newman
Siu Kwan SZE, PhD, Associate professor School of Biological Sciences Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry  Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551  **Current affilliation Newman S-K. Sze, PhD Professor, Department of Health Sciences CIHR Tier1 Canada Research Chair in Mechanisms of Health and Disease  Brock University | Faculty of Applied Health Sciences Niagara Region   | 1812 Sir Isaac Brock Way | St. Catharines, ON L2S 3A1


