### Accession
PXD017714

### Title
IP of endogenous SUMO2/3 in HEK293 cells

### Description
Aim of the experiments was to identify endogenously SUMO2/3 modified proteins in HEK293 cells. Cells were treated with dexamethasone (dex) or vehicle (etoh) and with heatshock (+43C, HS) or normal growth temperature (+37C, non-HS). Cells were induced with tetracycline to express BirA*-GR (glucocorticoid receptor) to express GR at sufficient levels to assess effect of GR activation on protein SUMOylation.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells expressing in a tet-inducible manner BirA*-GRwt were grown on 15-cm dishes (3 x 10^6 cells per dish) for 3 days after which the medium was replaced with steroid-depleted medium. After growing in steroid-depleted medium for 24 h, cells were treated with 30 ng/ml tet for the next 22 h, after which 100 nM Dex or vehicle (EtOH) was added for 2 h before collecting. Cells were also exposed to heatshock temperature(+43C, HS) or to normal growth temperature (+37C, non-HS) 2h before collecting. When collecting, 20 mM final concentration of N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, E3876, Sigma-Aldrich) was first added to the medium to inhibit de-SUMOylation. Cells were collected by centrifugation, washed with ice-cold PBS supplemented with 10 mM NEM, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70C until further processing.   For IP, ~5 x 10^8 cells were lysed, lysates sonicated with a probe sonicator and supplemented with 50 mM dithiothreitol. Lysates were boiled at 97C for 10 min, diluted with RIPA buffer and supplemented with 10 mM NEM. Then, lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min at 4C and supernatants cleared by filtration through 0.45 µm filter. SUMO2/3 antibody (produced in-house) and normal mouse IgG (Life Technologies) were coupled to protein G -agarose beads (5015952001, Roche Diagnostics) and lysates incubated with antibody-coupled beads 16 h. Approximately 10 mg of antibody or IgG was used per sample. Beads were washed and proteins eluted twice with 0.5 mg/ml SUMO2 epitope peptide (IRFRFDGQPI, Panatecs Biochemical Solutions, Germany).   Eluates were combined and proteins precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid, washed twice with acetone and resuspended to 60 µl 2 x SDS sample buffer supplemented with 200 mM dithiothreitol. An aliquot (8 µl) was used for Western immunoblots to check the quality of the samples and the rest frozen at  20C until mass spectrometric analysis.   Before analysis with MS, eluates were neutralized with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Cysteines were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were trypsinized to peptides by adding 1 µg trypsin (Promega). After overnight incubation at 37C, samples were quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid, purified with C18 MicroSpinColumns (The Nest Group Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and re-dissolved in 30 µl buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 1% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water).   MS analyses were performed on Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer coupled to EASY-nLC II -system using the Xcalibur version 2.7.0 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptide mixture was loaded into a C18-packed pre-column (EASY-Column™ 2 cm x 100 µm, 5 µm, 120 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A and then to C18-packed analytical column (EASY-Column™ 10 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, 120 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sixty-minute linear gradient at the constant flow rate of 300 nl/min from 5 to 35% of buffer B (98% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water) was used to separate the peptides. Analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer™ software with SEQUEST search engine (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Thermo .raw files were searched against the human component of the UniProt-database complemented with trypsin, BSA and tag sequences. Trypsin was used as the enzyme specificity. Search parameters specified a precursor ion tolerance of 15 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da, with up to two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as static modification whereas oxidation of methionine was used as dynamic modification. Peptide FDR was calculated using Percolator node of software and set to <0.01. Spectral counting was used to produce semiquantitative data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Hek293, Heatshock, Sumo2/3

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Finland
University of Eastern Finland, Institute of Biomedicine

### Submitter
Joanna Lempiäinen

### Lab Head
Dr Jorma J Palvimo
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Finland


