### Accession
PXD004567

### Title
High-throughput Proteomics Reveals the Unicellular Roots of Animal Phosphosignaling and Cell Differentiation

### Description
Cell-specific regulation of protein levels and activity is essential for the distribution of functions among multiple cell types in animals. The finding that many genes involved in these regulatory processes have a premetazoan origin raises the intriguing possibility that the mechanisms required for spatially regulated cell differentiation evolved prior to the appearance of animals. Here, we use high-throughput proteomics in Capsaspora owczarzaki, a close unicellular relative of animals, to characterize the dynamic proteome and phosphoproteome profiles of three temporally distinct cell types in this premetazoan species. We show that life-cycle transitions are linked to extensive proteome and phosphoproteome remodeling and that they affect key genes involved in animal multicellularity, such as transcription factors and tyrosine kinases. The observation of shared features between Capsaspora and metazoans indicates that elaborate and conserved phosphosignaling and proteome regulation supported temporal cell-type differentiation in the unicellular ancestor of animals.

### Sample Protocol
Between 8x10e8 and 25x10e8 cells were collected by centrifugation 10 min at 5000g at 4ºC and washed once in sterile PBS1x. The cell pellet was resuspended in 1.5ml of 50mM TrisHCl pH8, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% deoxycholic acid, 5mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 1mM MgCl2, 1mM CaCl2 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Complete Mini Tablet and PhoSTOP tablet (Roche)). Samples were sonicated three times for 30 seconds at 10% amplitude in a Branson Sonifier 250 with a microtip (Branson Ultrasonics). Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 20.000g at 4ºC in order to remove cellular debris.  Cell lysates were precipitated with six volumes of cold acetone at -20 ºC overnight. Pellets were resuspended with 6 M Urea 200 mM NH4HCO3 and sonicated in cycles of 30 sec for 15 min. Proteins were reduced with DL-Dithiothreitol 1 h at 37ºC, alkylated with iodoacetamide 30 min at 20ºC in dark. The resulting protein extract was then diluted 1:6 with 200 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:10; w:w) at 37 ºC overnight. Trypsin activity was quenched by the addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 10%.  Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using an offline immobilized metal affinity TiO2 protocol. Briefly, microcolumns were prepared by placing a small plug of C8 material (3M Empore C8 extraction disk) into the end of a GeLoader tip (Eppendorf). TiO2 beads were rinsed with washing buffer (WB: 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid + 80 % acetonitrile in water), then suspended in loading buffer (LB: 6 % trifluoroacetic acid + 80 % acetonitrile in water) in a concentration 10 µg/µl. A slurry-suspension of TiO2 (50 µl) was packed in the GeLoader tip by centrifugation at 100 x g. Then, 250 µg of peptides were dissolved in LB (100 µl) and they were loaded into the TiO2 microcolumn by centrifugation (100 x g). Microcolumns were rinsed with LB and subsequently with WB. Phospho-enriched peptides were  eluted from the microcolumns with 5 % NH3, followed by an elution with 2 % FA + 80 % acetonitrile in water. Eluted peptides were acidified with 30 µl of 20 % FA in water.   Phosphotyrosine-containing peptides were enriched by immunoaffinity purification. Briefly, protein G bound to agarose beads (30 µl, Calbiochem) was incubated with a mix of three anti-pTyr antibodies (PT66, Sigma; PY100, Cell Signaling Techn; and 4G10, Millipore; 4 µg each) and 250 µl of IP buffer (100 mM Tris, 1% Nonidet P-40, pH 7.4) for 8 h at 4 ºC. Antibody-conjugated protein G agarose was rinsed three times with 400 µl IP buffer. Then, 3 mg of tryptic peptides dissolved in 1.5 ml of IP buffer were added to the loaded agarose beads, and incubated with rotation overnight at 4ºC. Conjugated protein G was rinsed with 400 µl IP buffer and four times with 400 µl 100mM Tris pH 7.4. Enriched phosphotyrosine-containing peptides were eluted with 100 µl 100 mM glycine pH 2. A further elution step was performed with 100 µl 0.1% TFA.   Preceding the LC-MSMS analysis both peptide and phosphopeptide samples were purified by reverse phase columns. The resulting peptide mixtures were dried using a speed-vac system.  Samples were analyzed in a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled to an EasyLC (Proxeon) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 and 3 µm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co). Chromatographic gradients from 93 % buffer A, 7 % buffer B to 65% buffer A, 35% buffer B in 360 min for the proteome and phosphoproteome, and in 120 min for phosphotyrosine samples. In both cases the flow rate was set at 250 nl/min. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.5 kV and source temperature at 200 °C. An internal calibration was also performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The instrument was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control was set to 1E6, and dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides were both activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the twenty most intense multiple charged ions were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35% (ion count threshold = 5000). Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation were acquired in the ion trap, AGC was set to 5E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z and maximum injection time of 50 ms was used. Neutral loss masses of 32.7, 49, 65.4 and 98.0 m/z among the three most intense fragment ions, was set to trigger a multi-stage activation acquisition in the phosphorylation database. For the particular case of phosphotyrosine-enriched samples neutral losses of 80, 40 and 26.7 m/z were also considered.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was analyzed using Mascot search engine (v2.3, Matrix Science) for peptide and TiO2-enriched phosphopeptide identification, and Andromeda search engine (MaxQuant v1.4.0.5) for antibody-based enrichment of pTyr-containing peptides. Data was searched against an in-house generated database based on Capsaspora owczarzaki genome v3. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three miscleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminal were defined as variable modification. In the case of the phospho-enriched samples, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr were also considered as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fix modification in all cases. All identified peptides were filtered using a 5 % FDR threshold (peptide level). Identified pTyr-containing peptides were quantified using the area under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms (MS1) (Schilling et al., 2014). In the analysis of Tyrosine Kinase (TK) phosphorylation, only pTyr residues present in the TyrK catalytic domain were considered, as a proxy of TK activation by autophosphorylation.  Peptide and phosphopeptide (pSer, pThr) areas were extracted from the peptide features using the feature detection algorithm implemented in Progenesis (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics Inc.). Normalized abundances of unique peptides were used to estimate protein quantities, and significant differences in protein levels were evaluated using an ANOVA model.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-specific regulation of protein levels and activity is essential for the distribution of functions among multiple cell types in animals. The finding that many genes involved in these regulatory processes have a premetazoan origin raises the intriguing possibility that the mechanisms required for spatially regulated cell differentiation evolved prior to the appearance of animals. Here, we use high-throughput proteomics in Capsaspora owczarzaki, a close unicellular relative of animals, to characterize the dynamic proteome and phosphoproteome profiles of three temporally distinct cell types in this premetazoan species. We&#xa0;show that life-cycle transitions are linked to extensive proteome and phosphoproteome remodeling and that they affect key genes involved in animal multicellularity, such as transcription factors and tyrosine kinases. The observation of shared features between Capsaspora and metazoans indicates that elaborate and conserved phosphosignaling and proteome regulation supported temporal cell-type differentiation in the unicellular ancestor of animals.

### Keywords
Capsaspora, Metazoa

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona


