### Accession
PXD021612

### Title
A suite of tools for the study of tryptophan C-mannosylation - additional point mutants

### Description
Tryptophan C-mannosylation is an unusual co-translational protein modification performed by metazoans and apicomplexan parasites. The prevalence of this modification and its biological function is poorly understood, with progress being hampered by a dearth of tools for its study. Here, we engineer of a simple yeast system to enable the production of a diverse array of proteins with and without the modification to interrogate its effect on protein stability and function. This system also facilitated mutagenesis studies, to elucidate what features of the glycosyltransferase and its substrates are crucial for catalysis, and expedited the generation and thorough characterisation of monoclonal antibodies against the protein modification. These antibodies empowered proteomic analyses of the brain C-glycome by enriching for peptides possessing tryptophan C-mannosylation, which revealed new modification sites on difficult-to-study proteins throughout the secretory pathway on both conventional and non-canonical consensus sequences.

### Sample Protocol
in-gel digests were performed on selected C-mannosylated proteins. Samples were digested overnight with  trypsin then cleaned up with C18 Stagetips.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins and C-glycosylated peptides was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4).The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common proteins contaminates prior to further analysis. Glycopeptide identified were manual assessed according to the guidelines of Chen et al 22, annotated manually with the aid of Protein Prospector tool MS-Product (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msproduct)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C-mannosylation, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Associate Professor Laboratory Head The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 1G Royal Parade Parkville, VIC, Australia 3052

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Ethan Goddard-Borger
Associate Professor Laboratory Head The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 1G Royal Parade Parkville, VIC, Australia 3052


