### Accession
PXD012681

### Title
Semi-quantitative proteomics enables mapping of global neutrophil dynamics following influenza virus infection

### Description
Lung neutrophils are causally associated with IAV-induced disease severity. Less is known about the repertoire of lethal IAV-associated neutrophil proteins or about how global changes in different neutrophil compartments are coordinated following lethal IAV infection. Here, we use semi-quantitative proteomics to characterize dynamic alterations in BM, blood and lung neutrophils at homeostasis or following a lethal IAV infection, with a secondary aim of identifying lung neutrophil-derived proteins which are selectively induced following IAV infection. Our findings identify bone marrow neutrophil maturation as the key site of anti-viral activity induction, with further upregulation or release of both anti-viral and antimicrobial effectors occurring following lung tissue infiltration.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection: Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells were obtained by inserting a cannula through the trachea of euthanized mice and flushing the lungs with 4 x 0.5 ml PBS supplemented with 2% FCS and 2 mM EDTA (FACS buffer; Whole blood was collected via the vena cava and bone marrow cells were flushed with RPMI media from the left femur.   Single cell suspension: All samples were incubated in the Red Blood Cell Lysing Buffer Hybri-Max (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. No: R7757-100ML; 5 min RT) and resuspended into single cell suspensions with FACS buffer for cell-sorting. Cell numbers and cell viability were assessed via trypan blue exclusion using a hemocytometer.  Cell sorting: BAL cells were obtained from age-matched non-infected (naïve) or 1) 1000 pfu PR8 infected, 2) 100 pfu PR8 infected or 3) 3 x 106 P. Aeruginosa infected B6 mice at day 3 post-infection. To obtain sufficient cell numbers for proteomics, a pool of 11 mice per group was used for naïve vs 1000 pfu PR8 infection experiments (comparing BM, blood and BAL neutrophils) and a pool of 6 mice per group was used for 100 vs 1000 pfu PR8 infection vs 3 x 106 P. Aeruginosa infection experiments (comparing only BAL neutrophils). Single cell suspensions were incubated with BD Fc Block (anti-CD16/32) for 10 min at 4 °C and incubated with anti-mouse CD45.2 FITC, CD11b PerCP5.5, Ly6g PE and Siglec-F APC primary antibodies for 20 min at 4 °C (Supplementary Table 1). FACS-sorting was conducted using the BD FACS Aria III, with gating of neutrophils as all live (DAPIneg)/ singlet/ Siglec-Fneg/ Ly6gpos and CD11bpos cells. Cell purity was checked post-sort and cells were washed in PBS and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C before use.  LC-MS/MS: Cells were dried and cell pellets concentrated using a SpeedVac Concentrator and Savant Refrigerated Vapor trap (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) for 45 min RT. Samples were resuspended in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 mM tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate before incubation for 5 h at 25 °C. 10 mM iodoacetamide was then added to alkylate thiol groups at 20 °C for 35 minutes in the dark. The alkylated preparation was diluted to 1 M urea with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) before sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added to 5 µM final concentration. Tryptic digests were performed overnight at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides desalted on SDB-XC (Empore) StageTips as previously described (Rappsilber, J., et. al.  2007. Nat Protoc 2: 1896-1906.). Peptides were modified by stable isotope dimethyl labelling for quantitative proteomics according to Boresema protocal (Boersema, P. J. et. al. 2009. Nat Protoc 4: 484-494.) A label switch was performed for each replicate. Labeled samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, desalted as described above and dried before fractionation by high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. The samples were fractionated off-line by high pH reversed-phase fractionation on 12 fractions. Peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded onto C18 PepMap 100 µm ID × 2 cm trapping column (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 µl/min for 6 min and washed for 6 min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (Acquity BHE C18, 1.7 µm, 130 Å and 75 µm ID × 25 cm, Waters). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nl/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting at 5% buffer B to 55% over 55 min, then 100% B for 5 min followed by an equilibration step of 15 min (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN). Data was collected on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 350–1500 as MS scan range. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 10 most intense ions per MS scan at 15 000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows: exclude isotope on, duration 30 s and peptide match preferred. Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were: MS scan at 120 000 resolution, maximum injection time 30 ms, AGC target 3 × 10^6, collision at 28% energy for a maximum injection time of 110 ms with AGT target of 1 × 10^5.

### Data Protocol
Identification and isotopic quantification of proteins was performed on raw output files from LC-ESI-MS/MS using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.8.3) together with its built-in search engine Andromeda. The Mouse Uniprot FASTA database (downloaded on 29.03.2017, 50,943 protein entries) together with common contaminants were used for analysis. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, acetylation of protein N-termini, methionine oxidation was included as variable modifications. For quantitative analysis, dimethyl labeled DimethlyLys0, DimethylNter0, DimethlyLys4, DimethylNter4, DimethlyLys8 and DimethylNter8 were used as labels together with the optional iBAQ (Intensity Based Absolute Quantification) calculation. Parent mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (after refinement by MaxQuant) and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. The match between runs feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer peptide identifications from one run to another based on retention time and mass to charge ratio and the “requant option” of MaxQuant was enabled. Both peptide and protein identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils are rapidly deployed innate immune cells, and excessive recruitment is causally associated with influenza-induced pathologic conditions. Despite this, the complete set of influenza lethality-associated neutrophil effector proteins is currently unknown. Whether the expression of these proteins is predetermined during bone marrow (BM) neutrophil maturation or further modulated by tissue compartment transitions has also not been comprehensively characterized at a proteome-wide scale. In this study, we used high-resolution mass spectrometry to map how the proteomes of murine neutrophils change comparatively across BM, blood, and the alveolar airspaces to deploy an influenza lethality-associated response. Following lethal influenza infection, mature neutrophils undergo two infection-dependent and one context-independent compartmental transitions. Translation of type I IFN-stimulated genes is first elevated in the BM, preceding the context-independent downregulation of ribosomal proteins observed in blood neutrophils. Following alveolar airspace infiltration, the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) neutrophil proteome is further characterized by a limited increase in type I IFN-stimulated and metal-sequestering proteins as well as a decrease in degranulation-associated proteins. An influenza-selective and dose-dependent increase in antiviral and lipid metabolism-associated proteins was also observed in BAL neutrophils, indicative of a modest capacity for pathogen response tuning. Altogether, our study provides new and comprehensive evidence that the BAL neutrophil proteome is shaped by BM neutrophil maturation as well as subsequent compartmental transitions following lethal influenza infection.

### Keywords
Mouse, Influenza, Lc-ms/ms, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Head, T cell Lab La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University 1 Kingsbury Drive, Bundoora, Vic 3086 Australia

### Submitter
Chuanxin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Weisan Chen
Head, T cell Lab La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University 1 Kingsbury Drive, Bundoora, Vic 3086 Australia


