### Accession
PXD036597

### Title
Serum proteomics in a cohort of COVID patients and healthy controls

### Description
This project investigates the serum proteome patterms in recovered COVID patients compared to that in healthy controls. Specifically, serum saamples from 29 recovered patients and 29 age, sex, and race matched healthy controls were collected and subject to DIA-MS proteomics. A fraction of the serum from each sample was pooled for all 58 samples and run as a quality control.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples including individual (n=58) and pooled samples were processed using a protocol described elsewhere (Allgoewer K, 2021). In brief, 1  μl of serum sample (~70-80 μg protein) was lysed with 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, MA, USA) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, MO, USA) and denatured at 95◦C for 5 min. Further, the samples were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) at 60◦C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Subsequently, the samples were quenched with 10 mM DTT and digested overnight at 37◦C with Trypsin gold (Promega, WI, USA). The digestion was stopped and the surfactant was cleaved by treating samples with 200 mM HCl (Sigma) at 37◦C for 30 min. The samples were desalted on Hypersep C-18 spin tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and the peptides dried under vacuum at low heat (Eppendorf, CT, USA). The dried peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Scientific) and quantified by fluorometric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  We analyzed the samples using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We used an  analytical column RSLC PepMan C-18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 2uM, 100Å, 75μm id x 50cm) at 55◦C with the mobile phase comprising buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), injecting approximately 400 ng peptides. The chromatographic gradient consisted of 155 min from buffer A to buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with the following steps: 2 to 5% buffer B for 5 min, 5 to 25% buffer B for 110 min, 25 to 40% buffer B for 25 min, 40 to 80% buffer B for 5 min, and 80 to 95% buffer B for 5 min and hold for additional 5 min at 95% for Buffer B.  The serum samples were analyzed using the data independent acquisition (DIA) mode with the following parameters: for full-scan MS acquisition in the Orbitrap, the resolution was set to 120,000, with scan range of 350 to 1650 m/z, the maximum injection time of 100 ms, and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6.  The data was acquired using 17 DIA variable windows in the Orbitrap with a resolution set at 60,000, AGC target of 1e6, and the maximum injection time in auto mode.  The run order was randomized with a quality control (QC) sample run approximately every 6 samples. The QC sample consisted of pooled serum samples that had been processed in a way identical to that of the experimental samples.

### Data Protocol
Data preprocessing. We used Spectronaut for all primary processing (v14, https://biognosys.com/software/spectronaut/). All 74 raw files were first converted to the HTRMS format with the HTRMS converter (centroid method). The converted files were then analyzed with the directDIA method using default settings. We exported intensity information at the fragment level for data preprocessing.  We used in-house R scripts to eliminate the batch arising from events such as a change of chromatographic columns between the sample runs, mapDIA for selection of best-quality ions for protein level quantifcation, as well as in house R-scripts for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Healthy controls, Dia-ms, Recovered covid patients

### Affiliations
New York University
Vogel lab, Department of Biology, New York University, US

### Submitter
Shaohuan Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Vogel lab, Department of Biology, New York University, US


