### Accession
PXD001131

### Title
Microbial life in permafrost: predictions of microbial response to natural thaw using a multi-omics approach

### Description
Over 20% of Earth’s terrestrial surface is underlain by permafrost that represents one of the largest terrestrial carbon pools, with an estimated ~1700 Pg of carbon (C) contained in the upper 3 m of permafrost. Models estimate that C release from thawing permafrost might represent the largest new transfer of C from the biosphere to the atmosphere as the climate warms. Here we investigated microbial community phylogeny, genetic functional potential gene expression, and protein production patterns along a natural thaw gradient, including permafrost, the seasonally thawed active layer and nearby thawed thermokarst bog, using a combination of molecular “omics” approaches: metagenomics (MG), metatranscriptomics (MT) and metaproteomics (MP). Highlights from these analyses reveal energy yielding microbial processes and potential strategies for microbial survival in permafrost soils, and linkages between biogeochemical process rates and –omics measurements.  The results provide new knowledge about microbial life and activity potential in permafrost, the potential importance of iron reduction as a survival strategy under frozen conditions in mineral soils, and the importance of methanogenesis following thaw. The multi-omics strategy demonstrated here enables better mechanistic understanding of the ecological strategies utilized by soil microbial communities in response to climate change. Associated metagenomics data available at the EBI Metagenomics portal under the accession number <a href="https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metagenomics/projects/SRP052575">SRP052575</a>.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicate intact cores (approx. 1.2 m depth) of frozen permafrost with overlying seasonally thawed active layer and of thawed thermokarst bog were collected across a natural permafrost thaw gradient at the Alaska Peatland Experiment (APEX) in the Bonanza Creek Experimental Forest, AK. While in the field, the cores were transported on dry ice to a cryolab where they were scraped free of surface contaminants that adhered to the core during the drilling and extraction process. Samples from the active layer were collected at 30-35 cm depth and samples from the permafrost at 65-75 cm depth from the same cores. Samples from the bog were collected from approximately 100cm depth. Each core was split vertically while frozen, in a glovebox under anaerobic conditions. Core splits were allocated to standard soil analyses, e.g. moisture, pH, and total CN content. An additional 5 soil cores were collected at each location on a later sampling date for sequential determination of Fe(III)/Fe(II), SO42-, NO3-, denitrification potential, methane oxidation, as well trace gas production (CO2, CH4) by aerobic and anerobic pathways. Portions of the cores were used for molecular analysis. The outer surfaces were first shaved off using a sterile jigsaw while frozen to remove any potential contamination that could have arisen during sampling and transport. Nucleic acids were extracted using a using pressure cycling and bead beating as cell lysis steps. For all samples, the V6-V9 region of 16S rRNA genes was amplified and sequenced on the 454 Titanium at the DOE Joint Genome Institute (JGI). Total DNA (2 x 113 bp paired end reads) was also sequenced from two replicate cores for each sample type on the Illumina GAII platform at JGI and the resulting MG were assembled using Velvet and the CLC Genomics Workbench. The RNA samples were first converted to cDNA and the resulting cDNA was amplified using the Ambion aRNA amplification kit (Ambion). One Illumina HiSeq lane was used to obtain the MT data from each cDNA sample (2 x 150 bp paired ends). MT and MG reads were annotated at IMG/M and MG-RAST. Proteins were extracted from two replicate cores per sample type using a protocol involving SDS lysis and TCA precipitation. The proteins were digested with trypsin and separated by multi-dimensional liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Resultant MS/MS spectra were searched against matched metagenomes as well as 180 reference isolate genomes (JGI/IMG) to identify peptides and proteins.

### Data Protocol
FASTA database were complied with the protein sequences of the assembled and annotated metagenomes (active layer, permafrost and thermokarst bog) and 181 proteomes of known soil bacteria (supplementary table S3) and known protein contaminants (trypsin, keratin, etc) into one single composite database.  All MS/MS spectra were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm against the composite Fasta database and filtered with DTASelect/Contrast at the peptide level (Xcorrs of at least 1.8 (+1), 2.5 (+2), 3.5 (+3)). Only proteins identified with two fully tryptic peptides, with one unique to that specific protein entry, from a 22 hour run were considered for further biological study.   To prepare for semi-quantitative proteome analysis, DTASelect-filtered data were subjected to spectral count balancing and subsequent NSAF (Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor) determination. With regards to the former, the unique-status of each identified peptide was assessed. If a peptide was deemed unique, it retained 100% of its previously assessed spectral count (SpC). However, if a peptide was found to belong to more than one representative protein, i.e. non-unique, its SpC was recalculated based on the ratio of uniquely identified peptides between the 2 or more proteins that share the non-unique peptide in question. The adjusted SpC of the proteins (aSpC) incorporate these balanced values, which correct for the slight quantitative bias that occurs with homologous proteins and/or proteins with homologous regions, both of which artificially inflate SpC values at the expense of proteins that share no homology. Once spectrally balanced, NSAF values were calculated for each protein in a specific run to normalize individual MS runs based on the total number of spectra collected and protein length, which by itself introduces a bias that favors larger proteins if not corrected for.

### Publication Abstract
Over 20% of Earth's terrestrial surface is underlain by permafrost with vast stores of carbon that, once thawed, may represent the largest future transfer of carbon from the biosphere to the atmosphere. This process is largely dependent on microbial responses, but we know little about microbial activity in intact, let alone in thawing, permafrost. Molecular approaches have recently revealed the identities and functional gene composition of microorganisms in some permafrost soils and a rapid shift in functional gene composition during short-term thaw experiments. However, the fate of permafrost carbon depends on climatic, hydrological and microbial responses to thaw at decadal scales. Here we use the combination of several molecular 'omics' approaches to determine the phylogenetic composition of the microbial communities, including several draft genomes of novel species, their functional potential and activity in soils representing different states of thaw: intact permafrost, seasonally thawed active layer and thermokarst bog. The multi-omics strategy reveals a good correlation of process rates to omics data for dominant processes, such as methanogenesis in the bog, as well as novel survival strategies for potentially active microbes in permafrost.

### Keywords
Microbial permafrost response natural thaw omics

### Affiliations
Biosciences Division
Department of Food Safety and Environmental Health, University of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Manesh Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Jenni Hultman
Department of Food Safety and Environmental Health, University of Helsinki, Finland


