### Accession
PXD037259

### Title
Targeting Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1 (KDM1A/LSD1) Impairs Colorectal Cancer Tumorigenesis by Affecting Cancer Cells Stemness, Motility and Differentiation

### Description
Among all cancers, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 3rd most common and the 2nd leading cause of death worldwide. New therapeutic strategies are required to target cancer stem cells (CSCs), a subset of tumor cells highly resistant to present-day therapy and responsible for tumor relapse. CSCs display dynamic genetic and epigenetic alterations that allow quick adaptations to perturbations. Lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (KDM1A), a FAD-dependent H3K4me1/2 and H3K9me1/2 demethylase, was found to be upregulated in several tumors and associated with a poor prognosis due to its ability to maintain CSCs staminal features. Here, we explored the potential role of KDM1A targeting in CRC by characterizing the effect of KDM1A silencing in differentiated and CRC stem cells (CRC-SCs). In CRC primary samples, KDM1A expression was associated with a worse prognosis, confirming its role as an independent negative prognostic factor of CRC. Consistently, biological assays such as methylcellulose colony formation, invasion, and migration assays demonstrated a significantly decreased self-renewal potential, as well as migration and invasion potential upon KDM1A silencing. Our untargeted omics approach (transcriptomic and proteomic) revealed the association of KDM1A silencing with CRC-SCs cytoskeletal and metabolism remodeling towards a differentiated phenotype (e.g., the activation of a collateral mitochondrial metabolic pathway independent from succinate-CoA ligase GDP-forming subunit beta 2, expressions of brush border’s protein villin, and ketogenic enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 2) suggesting a key role of KDM1A in cell metabolism. Also, KDM1A silencing resulted in a 3-fold increase in the expression of miR-506-3p. Lastly, loss of KDM1A markedly reduced 53BP1 DNA repair foci, implying the involvement of KDM1A in the DNA damage response. Overall, our results indicate that KDM1A plays a key role in CRC progression and therefore it represents a promising epigenetic target to prevent tumor relapse.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to denaturation with TFE, to reduction with DTT 200 mM, to alkylation with IAM 200 mM and to complete protein digestion with 2 μg of Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptide digests were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). The SPE plate was preconditioned with 1 mL of acetonitrile and 2 mL of water. After loading the sample, the SPE was washed with 1 mL of water. The adsorbed proteins were eluted with 800 μL of acetonitrile and water (80:20). Proteins were analyzed with the micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent, Dublin, USA) system that included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with flow module 5–50 μL, interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5×100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies Dublin, USA). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 μL min−1 with an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. Injection volume was 4.0 μL and oven temperature was set at 40 °C. For identification purposes the samples were subjected to data-dependent acquisition (DDA): mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by an MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, and GAS2 at 20 psig, ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V. For the label-free quantification process the samples were subjected to cyclical data-independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated so that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were carried out in a cyclical manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
A DDA and DIA acquisitions were performed. Peptides (and proteins) were identified using DDA followed by database search while the quantification was obtained by integrating the area under the chromatographic peak for each ion fragment of identified peptides by using the DIA file. The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA). Trypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for both software. For Mascot we used 2 missed cleavages, set the instrument to ESI-QUAD-TOF and specified the following modifications for the assay: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. An assay tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for MS/MS tolerance. The peptide charges to be detected were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the assay was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 2015.07.07, containing 42,131 sequence entries) was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%. Quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. Quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (ABSCIEX, Concord, Canada). The six peptides per protein with the highest MS1 intensity and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Among all cancers, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 3rd most common and the 2nd leading cause of death worldwide. New therapeutic strategies are required to target cancer stem cells (CSCs), a subset of tumor cells highly resistant to present-day therapy and responsible for tumor relapse. CSCs display dynamic genetic and epigenetic alterations that allow quick adaptations to perturbations. Lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (KDM1A also known as LSD1), a FAD-dependent H3K4me1/2 and H3K9me1/2 demethylase, was found to be upregulated in several tumors and associated with a poor prognosis due to its ability to maintain CSCs staminal features. Here, we explored the potential role of KDM1A targeting in CRC by characterizing the effect of KDM1A silencing in differentiated and CRC stem cells (CRC-SCs). In CRC samples, KDM1A overexpression was associated with a worse prognosis, confirming its role as an independent negative prognostic factor of CRC. Consistently, biological assays such as methylcellulose colony formation, invasion, and migration assays demonstrated a significantly decreased self-renewal potential, as well as migration and invasion potential upon KDM1A silencing. Our untargeted multi-omics approach (transcriptomic and proteomic) revealed the association of KDM1A silencing with CRC-SCs cytoskeletal and metabolism remodeling towards a differentiated phenotype, supporting the role of KDM1A in CRC cells stemness maintenance. Also, KDM1A silencing resulted in up-regulation of miR-506-3p, previously reported to play a tumor-suppressive role in CRC. Lastly, loss of KDM1A markedly reduced 53BP1 DNA repair foci, implying the involvement of KDM1A in the DNA damage response. Overall, our results indicate that KDM1A impacts CRC progression in several non-overlapping ways, and therefore it represents a promising epigenetic target to prevent tumor relapse.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tumor, Proteome, Crc-scs, Kdm1a, Epigenome

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy


