### Accession
PXD009154

### Title
Differential BN analysis of cytoadherence complexes in P. falciparum

### Description
The pathogenesis of severe malaria has been associated with the ability of P. falciparum infected erythrocyte binding to host endothelium (a process known as cytoadherence) but the mechanisms underlying this have not been clearly described. To understand more about the molecular components that allow the parasite to modulate the behaviour of host endothelium and interact with endothelial molecules, we have used a combined proteomic technique of protein separation (1D Blue-Native electrophoresis) and mass spectrometry to study the interaction of infected erythrocytes (IE) with endothelial cells (EC) in a co-culture system.

### Sample Protocol
Native protein complexes were extracted from co-cultures and identified by mass spectrometry. Proteomic data from different parasite strains either adhesion proficient (to endothelial cells) or non-adherent were analysed in parallel to reveal specific associations mediated by cytoadherence. Informatic approaches were developed to facilitate this comparison.

### Data Protocol
Native protein complexes were extracted from co-cultures and identified by mass spectrometry. Proteomic data from different parasite strains either adhesion proficient (to endothelial cells) or non-adherent were analysed in parallel to reveal specific associations mediated by cytoadherence. Informatic approaches were developed to facilitate this comparison.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasmodium, Malaria, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine

### Submitter
Alister Craig

### Lab Head
Dr Alister Craig
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine


