### Accession
PXD012101

### Title
Development of a sensitive, scalable method for spatial, cell-type-resolved proteomics of the human brain

### Description
While nearly comprehensive proteome coverage can be achieved from bulk tissue or cultured cells, the data usually lacks spatial resolution. As a result, tissue based proteomics averages protein abundance across multiple cell types and/or localisations. With proteomics platforms lacking sensitivity and throughput to undertake deep single-cell proteome studies to resolve spatial or cell type dependent protein expression gradients within tissue, proteome analysis has been combined with sorting techniques to enrich for certain cell populations. However, the tissue context and spatial resolution is lost in the sorting process.  Here, we report an optimised method for the proteomic analysis of neurons isolated from post-mortem human brain by Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM). We tested combinations of sample collection methods, lysis buffers and digestion methods to maximize the number of identifications and quantitative performance, identifying up to 1500 proteins from 60,000 µm2 of cerebellar molecular layer with excellent reproducibility. In order to demonstrate the ability of our workflow to resolve for the first time cell type specific proteomes within a tissue, we isolated sets of individual Betz and Purkinje cells. Both neuronal cell types are involved in motor coordination and were found to express highly specific proteomes to a depth of 2800 to 3600 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample processing Tissue lysis  Protein was extracted from tissue collected in the LCM cap by the addition of 10 µL of lysis buffer followed by both brief centrifugation and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes, or by omitting the centrifugation step and incubating in an inverted position for 30 minutes at room temperature.  In-cap digestion Protein extracts in the LCM cap were diluted to either 1 M Urea or 10 % TFE with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25 ng of trypsin was added, and samples incubated at 37 °C overnight – all steps taking place in the LCM cap. Peptides were acidified to 1 % formic acid (v/v) and purified using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SOLA HRP, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were dried to completeness under vacuum, resuspended in 6 µL 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and stored at -20 °C until analysis. In-solution digestion Protein lysates contained within the LCM cap (either after collecting dry or directly into buffer) were reduced and alkylated in-cap with 5 mM DTT and 20 mM iodoacetamide. Lysates were then transferred to 200 µL PCR tubes. Proteins were cleaned-up prior to digestion by precipitation with methanol-chloroform. The protein pellet was resuspended in 6M urea 0.1 M tris pH 7.8, this was then diluted to 1 M urea with ultrapure water, 25 ng trypsin added and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were acidified to 1 % formic acid (v/v) and purified using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SOLA HRP, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were dried to completeness under vacuum, resuspended in 6 µL 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid and stored at -20 °C until analysis. SP3 Paramagnetic beads were prepared as described. Protein lysates contained within the LCM cap (either after collecting dry or directly into buffer) were reduced and alkylated in-cap with 5 mM DTT and 20 mM iodoacetamide. Lysates were then transferred to 200 µL PCR tubes. 2 µL of beads were mixed with the samples. Acetonitrile was added to the samples to a final concentration of 70 % (v/v) and briefly vortexed. This mixture was incubated for 18 minutes with orbital shaking at 1,000 rpm. Beads were then immobilised on a magnet for 2 minutes and the supernatant transferred to fresh tubes containing 2 µL of fresh beads and the incubation step repeated to capture any initially unbound protein. Beads were washed twice with 70 % (v/v) ethanol in water and once with 100 % acetonitrile, all on the magnet. Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25 ng trypsin and digested overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the beads were resuspended by bath sonication. Acetonitrile was added to 95 % (v/v) and beads incubated at 1,000 rpm for 18 minutes to bind peptide, then beads were immobilised on the magnet for 2 minutes and the supernatant discarded. Peptides in the initially unbound tubes were eluted from the beads with 6 µL 2 % DMSO and combined with their other corresponding tube. Combined beads were pipette mixed and then immobilised on the magnet for 5 minutes and peptides transferred to LC-MS vials containing 600 nL 1 % trifluoroacetic acid, vials were stored at -20 °C until analysis.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were analysed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For all samples, a 75 µm x 500 mm C18 EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) with 2 µm particles was used at a spray voltage of 2.0 kV and a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 60-minute linear gradient from 2 % buffer B to 35 % buffer B (A: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in water; B: 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). For the initial Purkinje cell experiments (Figure 2), the mass spectrometer was operated with the following settings: MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap between 400 and 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120000 and an AGC target of 4e5. Selected precursors between charge states 2+ and 7+ and above the intensity threshold of 5e3 were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation, with a collision energy of 35 %, an AGC target of 4e3, a maximum injection time of 300 ms, a dynamic exclusion window of 60 seconds and a maximum duty cycle of 3 seconds. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap using the rapid scan mode. The option to “use all available parallelizable time” was enabled. For the molecular layer optimisation experiments and Betz/Purkinje comparison, the following settings were used: MS1 scans were acquired as above. Selected precursors between charge states 2+ and 7+ and above the intensity threshold of 5e3 were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, with a normalized collision energy of 28 %, an AGC target of 4e3, a maximum injection time of 80 ms, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 seconds and a maximum duty cycle of 1 second. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap using the rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched against the Uniprot human database (Retrieved 17/01/2018, 929527 sequences) using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 and its built-in contaminant database using tryptic specificity and allowing 2 missed cleavages, results were filtered to a 1 % false discovery rate at the PSM and Protein level. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification as appropriate, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and the ‘match between runs’ option was used, all other settings were left as default. Protein quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm within MaxQuant. Downstream analysis was performed in Perseus and using R.

### Publication Abstract
While nearly comprehensive proteome coverage can be achieved from bulk tissue or cultured cells, the data usually lacks spatial resolution. As a result, tissue based proteomics averages protein abundance across multiple cell types and/or localizations. With proteomics platforms lacking sensitivity and throughput to undertake deep single-cell proteome studies in order to resolve spatial or cell type dependent protein expression gradients within tissue, proteome analysis has been combined with sorting techniques to enrich for certain cell populations. However, the spatial resolution and context is lost after cell sorting. Here, we report an optimized method for the proteomic analysis of neurons isolated from post-mortem human brain by laser capture microdissection (LCM). We tested combinations of sample collection methods, lysis buffers and digestion methods to maximize the number of identifications and quantitative performance, identifying 1500 proteins from 60&#x202f;000 &#x3bc;m<sup>2</sup> of 10 &#x3bc;m thick cerebellar molecular layer with excellent reproducibility. To demonstrate the ability of our workflow to resolve cell type specific proteomes within human brain tissue, we isolated sets of individual Betz and Purkinje cells. Both neuronal cell types are involved in motor coordination and were found to express highly specific proteomes to a depth of 2800 to 3600 proteins.

### Keywords
Brain, Tissue proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Laser capture microdissection, Spatially resolved proteomics

### Affiliations
1Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
1Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK


