### Accession
PXD021648

### Title
XL-MS data analysis with MeroX and XlinkX

### Description
Comparison of MeroX in different modes and XlinkX upon variation of database size based on DSBU linked BSA as test-dataset

### Sample Protocol
BSA was cross-linked using DSBU, reduced (DTT), alkylated (IAA) and digested (trypsin). The digested protein was analyzed on an Orbitrap using a stepped collisional HCD method.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed directly via XlinkX within Proteome Discoverer 2.4. For analysis using MeroX (v2.0.1.4) raw files were converted to mgf using MSConvertGUI (v3.0.20119-8768fab3c) without any filters. Data was analyzed against a fasta file containing BSA plus an increasing number of human proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has matured into a potent tool to identify protein-protein interactions or to uncover protein structures in living cells, tissues, or organelles. The unique ability to investigate the interplay of proteins within their native environment delivers valuable complementary information to other advanced structural biology techniques. This Review gives a comprehensive overview of the current possible applications as well as the remaining limitations of the technique, focusing on cross-linking in highly complex biological systems like cells, organelles, or tissues. Thanks to the commercial availability of most reagents and advances in user-friendly data analysis, validation, and visualization tools, studies using XL-MS can, in theory, now also be utilized by nonexpert laboratories.

### Keywords
Bsa, Dsbu, Mass-spectromerty, Crosslinking, Xlinkx, Merox

### Affiliations
IMP / University of Vienna
1Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Manuel Matzinger

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
1Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria


