### Accession
PXD011271

### Title
Transmission of Cricket paralysis virus via exosome-like vesicles during infection of Drosophila cells

### Description
Examining the role of exosomes in the life cycle of CrPV in Drosophila Melanogaster. sing prquantitative proteomics we find CrPV proteins in exosome-like vesicles, which upon further aanalysis appear to facilitate infection.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and duplex demethylation labeling: Cell or exosome pellets harvested from CrPV-infected cells at 6 hpi were solubilized in 6M urea and 2M thiourea. Protein concentrations were determined via BCA assay (Thermo). Equal amounts of protein (50 µg) from each sample was reduced by adding 1 µg of dithiothretiol and incubating for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were alkylated with the addition of 5 µg iodoacetamide and allowed to incubate for 20 min at room temperature. Samples were digested with LysC before dilution with 4 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digestion overnight with trypsin. Digested peptides were purified and concentrated on C18 STAGE-tips, eluted in 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Dried peptides were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and chemical demethylation labeling was performed using light (CH2O; mock-infected samples) or heavy (13CD2O; CrPV-infected samples) isotopologues of formaldehyde. Labeled samples were combined and STAGE-tip purified. Eluted samples were dried and resuspended in 20% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis:  Digested peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoflow HPLC (Thermo easy-nLC1000) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). For each sample, 5.0 μg of peptides (based on the protein quantitation) were injected into the LC and loaded onto an in-house packed fused-silica (5 μm Aqua C18 particles (Phenomenex)) fritted trap column (2 cm, 100 μm I.D., 360 μm O.D., 5 μL/min flow rate, Buffer A = 0.5% acetic acid), then resolved on a reverse phase 75 μm inner diameter fused silica, in-house packed 30 cm analytical column (ReproSil C18, 3 μm particle size (Dr. Maisch)) using a 75 min linear gradient run at 250 μL/min from 5% to 35% Buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid), followed by a 15 min wash at 95% Buffer B. Instrument acquisition parameters included a 1% underfill ratio, 70 000 precursor mass resolution, 17 500 fragment mass resolution, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%, +1 and unassigned charges were excluded, “exclude isotopes”  was turned on, intensity-dependent MS/MS at 1.7e5 intensity threshold, and the instrument was set to scan from 300 to 2000 m /z  with a 30 s dynamic exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30)(21,22). Parameters included: carbamidomethylated cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation (variable), glutamine and asparagine deamidation (variable); trypsin specific; maximum 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance; 1% FDR; +1 to +7 charge states; match between runs and re-quantify; and common contaminants were included. Protein groups required a minimum of 1 peptide to be identified and a minimum of 2 peptides for quantification. Both the Drosophila and CrPV protein databases used were downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org; April 23rd, 2014). Using Perseus (v1.5.2.6)(23), contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out, protein ratios were Log2 transformed, and ratios were averaged between replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses are classically characterized as being either enveloped or nonenveloped depending on the presence or absence of a lipid bi-layer surrounding their proteinaceous capsid. In recent years, many studies have challenged this view by demonstrating that some nonenveloped viruses (e.g. hepatitis A virus) can acquire an envelope during infection by hijacking host cellular pathways. In this study, we examined the role of exosome-like vesicles (ELVs) during infection of Drosophilia melanogaster S2 cells by Cricket paralysis virus (CrPV). Utilizing quantitative proteomics, we demonstrated that ELVs can be isolated from both mock- and CrPV-infected S2 cells that contain distinct set of proteins compared to the cellular proteome. Moreover, 40 proteins increased in abundance in ELVs derived from CrPV-infected cells compared to mock, suggesting specific factors associate with ELVs during infection. Interestingly, peptides from CrPV capsid proteins (ORF2) and viral RNA were detected in ELVs from infected cells. Finally, ELVs from CrPV-infected cells are infectious suggesting that CrPV may hijack ELVs to acquire an envelope during infection of S2 cells. This study further demonstrates the diverse strategies of nonenveloped viruses from invertebrates to vertebrates to acquire an envelope in order to evade the host response or facilitate transmission.

### Keywords
Virus, Crpv, Drosophila, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Craig Kerr

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


