### Accession
PXD022367

### Title
MaxQuant.Live enables enhanced selectivity and identification of peptides modified by endogenous SUMO and ubiquitin

### Description
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) and ubiquitin are frequent post-translational modifications of proteins that play pivotal roles in all cellular processes. We previously reported mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods that enable profiling of lysines modified by endogenous SUMO or ubiquitin in an unbiased manner, without requiring genetic engineering. Here we investigated the applicability of precursor mass filtering enabled by MaxQuant.Live (MQL) to our SUMO and ubiquitin proteomics workflows, which efficiently avoided sequencing of precursors too small to be modified but otherwise indistinguishable by mass-to-charge ratio. Using peptide mass filtering, we achieved much higher precursor selectivity, ultimately resulting in up to 30% more SUMO and ubiquitin sites identified from replicate samples. Real-time ‘untargeting’ of unmodified peptides by MQL resulted in 90% SUMO-modified precursor selectivity from a 25% pure sample, demonstrating great applicability for digging deeper into ubiquitin-like modificomes. We adapted the mass filtering strategy to the new Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, achieving comparable gains in SUMO precursor selectivity and identification rates. Collectively, mass filtering via MQL significantly increased identification rates of SUMO- and ubiquitin-modified peptides from the exact same samples, without the requirement for prior knowledge or spectral libraries.

### Sample Protocol
U-2 OS cells (HTB-96) were acquired via the American Type Culture Collection, and Hep2 cells (kind gift from Dr. Bo van Deurs, Copenhagen University). Cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) GlutaMAX™ (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and a pen/strep mixture (100 U/mL; Gibco). Cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma. Cells were not routinely authenticated. For SUMO samples, one batch of U-2 OS cells was cultured under standard growth conditions, using 30x 15-cm dishes, containing ~600 million cells and yielding ~150 mg of extracted total protein. Technical quadruplicate MS runs were performed on final purified material from ~3 mg of total protein. For ubiquitin samples, one batch of Hep2 cells was cultured under standard growth conditions, using 30x 15-cm dishes, containing ~400 million cells and yielding ~100 mg of extracted total protein. Technical triplicate MS runs were performed on final purified material from ~0.5 mg of total protein (trypsin digest) or ~0.75 mg of total protein (Lys-C and LysC/Asp-N digest).  Sample preparation and subsequent immunoprecipitation of SUMOylated peptides was performed essentially as described previously (Hendriks et al., 2018). Preparation of peptides for ubiquitin-IP and purification of ubiquitylated peptides was performed exactly as described previously (Akimov et al., 2018). C18 StageTips were prepared in-house, peptides were desalted according to standard protocols, and dried to completion in a SpeedVac at 60 °C. The SUMOylated peptide batch was dissolved in 150 μL 0.1% formic acid, of which 3 μL (2% total sample) was used per replicate injection for MaxQuant.Live experiments, and 0.3 μL (0.2% total sample; diluted 10x with 0.1% formic acid) per replicate injection for Exploris experiments. Half of the trypsin-digested ubiquitin sample was purified by StageTip and afterwards dissolved in 250 μL 0.1% formic acid, of which 5 μL (0.5% total sample) was used per replicate injection. Ubiquitin samples digested with Lys-C or Lys-C/Asp-N were purified and dissolved in 167 μL 0.1% formic acid, of which 5 μL (0.75% total sample) was used per replicate injection.  All samples were analyzed on 15 cm long 75 μm internal diameter columns, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch), connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). MaxQuant.Live (MQL) experiments were performed using a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo). SUMO Exploris experiments were performed using a NanoSpray Flex™ NG ion source (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). A column heater was used to heat the column to 40 °C. Column elution was performed using Buffer A (0.1% FA) as the initial buffer, and an increasing amount of Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA) over time, depending on the sample type loaded. SUMO MQL experiments were analyzed using 80 min gradients, including ramp-up and washout, and an effective gradient ranging from 13-32% buffer B over 50 min. SUMO Exploris experiments were analyzed using 60 min gradients, with an effective gradient ranging from 13-32% buffer B over 36 min. Ubiquitin MQL experiments were analyzed using 80 min gradients, with effective buffer B ramps depending on the enzymes used. Trypsin: 8-34% over 56 min, Lys-C only: 16-34% over 50 min, Lys-C and Asp-N: 16-25% over 50 min. For all experiments, spray voltage was set to 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275 °C, and an RF funnel level to 40%. Full scans were made at a resolution of 60,000 (SUMO normal, ubiquitin normal and sensitive) or 120,000 (SUMO sensitive and ultra, ubiquitin ultra, Exploris). MS1 AGC target was set to 3,000,000 charges (“300” on Exploris), with a maximum injection time of 60 ms (for 60,000 resolution) or 120 ms (for 120,000 resolution), or “Auto” (Exploris). Scan ranges used (in m/z) were; SUMO: 400-1,600, Lys-C or Asp-N ubiquitin: 300-1,300, tryptic ubiquitin: 300-1,200. Precursor fragmentation was achieved through higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25, an AGC target of 200,000 (“200” on Exploris), and an isolation width of 1.3 m/z. Minimum MS2 AGC target was set to 20,000. Charges 2-5 were considered for MS/MS, with a dynamic exclusion of 80 s (for 80 min gradients) or 60 s (for 60 min gradients). Loop counts were set to; 14 (ubiquitin normal), 7 (SUMO normal or ubiquitin sensitive), 5 (SUMO sensitive or ubiquitin ultra), 4 (SUMO sensitive Exploris), or 3 (SUMO ultra). MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 (ubiquitin normal) or 60,000 (all other experiments). Maximum MS2 injection times were; 60 ms (ubiquitin normal), 120 ms (SUMO normal or ubiquitin sensitive), 360 ms (SUMO sensitive or ubiquitin ultra), 600 ms (SUMO ultra Exploris), or 1000 ms (SUMO ultra).  Further method details are available in “additional_Methods.docx”.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software, version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). Data were analyzed in different computational runs depending on experiment type; SUMO MQL, ubiquitin tryptic, ubiquitin LysC, ubiquitin LysC/AspN, and SUMO Exploris. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the human FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 2nd of September, 2018 (SUMO MQL), or the 25th of May, 2019 (all other data). A mouse FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 23rd of July, 2018, and only used to find mouse-exclusive contaminant peptides in the SUMO MQL data. For SUMO data, in silico digestion of theoretical peptides was performed with Lys-C, Asp-N, and Glu-N, allowing up to 8 missed cleavages (MC). For tryptic ubiquitin data; with trypsin up to 3 MC. For Lys-C ubiquitin data; with Lys-C up to 2 MC. For Lys-C/Asp-N ubiquitin data; with Lys-C, Asp-N, and Glu-N, up to 6 MC. Variable modifications (VMs) used were protein N-terminal acetylation (default) and methionine oxidation (default). For SUMO searches, additional VMs were peptide N-terminal pyroglutamate, and Lys SUMOylation. The SUMO mass remnant was defined as described previously (Hendriks et al., 2018); DVFQQQTGG, H60C41N12O15, monoisotopic mass 960.4301, neutral loss b7-DVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-DV, b3-DVF, b4-DVFQ, b5-DVFQQ, b6-DVFQQQ, b7-DVFQQQT, b9-DVFQQQTGG, QQ, FQ, FQQ]. For tryptic ubiquitin data, additional VMs were Lys diglycine, and Lys LRGG. For Lys-C and Lys-C/Asp-N ubiquitin data, the long ubiquitin mass remnant was set as a VM and defined as described previously (Akimov et al., 2018); ESTLHLVLRLRGG, H109C63N21O17, monoisotopic mass 1431.8310, and disallowed on peptide C-terminus. In all cases, a maximum of 3 modifications were allowed per peptide. Maximum peptide mass was set to 6,000 Da, or 7,000 Da for Lys-C-only ubiquitin data. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR filtering was applied (default), and minimum delta score for modified peptides was increased to 20, with a site decoy fraction of 2% (SUMO data) or 1% (ubiquitin data). Matching between runs was enabled, with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment window of 20 min. Additional stringent manual filtering was performed for the processed data associated with the manuscript, which is not reflected in the raw MaxQuant output included here.

### Publication Abstract
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMO) and ubiquitin are frequent post-translational modifications of proteins that play pivotal roles in all cellular processes. We previously reported mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods that enable profiling of lysines modified by endogenous SUMO or ubiquitin in an unbiased manner, without the need for genetic engineering. Here we investigated the applicability of precursor mass filtering enabled by MaxQuant.Live to our SUMO and ubiquitin proteomics workflows, which efficiently avoided sequencing of precursors too small to be modified but otherwise indistinguishable by mass-to-charge ratio. Using precursor mass filtering, we achieved a much higher selectivity of modified peptides, ultimately resulting in up to 30% more SUMO and ubiquitin sites identified from replicate samples. Real-time exclusion of unmodified peptides by MQL resulted in 90% SUMO-modified precursor selectivity from a 25% pure sample, demonstrating great applicability for digging deeper into ubiquitin-like modificomes. We adapted the precursor mass filtering strategy to the new Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, achieving comparable gains in SUMO precursor selectivity and identification rates. Collectively, precursor mass filtering via MQL significantly increased identification rates of SUMO- and ubiquitin-modified peptides from the exact same samples, without the requirement for prior knowledge or spectral libraries.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Maxquant.live, Sumo, Mql, Precursor untargeting, Peptide mass filtering

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


