### Accession
PXD024119

### Title
Clonal plasma cells in AL amyloidosis are dependent on pro-survival BCL-2 family proteins and sensitive to BH3 mimetics alone and in combination with front-line therapies

### Description
Amyloid light chain amyloidosis (AL) is an incurable protein misfolding disorder characterized by the production of amyloidogenic immunoglobulin light chains by clonal populations of plasma cells. These abnormal light chains accumulate as amyloid fibrils in vital organs and cause multi-organ dysfunction that can be rapidly fatal. Current treatment regimens, which include proteasome inhibitors, were developed for the treatment of the more common plasma cell disease multiple myeloma and have demonstrated efficacy in AL amyloidosis. However, use of these agents is frequently limited due to multi-organ dysfunction at presentation, resulting in a median survival of 2-3 years and underscoring the need for novel therapies. By analyzing bone marrow-derived plasma cells from 44 patients with AL amyloidosis, we find that clonal plasma cells are highly primed to undergo apoptosis and exhibit strong dependencies on pro-survival BCL-2 family proteins that can potentially be targeted by recently-developed BH3 mimetics. In particular, we find that clonal plasma cells are highly dependent on the pro-survival MCL-1 and undergo apoptosis in response to single-agent treatment with an MCL-1 inhibitor. Notably, this MCL-1 dependency is indirectly targeted by the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, which is currently the standard of care for this disease, via the stabilization of Noxa and its direct inhibitory binding to MCL-1. BCL-2 inhibition with the FDA-approved inhibitor venetoclax (ABT-199) sensitizes plasma cells to bortezomib treatment and other front-line therapies, which can be observed in vitro and in vivo. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis reveals changes in signaling pathways regulating apoptosis, proliferation and mitochondrial metabolism between isogenic AL amyloidosis and multiple myeloma cells that divergently alter their sensitivity to therapy. Overall, our results indicate that BH3 mimetics may be highly effective therapies for AL amyloidosis that exploit inherent and induced dependencies on pro-survival proteins.

### Sample Protocol
After cell lysis by homogenization in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 (QIAshredder cartriges, Qiagen) reductive alkylation was performed with 5 mM DTT for 30min at 37°C followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Alkylation reactions were quenched with freshly prepared DTT added to a concentration of 50 mM and proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Digests were carried out in 1M urea freshly prepared in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 in presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v) with LysC (Wako, 2 mg/ml, used 1:75 w/w protease:substrates during digest) for 3 hours at room temperature and after subsequent addition of trypsin (Promega #V5111, stock 1:100 w/w protease:substrates) over night at 37°C. The rate of missed cleavages was assayed by mass spectrometry. For proteomic analysis, digests containing approximately 60 μg of peptide material were directly labeled with TMT 11plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeling efficiency and TMT ratios were assayed by mass spectrometry. Following quenching of TMT labeling reactions with hydroxylamine, TMT labelled peptides were mixed, solvent evaporated and TMT labeled peptides purified and desalted by acidic reversed phase C18 chromatography. Peptides were then fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography into 96 fractions and combined into 24 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) based software against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the H. sapiens proteome (Uniprot 07/2014) with added common contaminant proteins. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) were searched dynamically. A target decoy database strategy was applied and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1%. MS1 data were calibrated post search and searches performed again. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 spectra. Quant tables were filtered for an MS2 isolation specificity of >70% for each peptide and a sum of TMT signal to noise (s/n) of >200 over all channels. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and further search parameters applied were described previously (Paulo et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis is an incurable hematologic disorder typically characterized by the production of amyloidogenic light chains by clonal plasma cells. These light chains misfold and aggregate in healthy tissues as amyloid fibrils, leading to life-threatening multi-organ dysfunction. Here we show that the clonal plasma cells in AL amyloidosis are highly primed to undergo apoptosis and dependent on pro-survival proteins MCL-1 and BCL-2. Notably, this MCL-1 dependency is indirectly targeted by the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, currently the standard of care for this disease and the related plasma cell disorder multiple myeloma, due to upregulation of pro-apoptotic Noxa and its inhibitory binding to MCL-1. BCL-2 inhibitors sensitize clonal plasma cells to multiple front-line therapies including bortezomib, dexamethasone and lenalidomide. Strikingly, in mice bearing AL amyloidosis cell line xenografts, single agent treatment with the BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 (venetoclax) produces deeper remissions than bortezomib and triples median survival. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis reveals rewiring of signaling pathways regulating apoptosis, proliferation and mitochondrial metabolism between isogenic AL amyloidosis and multiple myeloma cells that divergently alter their sensitivity to therapies. These findings provide a roadmap for the use of BH3 mimetics to exploit endogenous and induced apoptotic vulnerabilities in AL amyloidosis.

### Keywords
Al amyloidosis bcl-2 apoptosis bh3 bortezomib proteasome inhibition

### Affiliations
Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences Harvard School of Public Health 665 Huntington Avenue Building 2, Room 221 Boston, MA  02115 USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Kristopher Sarosiek
Program in Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences Harvard School of Public Health 665 Huntington Avenue Building 2, Room 221 Boston, MA  02115 USA


