### Accession
PXD039808

### Title
Inter-regional proteomic profiling of the human brain using optimized protein extraction method from formalin-fixed tissue to identify signaling pathways

### Description
Proteomics offers vast potential to study the molecular regulation of the human brain. Formalin fixation is a common method for preserving human tissue, however, presents challenges for proteomic analysis. In this study we compared the efficiency of two different protein extraction buffers on three post-mortem, formalin-fixed human brains. Equal amounts of extracted proteins were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Protein, peptide sequence and peptide group identifications, protein abundance and gene ontology pathways were analyzed. Protein extraction was superior using lysis buffer containing Tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane hydrochloride, sodium dodecyl sulfate, sodium deoxycholate, and Triton X-100 (TrisHCl, SDS, SDC, Triton X-100), which was then used for inter-regional analysis. Pre-frontal, motor, temporal, and occipital cortex tissue was analyzed by label free quantification (LFQ) proteomics, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and PANTHERdb. Inter-regional analysis of the human brain revealed differential enrichment of proteins. We found similarly activated cellular signaling pathways, suggesting commonalities in the molecular regulation of neuroanatomically-linked brain functions. Overall, we developed an optimized, robust, and efficient method for protein extraction from formalin-fixed, human brain tissue for in-depth LFQ proteomics. We further demonstrate that this method is suitable for quick analysis of molecular signaling pathways in the human brain.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection and preservation  As a proof of concept, three formalin-fixed, post-mortem brain donors were included for sample collection. Four distinct neuroanatomical regions were collected from each of the donor brains; frontal pole cortex (pre-frontal cortex), motor cortex, temporal cortex and occipital cortex. A total of 12 brain tissue samples were collected (n=12). Brain tissue was obtained from the Macquarie Medical School at Macquarie University under approval of Macquarie University Human Research Ethics Committee (5201300835) in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and relevant local guidelines. No formal criterion of post-mortem interval time from death to formalin fixation was used. The donors had no known clinicopathological diagnosis. Each brain was dissected and collected by a neuroanatomist and neurosurgeon, with about 20 years of experience in the field, and stored in 70% ethanol at 4 °C. Samples were obtained from four neuroanatomical regions of three donors.  Protein extraction from formalin-fixed tissue  A 1:10 ratio of tissue (mg) per extraction buffer (µL) was used with a minimum of 10mg of brain tissue starting material per sample. Each tissue piece was chopped with a scalpel into smaller pieces prior to Dounce homogenization in cold protein extraction buffer. Buffer was supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors to a final concentration of 1X. Homogenate was transferred to a 1.5mL microcentrifuge tube and kept on ice. Intermittent vortexing was repeated for 10 min. Homogenates were passed 5 times through a 25-gauge needle followed by 3 times through a 30-gauge needle. Samples were incubated at 90 °C for 120 min with agitation at 750 rpm to remove cross-linking which occurs with formalin fixation. Then samples were bath sonicated for 20 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 20 min at 16, 000 xg at 4 °C. The supernatant containing extracted proteins was collected and further processed. Total protein concentration was determined using bicinchonic acid (BCA) method with bovine serum albumin as standard, and samples were frozen as aliquots at -80 °C until further processing. Aliquots of lysate were diluted to be compatible with the protein quantitation assay, and dilution factor was accounted for in determining the final protein concentration.  Protocol optimization High concentration tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane hydrochloride (TrisHCl) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) protein extraction buffers with or without sodium deoxycholate (SDC), Triton-X-100, sodium chloride (NaCl) and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) were compared to identify the buffer that extracted the most proteins. Equal weights of motor cortex tissue from each of the donors (n=6) were prepared in parallel, as previously described. Buffers contained (i) 600mM TrisHCl, 2% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% SDC, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, phosphatase and protease inhibitor, pH 8.0, (referred to as Tris/SDS/SDC/Triton X-100 buffer) or (ii) 600mM TrisHCl pH 8.0, 2% SDS, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor (referred to as Tris/SDS buffer). Three biological replicates for each buffer were prepared for protein analysis by mass spectrometry.  The buffer that extracted the most proteins, as determined by MS analysis, was selected for further analysis. For multiregional brain proteome analysis, tissue from the motor, pre-frontal, temporal, and occipital cortex (each approximately 15 mg of tissue in 150 µL buffer) from each of the three donors were prepared as previously described, totalling 12 samples.  Following extraction, equal amounts of protein lysates (20 µg) were mixed with Laemmli sample buffer and DTT (1X), and incubated for 5 minutes at 95 ⁰C. The protein was loaded into Mini Protean TGX (4-15%) gels (BioRad) and electrophoresed for approximately 10 minutes at 200 Volts. Gels were then stained with Coomassie Blue for protein visualization.  Protein digestion of brain tissues  Proteomic procedures were carried out as recently described(Cheng et al., 2021) with slight modifications. LC-MS/MS analysis of extracted proteins was performed. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis (BioRad) for in-gel reduction with 10mM DTT, alkylation with 55mM IAA and trypsin digestion (1:50 enzyme:protein) overnight at 37°C (V5111, Promega). Extracted peptides were lyophilised and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for desalting using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). Samples were lyophilised again and resuspended in 0.1% FA, bath sonicated for 20 minutes, and then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 minutes to remove insoluble debris, and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis and MS Data processing The Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC column particle size of 2 μm, diameter of 0.075 mm and length of 150 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used, employing a 120-minute gradient (2–80% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v FA) running at a flow rate of 300 nl/min to separate peptides. Subsequently, eluted peptides were ionized into the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that had an electrospray source fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (New Objective) and maintained at 1.6 kV electrospray voltage. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C. A data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in FT acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation was used for MS/MS fragmentation to select precursor ions. On the Q Exactive Plus, FT-MS analysis was carried out at 70,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS and a maximum injection time of 30 milliseconds; And MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x104 ions with maximum injection times set to 50 milliseconds. The ion selection threshold was set to 25,000 counts to trigger MS/MS fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed using an isolation width of 2.0 Da with a normalized collision energy of 27.  Raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Uniprot FASTA database incorporating the Sequest search algorithm. Search parameters accounted for 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.1 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance. The search allowed for static modifications of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, asparginine and glutamine deamidation, acetylated N-terminal residues. Two missed cleavages were allowed for. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.05. Protein identification required at least one unique peptide per protein.  Statistical and Bioinformatic Analysis Statistically significant differences in protein, peptide sequence, and peptide groups identified were calculated using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Common proteins identified in the LFQ of technical replicates were evaluated for Pearson correlation; the coefficients were calculated using the Scipy (v1.9.1) library in Python based on the logarithm values of proteins' Abundance Ratios with variance stabilization. The histogram and scatter plots were generated using the Matplotlib (v3.6.0) library in Python.  The frontal (including motor cortex) and temporal lobe cortex are implicated in neurodegenerative diseases whereas the occipital lobe cortex undergoes minor pathological changes in later stages(Yokota et al., 2006). Consistent with gene expression level studies, we compared protein levels and signaling pathway analyses in the pre-frontal/occipital lobe, temporal/occipital lobe and motor/occipital lobe in the brain tissue samples for relative label-free quantification (LFQ). High confidence proteins with an abundance ratio p<0.05 were selected and included for pathway analysis. Absolute expression fold change cutoff of 1.5 was used to identify analysis ready molecules in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Data were analyzed with the use of QIAGEN IPA (QIAGEN Inc., https://digitalinsights.qiagen.com/IPA) (Krämer et al., 2014). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the proteomic results was conducted using online open-source software PANTHERdb (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) classification system 17.0 that annotated proteins to biological processes (Mi et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics offers vast potential for studying the molecular regulation of the human brain. Formalin fixation is a common method for preserving human tissue; however, it presents challenges for proteomic analysis. In this study, we compared the efficiency of two different protein-extraction buffers on three post-mortem, formalin-fixed human brains. Equal amounts of extracted proteins were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS. Protein, peptide sequence, and peptide group identifications; protein abundance; and gene ontology pathways were analyzed. Protein extraction was superior using lysis buffer containing tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane hydrochloride, sodium dodecyl sulfate, sodium deoxycholate, and Triton X-100 (TrisHCl, SDS, SDC, Triton X-100), which was then used for inter-regional analysis. Pre-frontal, motor, temporal, and occipital cortex tissues were analyzed by label free quantification (LFQ) proteomics, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and PANTHERdb. Inter-regional analysis revealed differential enrichment of proteins. We found similarly activated cellular signaling pathways in different brain regions, suggesting commonalities in the molecular regulation of neuroanatomically-linked brain functions. Overall, we developed an optimized, robust, and efficient method for protein extraction from formalin-fixed human brain tissue for in-depth LFQ proteomics. We also demonstrate herein that this method is suitable for rapid and routine analysis to uncover molecular signaling pathways in the human brain.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Signaling, Pathways, Proteomics, Region, Method, Mass spectrometry, Formalin-fixed, Protein

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University NSW 2109 Australia

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University NSW 2109 Australia


