### Accession
PXD023367

### Title
Loss of COX4i1 leads to combined respiratory chain deficiency and impaired mitochondrial protein synthesis

### Description
The oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system localized in the inner mitochondrial membrane secures production of the majority of ATP in mammalian organisms. Individual OXPHOS complexes form supramolecular assemblies termed supercomplexes. The complexes are linked not only by their function but also by interdependence of individual complex biogenesis or maintenance. For instance, cytochrome c oxidase (cIV, COX) or cytochrome bc1 complex (cIII) deficiencies affect the level of fully assembled NADH dehydrogenase (cI) in monomeric as well as supercomplex forms. It was hypothesized that cI is affected at the level of enzyme assembly as well as at the level of cI stability and maintenance. However, the true nature of interdependency between cI and cIV is not fully understood yet. We used a HEK293 cellular model where the COX4 subunit was completely knocked out, serving as an ideal system to study interdependency of cI and cIV, as early phases of cIV assembly process are disrupted. Total absence of cIV was accompanied by profound deficiency of cI, documented by decrease in the levels of cI subunits and significantly reduced amount of assembled cI. Supercomplexes assembled from cI, cIII and cIV were missing in COX4 KO due to loss of cIV and decrease in cI amount. Pulse-chase metabolic labelling of mtDNA-encoded proteins uncovered a decrease in the translation of cIV and cI subunits. Moreover, partial impairment of mitochondrial protein synthesis correlated with decreased content of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. In addition, complexome profiling revealed accumulation of cI assembly intermediates indicating that cI biogenesis, rather than stability, was the affected process. We propose, that impairment of mitochondrial protein synthesis caused by cIV deficiency represents one of the mechanisms which may couple biogenesis of cI and cIV.

### Sample Protocol
Biological duplicates (COX4i1 KO clones 1 and 2, COX4i2 KO clones 1 and 2, COX4i1/4i2 KO clones 1 and 2) were harvested and MS LFQ analysis was performed in technical duplicates. Cell pellets (100 µg of protein) of wild-type HEK293 cell line, COX4i1, COX4i2 and COX4i1/4i2 KO clones were solubilized by sodium deoxycholate (final concentration 1% (w/v)), reduced with TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine], alkylated with MMTS (S-methyl methanethiosulfonate), digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin and extracted with ethylacetate saturated with water. Samples were desalted on Empore C18 columns, dried in Speedvac and dissolved in 0.1% TFA + 2% acetonitrile. About 1 µg of peptide digests were separated on 50 cm C18 column using 2.5 h elution gradient and analyzed in a DDA mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant (v. 1.5.8.3) with label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm MaxLFQ and match between runs feature activated. FDR was set as 0.01 at all levels. UP000005640_9606.fasta and UP000005640_9606_additional.fasta proteome files from UniProt 2017_04 release were used. MMTS alkylated cysteine was selected as a fixed modification (Methylthio (C), composition: H(2) C S, +45.988). Downstream processing of the proteinGroups.txt file was performed in Perseus v. 1.5.8.5. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and the rows were filtered based on valid values (min. 3 in at least one group).

### Publication Abstract
The oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system localized in the inner mitochondrial membrane secures production of the majority of ATP in mammalian organisms. Individual OXPHOS complexes form supramolecular assemblies termed supercomplexes. The complexes are linked not only by their function but also by interdependency of individual complex biogenesis or maintenance. For instance, cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidase (cIV) or cytochrome <i>bc1</i> complex (cIII) deficiencies affect the level of fully assembled NADH dehydrogenase (cI) in monomeric as well as supercomplex forms. It was hypothesized that cI is affected at the level of enzyme assembly as well as at the level of cI stability and maintenance. However, the true nature of interdependency between cI and cIV is not fully understood yet. We used a HEK293 cellular model where the COX4 subunit was completely knocked out, serving as an ideal system to study interdependency of cI and cIV, as early phases of cIV assembly process were disrupted. Total absence of cIV was accompanied by profound deficiency of cI, documented by decrease in the levels of cI subunits and significantly reduced amount of assembled cI. Supercomplexes assembled from cI, cIII, and cIV were missing in COX4I1 knock-out (KO) due to loss of cIV and decrease in cI amount. Pulse-chase metabolic labeling of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded proteins uncovered a decrease in the translation of cIV and cI subunits. Moreover, partial impairment of mitochondrial protein synthesis correlated with decreased content of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. In addition, complexome profiling revealed accumulation of cI assembly intermediates, indicating that cI biogenesis, rather than stability, was affected. We propose that attenuation of mitochondrial protein synthesis caused by cIV deficiency represents one of the mechanisms, which may impair biogenesis of cI.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Complexome profiling, Mitochondrial protein synthesis, Cox4, Biogenesis interdependency, Complex i, Cox assembly, Oxphos, Cox, Knock-out

### Affiliations
Czech Academy of Sciences
Laboratory of Bioenergetics, Institute of Physiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Marek Vrbacky

### Lab Head
Dr Tomas Mracek
Laboratory of Bioenergetics, Institute of Physiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic


