### Accession
PXD016147

### Title
BAP and ADCK4 interactor proteomic data LC-MS/MS

### Description
Although identification of single gene mutations associated with SRNS have yielded insights into pathogenic mechanisms and localized its pathogenesis to glomerular podocytes, the disease mechanisms of SRNS remain obscure. ADCK4 mutations usually manifest as steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, and cause coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency. We performed proteomic analysis to understand the function of ADCK4 via the identification of its interactome. We generated HEK293 cells that stably overexpressed C-terminal FLAG-tagged bacterial alkaline phosphatase (BAP; BAP-3xFLAG) and ADCK4 (ADCK4-3xFLAG). We confirmed that ADCK4-3xFLAG mostly localized to the mitochondria. Following affinity purification using anti-FLAG beads, protein eluates were analyzed using a liquid chromatograph coupled to a high-resolution mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). In total, 612 proteins were identified as interactors of ADCK4. Among them, the cytoplasmic proteins, including myosin (MYH10, MYH11, MYO1B, and MYO1C), filamin (FLNC), and kinase proteins (STK24, STK25, STK38 and ROCK1) were detected. In addition, the mitochondrial proteins, including ATP synthase subunit (ATP5L), cytochrome c oxidase subunit (COX6A1 and UQCRQ), and COQ5, were also identified as interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (75 mg) from HEK293 cells stably expressing p3XFLAG-ADCK4 or -BAP were incubated with 80 µL of FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 48 h at 4°C in an orbital shaker. The agarose beads were washed four times with lysis buffer to restrict non-specific binding. Subsequently, 200 µL of elution buffer containing 150 ng/µL 3xFLAG peptide was added, and then the samples were incubated overnight. The eluates were analyzed by immunoblotting, Coomassie blue staining, and silver staining. The eluates were digested and subjected to NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. ProLuCID was used to identify the peptides.  Protein sample preparation   A) In solution digest To perform protein digestion, protein extract was dissolved in 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of about 1 μg/μL. The proteins were denatured at 95°C for 5 min. The samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 60°C for 45 min. IAA was added to a final concentration of 20 mM, and the resulting mixture was incubated at 25°C in the dark for 45 min. Trypsin (1:50 protease-to-protein ratio) was added, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. Digested protein sample was speed-vacuum dried, and then dissolved in 20 μL of water containing 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were analyzed using a LC-MS/MS system consisting of a Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher scientific) and a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source (EASY-Spray Sources, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped 75 μm × 2 cm C18 precolumn (nanoViper, Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being separated on an analytical C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phases A and B were composed of 0 and 100% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The LC gradient began with 5% B and was ramped to 8% B for 1 min, 10% B for 16 min, to 40% B for 79 min, to 80% B for 1 min, and remained at 80% B over 8 min. Finally, it was ramped to 2% B for another 5 min. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% B for 10 min before the next run. The voltage applied to produce an electrospray was 1900 V. During the chromatographic separation, the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2. The MS data were acquired using the following parameters:  Full scan MS1 spectral (400-1600 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap for a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms at a resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4.0e5. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at resolution of 30,000 with high energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 27% normalized collision energy and AGC target value of 5.0e4 with maximum ion injection time of 54ms. Previously fragmented ions were excluded for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the following software analysis protocols with the Uniprot human DB(2018.2.6). The reversed sequences of all proteins were appended into the database for calculation of false discovery rate (FDR). ProLucid was used to identify the peptides, a precursor mass error of 5 ppm, and a fragment ion mass error of 200 ppm. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation at cystein were chosen as static modifications. Oxidation at methionine was chosen as variable modification. The output data files were filtered and sorted to compose the protein list using the DTASelect with two and more peptides assignments for a protein identification and a false positive rate less than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bap, Human, Ip, Lc-ms/ms, Adck4, Flag

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea

### Submitter
SEYOUNG YU

### Lab Head
Dr Gee Heon Yung
Department of Pharmacology, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Sciences, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Korea


