### Accession
PXD020793

### Title
Proteome profiling of FF and FFPE microdissected human kidney tissue

### Description
Aim of the project was to evaluate several MS-comaptible detergents for processing fresh frozen (FF) and formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) microdissected human kidney tissue. Here we have evaluated sensitivity of the methods and their applicability on FF and FFPE tissues, as well as investigated for the appropriateness of the use of FFPE tissues.

### Sample Protocol
FF tissues were snap-frozen in optimal cutting temperature medium (OCT) and subsequently stored at −80 °C until analysis. FFPE tissue were fixated overnight in 4% buffered formalin, the next day embedded in paraffin and subsequently stored at room temperature until analysis. Tissue area of the excised material on slides was measured using ImageJ software (version 1.49). All experiments were performed in triplicate. FFPE tissues were first deparaffinized in xylene for 2 minutes to remove the paraffine and further incubated for 2 minutes in a gradient of EtOH. The FF and FFPE tissues were cut out with the scalpel and scraped off into the Eppendorf tube containing extraction buffer. Proteins from the tissues were extracted with the following buffers: B1: 0.1% Rapigest, 30% ACN and 8 M urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Buffer 1); B2: 0.1% PPS, 30% ACN and 8 M urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Buffer 2) and B3: 0.1% ProteaseMax, 30% ACN and 8 M urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Buffer 3). Samples were first incubated in the buffers with no urea addition for 90 min at 95 ºC and further cooled down to room temperature. Then urea was added and samples were further incubated for 30 min at 37 ºC. Subsequently, 2.5 μl DTT was added and samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 °C. Further, 9.2 μl IAA was added to the samples and incubated for 30 minutes at 37 °C. Finally, samples were diluted with 120 μl of 1M NH4HCO3 and 880 μl of H2O and digested overnight.  After digestion, samples were purified on an SPE cartridge and stored at -20 ºC until instrumental analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files (.wiff) were converted into .mgf format using MS Data Converter (Beta 1.3). Files were processed using SearchGUI (version 3.3.16) and searched with X!Tandem against the Uniprot database (downloaded September 5, 2019). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Carbamylation of K residues and protein N-termini were set as variable modifications for carbamylation analysis, and for up to two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic digestion. Results were analyzed using PeptideShaker28, and proteins at 1% FDR were filtered. Protein sequences and protein annotations concerning subcellular localization were retrieved from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org), GRAVY scores were determined using the GRAVY calculator (http://www.gravy-calculator.de) and pI values were obtained using ExPASy

### Publication Abstract
The application of proteomics to fresh frozen (FF) and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human tissues is an important development spurred on by requests from stakeholder groups in clinical fields. One objective is to complement current diagnostic methods with new specific molecular information. An important goal is to achieve adequate and consistent protein recovery across and within large-scale studies. Here, we describe development of several protocols incorporating mass spectrometry compatible detergents, including Rapigest, PPS, and ProteaseMax. Methods were applied on 4 and 15 &#x3bc;m thick FF tissues, and 4 &#x3bc;m thick FFPE tissues. We evaluated sensitivity and repeatability of the methods and found that the protocol containing Rapigest enabled detection of 630 proteins from FF tissue of 1 mm<sup>2</sup> and 15 &#x3bc;m thick, whereas 498 and 297 proteins were detected with the protocols containing ProteaseMax and PPS, respectively. Surprisingly, PPS-containing buffer showed good extraction of the proteins from 4 &#x3bc;m thick FFPE tissue with the average of 270 protein identifications (1 mm<sup>2</sup>), similar to the results on 4 &#x3bc;m thick FF. Moreover, we found that temperature increases during incubation with urea on 4 &#x3bc;m thick FF tissue revealed a decrease in the number of identified proteins and increase in the number of the carbamylated peptides.

### Keywords
Ff, Ffpe, Mass spectrometry, Ms-compatible protocols, Kidney

### Affiliations
International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science, University of Gdansk
International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science

### Submitter
Irena Dapic

### Lab Head
Dr Irena Dapic
International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science, University of Gdansk


