### Accession
PXD023077

### Title
Biogenesis of Mitochondrial-Derived Vesicles (MDVs) – Novel Roles of GTPases MIRO1/2 and DRP1

### Description
MDVs are implicated in diverse physiological processes e.g. mitochondrial quality control and are linked to various neurodegenerative diseases. However, their specific cargo composition and complex molecular biogenesis is still unknown. Here we report for the first time the proteome and lipidome of steady-state TOMM20+-MDVs. We identified 106 novel high confidence MDV cargoes and verified several candidates by super-resolution microscopy including 5 members of the TOM import complex. Additionally, we demonstrate that MDVs deliver fully assembled protein complexes like the TOM complex for lysosomal degradation, thus filling a crucial mitochondrial quality control niche. Moreover, we show key biogenesis steps of MDVs starting with the MIRO1/2-dependent formation of thin membrane protrusions pulled along microtubule filaments, followed by MID49/MID51/MFF-dependent recruitment of the dynamin family GTPase DRP1 and finally DRP1-dependent scission. We conclude that catalysing scission during MDV biogenesis demonstrates a novel function of DRP1, distinct from its role in mitochondrial division.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from MDV and OMM enrichments were reduced (TCEP, 10 mM) and alkylated (CAA, 20 mM) for 60 min at 45°C and digested using the SP3 digestion technique (PMC4299378) using a one to one mixture of two different magnet beands (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic) # GE44152105050250,  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophylic) # GE24152105050250). 3 µL of washed bead mixture was added to the protein lysate and acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50%. The lysate was incubated for 8 min on an in-house constructed magnet and the supernatant was removed. Proteins bound to the beads, were washed twice with 200 µL acetonitrile. Beads were dried for 3 minutes and 5 µL of a digestion solution containing 0.1 µg Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.1µg Lys-C (Wako) was added for overnight incubation. Peptides were cleaned-up by 2 wash steps using 200 µL acetonitrile. Beads were incubated in 2% freshly prepared DMSO (Sigma Aldrich) and dried to complete dryness in a speed vac concentrator (Eppendorf). Prior to LC-MS/MS measurements, peptides were re-suspended in 10 µL 2% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry  LC–MS/MS instrumentation consisted out of an Easy nLC-1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled via a nanospray ionization source to a QExactive HF-x (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer. A binary buffer system consisting out of solvent A and B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was utilized for peptide separation. The in-house packed column length was 45 cm (ID = 75 µm). The column was filled with PoroShell C18 2.7-µm (Agilent Technologies) beads a column oven controlled temperate at 50 °C (PRSO-V2, Sonation). The buffer B percentage was linearly raised from 5% to 29% within 45 min and further increased to 55% within 10 min. The column was washed at 95% B for 5 min. All samples were measured in random order. The mass spectrometer operated in data independent acquisition mode. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 1 × 106. In total, 48 DIA windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th, covering a mass range from 385 to 1,043 m/z. Resolution of MS2 spectra was set to 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 24, 27, 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were analyzed using Spectronat (13.9.191106.43655) in directDIA (spectra library free) model. We downloaded the Chlorocebus sabaeus Uniprot reference proteome database and added the human TOMM20 fasta sequence (Uniprot ID: Q15388). Acquired runs were aligned using Precision iRT algorithm in Spectronaut by applying non-linear regression. Mass tolerances were set as default (40ppm for MS1 and MS2 level). Q-value cutoff on precursor and protein level was set to 0.01 using the implemented decoy method ‘mutated’. A maximum of 3 precursors were picked per peptide. Quantification was done on the MS2 level using the are under curve. Of note, the PRIDE repository contains additionally to the raw files the .sne Spectronaut file and further parameter settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Qexactive hf-x, Mdv

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


