### Accession
PXD004678

### Title
Proteomics of human dendritic cell subsets

### Description
We exploited label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to compare primary human blood Dendritic cells (DCs) subsets protein expression to identify new markers. Subsets distinguished are: Plasmacytoid DCs (pDC) and BDCA3+ and CD1c+ myeloid DCs and CD16+ monocytes. The dendritic cells were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and processed by MaxQuant for identification and LFQ quantification.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, DCs were isolated from aphaeresis products obtained from three healthy volunteers.  Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) were purified via ficoll density gradient centrifugation, followed by magnetic bead or flow cytometric isolation and directly lysed for MS. The lysed cells were centrifuged to separate soluble and insoluble fractions and separated by SDS-PAGE using precasted 4-20% TRIS/Bis ready Gels. Both soluble and insoluble fractions were loaded onto gels for MS analysis. The protein gel was stained with Novex Colloidal Blue and each lane was cut in to ten fractions. Gel fractions were subsequently treated with dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide and digested by trypsin.  Digested samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% HAc and purified by STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from raw mass spectrometric files using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5. Peak lists were generated for the top 6 most intense MS peaks in 100 Da windows by MaxQuant prior to the database search. Database search was performed in Andromeda search engine against Human Uniprot database (86,749 entries, June 2012) supplemented with sequences of contaminant proteins. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to tolerance of 6 ppm for the parental peptide and 0.5 Da for fragmentation spectra and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Deamination of glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and asparagine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Minimal required peptide length was specified at 6 amino acids. MaxQuant was used to perform internal mass calibration of measured ions and peptide validation by the target decoy approach and to enable the ‘match between run option’ for an elution time window of 2 minutes. Peptides and proteins detected by at least two peptides in one of the samples with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% were accepted. Proteins were quantified by normalized summed peptide intensities computed in MaxQuant with the label free quantification (LFQ) option switched on.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DCs) play a key role in orchestrating adaptive immune responses. In human blood, three distinct subsets exist: plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) and BDCA3+ and CD1c+ myeloid DCs. In addition, a DC-like CD16+ monocyte has been reported. Although RNA-expression profiles have been previously compared, protein expression data may provide a different picture. Here, we exploited label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to compare and identify differences in primary human DC subset proteins. Moreover, we integrated these proteomic data with existing mRNA data to derive robust cell-specific expression signatures with more than 400 differentially expressed proteins between subsets, forming a solid basis for investigation of subset-specific functions. We illustrated this by extracting subset identification markers and by demonstrating that pDCs lack caspase-1 and only express low levels of other inflammasome-related proteins. In accordance, pDCs were incapable of interleukin (IL)-1&#x3b2; secretion in response to ATP.

### Keywords
Cd1c+ myeloid dcs, Cd16+ monocytes, Dendritic cells, Lfq, Bdca3+, Plasmacytoid dcs (pdcs), Ms/ms (lc-ms/ms)

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences B427 Portland Square Plymouth University Drake Circus, Plymouth Devon PL4 8AA United Kingdom
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Kuntal worah

### Lab Head
Dr Edwin Lasonder
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences B427 Portland Square Plymouth University Drake Circus, Plymouth Devon PL4 8AA United Kingdom


