### Accession
PXD035422

### Title
Data in support of Temporal changes of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in multiple sclerosis related to the evolution of enhancing lesions on frequent brain MRI

### Description
Blood-brain-barrier (BBB) breakdown and active inflammation by relapsing–remitting (RRMS) lesions are hallmarks of multiple sclerosis (MS). Leaky endothelial junctions causes an increased expression of circulating immune cells with associated adhesion molecules on endothelial cell membrane but also an increased production of endothelial derived extracellular microvesicles (EV).  Methods:  Relapsing–remitting MS (RRMS) patients with no disease-modifying treatment were monitored with weekly intervals using high-resolution 3T MRI scanning. Plasma samples from each measurement were analyzed for protein biomarkers of inflammation by quantitative proteomics, cytokines and chemokines using multiplex immunoassay. Extracellular microvesicles were characterized by an optimized endothelial stress EV Array analysis for detection of soluble secreted microvesicles.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics – Sample Preparation and UPLC-TandemMS analysis A modified FASP protein digestion for plasma with trypsin was performed, with phase inversion surfactant removal. For each biological replicate sample a total of 100 µg protein was transferred to individual YM-10kDa spinfilters (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and buffer exchanged to 5%SDC in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) by centrifugation. All centrifugation steps were performed at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The proteins were then subjected to alkylation with 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for 30 min at 37°C, and reduction with 50 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 20 min at 37°C in the dark. The reducing and alkylating agents were dissolved in 120 mM SDC in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, and centrifuged after each step. In preparation for digestion, 100 µL digestion buffer (0.5% in 50 mM TEAB) was added to the spinfilter and centrifuged. A 1:50 (w/w) trypsin:protein ratio dissolved in 50 µL digestion buffer was added to the spinfilter, and the samples were digested overnight at 37°C. The flow-through containing the tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation followed by a phase separation performed with 3:1 (v/v) ethyl acetate:sample, acidified by addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Total phase separation was achieved by 1 min vortexing followed by centrifugation. The aqueous phase was collected and vacuum centrifuged overnight and stored at -80°C until time of analysis.  Proteomics – Mass Spectrometry Analysis The loaded samples amounts were normalized using A280 on a NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA), and 5 µg total peptide material was analyzed per UPLC-MS analysis. The samples were analyzed using a UPLC-nanoESI HCD MS/MS setup with an RSLC nanopump module. The system was coupled online with an emitter for nanospray ionization (New objective picotip 360-20-10) to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptide material was loaded onto a 2 cm trapping reversed phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Dionex) and separated using an analytical 50 cm reversed phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Dionex). Both columns were kept at 40°C. The sample was eluted with a gradient of 96% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 4% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN), which was increased to 8% solvent B on a 5 minutes ramp gradient and subsequently to 30% solvent B in 35 minutes ramp gradient, at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode (m/z 375-1400), selecting up to 12 precursor ions with a mass window of m/z 1.6 based on highest intensity for HCD fragmenting, at a normalized collision energy of 27. Selected precursors were dynamically excluded for fragmentation for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
A label-free quantitation analysis of the biopsies was performed in MaxQuant 1.5.7.0 by searching the data-files against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (UP000005640, protein count 70,952). All standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl (C) as a static modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) and Oxidation (M) were included as variable modifications. All proteins are reported <1% FDR, to ensure only high-confidence protein identifications and the result files from MaxQuant were analyzed in Perseus v1.6.7.0. All reverse FDR hits were removed from further analysis, and the data was log2-transformed. Two unique peptides or more were required for a protein quantitation to ensure high-quality data. For the purpose of conducting PCA missing values (i.e. proteins where a quantitation value was not obtained for a given replicate analysis) were replaced with values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8), to simulate signals from low abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis; proteomics; translational biomarker; blood brain barrier; flair

### Affiliations
Laboratory for translational biomarkers and digital health
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for translational biomarkers and digital health


