### Accession
PXD002151

### Title
Yeast methylarginine peptide IPS

### Description
Yeast peptides immunoprecipitated with an anti-mono-methylarginine antibody, analysis on Orbitrap Velos with ETD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from yeast were digested to peptides. Peptides were immunoprecipitated with an anti-monomethylarginine antibody. Analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Velos with ETD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mascot was used for processing. The following search parameters were employed: instrument type was set as ESI-TRAP, precursor and MS/MS tolerances were ±4 ppm and ±0.4 Da, respectively; acrylamide (C), carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), methylation (R), and dimethylation (R) were specified as variable modifications; enzyme specificity was trypsin with two or four missed cleavages allowed; and the SwissProt database was searched.

### Publication Abstract
The Hmt1 methyltransferase is the predominant arginine methyltransferase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. There are 18 substrate proteins described for this methyltransferase, however native sites of methylation have only been identified on two of these proteins. Here we used peptide immunoaffinity enrichment, followed by LC-ETD-MS/MS, to discover 21 native sites of arginine methylation on five putative Hmt1 substrate proteins, namely Gar1p (H/ACA ribonucleoprotein complex subunit 1), Nop1p (rRNA 2'-O-methyltransferase fibrillarin), Npl3p (nucleolar protein 3), Nsr1p (nuclear localization sequence-binding protein), and Rps2p (40S ribosomal protein S2). The sites, many of which were found to be mono- or di-methylated, were predominantly found in RGG (Arg-Gly-Gly) motifs. Heavy methyl-SILAC validated the majority of these peptides. The above proteins, and relevant sites of methylation, were subsequently validated by in vitro methylation with recombinant Hmt1. This brings the total of Hmt1 substrate proteins for which native methylation sites have been identified to five.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Arginine, Methylation

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences.
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Daniel Yagoub

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Marc Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences.


