### Accession
PXD022420

### Title
CFAP161 interactome from mouse testis

### Description
Identification of the interactome of the ciliary protein CFAP161 from mouse testit to identify the molecular function of this protein

### Sample Protocol
CFAP161 was immunoprecipitated from mouse testis using the Thermo Scientific Pierce crosslink IP kit with CFAP161 pII antibody. Immunoprecipitated CFAP161 complexes were isolated, purified, and subsequently analysed by LC-MS/MS as described previously {Beckers:2020bg} Control immunoprecipitations were done with rabbit-IgG. Eluates  were precipitated with chloroform and methanol followed by trypsin digestion as described before [36]. C-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (300 µm i.d. × 5 mm Pre collumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 µm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 117 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an LTQ Fusion mass spectrometer. From the high resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500, the most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the orbitrap depending by using a high speed method if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 27 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass [37]. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuanMS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) [25,38]. As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 3. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (release 2014_04) was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For each sample, 6 biological replicates were analysed. The statistical analysis including ratio, t-test and significance A calculation was done using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3,[26]). t software (version 1.6.1.0) [25,38]. As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 3. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (release 2014_04) was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. 8 immunoprecipitations from 3 wild type and 8 immunoprecipitations from 3 knock-out mice were analyzed. The statistical analysis including ratio, t-test and significance A calculation was done using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3,[26]). [25] M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification, 26 (2008) 1367–1372. doi:10.1038/nbt.1511. [26] S. Tyanova, T. Temu, P. Sinitcyn, A. Carlson, M.Y. Hein, T. Geiger, M. Mann, J. Cox, The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of ( prote ) omics data, (2016). doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901. [38] J. Cox, I. Matic, M. Hilger, N. Nagaraj, M. Selbach, J. V Olsen, M. Mann, A practical guide to the MaxQuant computational platform for SILAC-based quantitative proteomics., Nat. Protoc. 4 (2009) 698–705. doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.36.

### Publication Abstract
Cilia are protrusions of the cell surface and composed of hundreds of proteins many of which are evolutionary and functionally well conserved. In cells assembling motile cilia the expression of numerous ciliary components is under the control of the transcription factor FOXJ1. Here, we analyse the evolutionary conserved FOXJ1 target CFAP161 in Xenopus and mouse. In both species Cfap161 expression correlates with the presence of motile cilia and depends on FOXJ1. Tagged CFAP161 localises to the basal bodies of multiciliated cells of the Xenopus larval epidermis, and in mice CFAP161 protein localises to the axoneme. Surprisingly, disruption of the Cfap161 gene in both species did not lead to motile cilia-related phenotypes, which contrasts with the conserved expression in cells carrying motile cilia and high sequence conservation. In mice mutation of Cfap161 stabilised the mutant mRNA making genetic compensation triggered by mRNA decay unlikely. However, genes related to microtubules and cilia, microtubule motor activity and inner dyneins were dysregulated, which might buffer the Cfap161 mutation.

### Keywords
Mouse testis, Cfap206

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen


