### Accession
PXD040303

### Title
Structural basis of activation and inhibition of the Ca2+/calmodulin-sensitive adenylyl cyclase 8 (LiP-MS)

### Description
Membrane adenylyl cyclases (ACs) catalyze the conversion of ATP to cAMP, a second messenger involved in different signaling pathways. AC8 is one of the 9 membrane-bound isoforms, present in the brain and implicated in cognitive functions. AC8 is regulated by Ca2+/CaM and different G proteins but structural evidence on its regulation is scarce. We solved the structure of full-length AC8 in complex with Gas and CaM. ACs contain large stretches of disordered/highly flexible domains that cannot be resolved with cryo-EM. To overcome this limitation, we have studied AC8's interaction with Gas and Gbg using limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry (LiP-MS). A previously published data set on the interaction of AC8 and CaM was included in the analysis (PXD039520).

### Sample Protocol
The reactions were conducted in quadruplicates. Membrane suspensions were titrated with increasing concentrations of the respective interactor and incubated for 5 min. Proteinase K was added and incubated for 5 minutes at 25°C. The reaction was quenched and proteins were subjected to a tryptic digest overnight. More details on the sample prep and LC-MS/MS conditions can be found in the publication.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with Spectronaut v.15. The results were exported and imported into R where four parameter dose response curves were modeled onto to measured peptide intensities using the R packages protti, tidyverse and data.table. Tryptic controls were checked for protein abundance changes.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a chronic liver abnormality that exhibits high variability and can lead to liver cancer in advanced stages. Hepatic ablation of SIRT6 results in fatty liver disease, yet the potential mechanism of SIRT6 deficiency, particularly in relation to downstream mediators for NAFLD, remains elusive. Here we identify Serpina12 as a key gene regulated by Sirt6 that plays a crucial function in energy homeostasis. Specifically, Sirt6 suppresses Serpina12 expression through histone deacetylation at its promoter region, after which the transcription factor, Cebp&#x3b1;, binds to and regulates its expression. Sirt6 deficiency results in an increased expression of Serpina12 in hepatocytes, which enhances insulin signaling and promotes lipid accumulation. Importantly, CRISPR-Cas9 mediated Serpina12 knockout in the liver ameliorated fatty liver disease caused by Sirt6 ablation. Finally, we demonstrate that Sirt6 functions as a tumor suppressor in the liver, and consequently, deletion of Sirt6 in the liver leads to not only the spontaneous development of tumors but also enhanced tumorigenesis in response to DEN treatment or under conditions of obesity.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Structural proteomics, Lip-ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland; Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr M. Korkhov
Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland; Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


