### Accession
PXD009016

### Title
MPK4 phosphorylation dynamics and interacting proteins in plant immunity

### Description
The Arabidopsis MAP kinase 4 (MPK4) has been proposed as negative player in plant immunity, but it is activated by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as flg22. The molecular mechanisms by which MPK4 is activated and controls plant defense remain elusive. In this study, we investigated the Arabidopsis defense against a bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000 when the MPK4 is overexpressed. We showed an increase in pathogen resistance and suppression of jasmonic acid (JA) signaling in the MPK4 overexpressing (OE) plants. We also showed that the OE plants are very sensitive to flg22-triggered reactive oxygen species (ROS) burst in guard cells, which resulted in an enhanced stomatal closure, compared to wild-type (WT). During the flg22 activation, dynamic phosphorylation of MPK4 within and outside of the conserved TEY activation loop was observed. To elucidate how MPK4 functions during the defense response, we used immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry (IP-MS) to identify MPK4 interacting proteins in the absence and presence of flg22. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed a shift in MPK4-associated protein network, providing insight into the molecular functions of MPK4 at a systems level.

### Sample Protocol
To identify MPK4-interacting proteins, IP experiments were performed as described in the previous section with 10 mg protein each sample as input. The reagents described above were scaled up accordingly. IP of proteins from WT Col-0 (as control) was performed using the same conditions as IP of proteins from MPK4 transgenic plants with and without 10 µM flg22 treatment (denoted as flg22 and mock, respectively).  Four biological replicates (each derived from a pool of 1 g FW seedlings) were performed for each of the experimental group. After elution, the IP products were fractionated by SDS-PAGE using 12% precast gels (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA) at 100 V for 30 min. For each sample, three fractions of gel bands were collected: the major MPK4 bands, bands above the MPK4 bands and bands below the MPK4 bands. All the gel fractions were subjected to in-gel digestion and LC-MS analysis.   MS data acquisition was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a nanoelectrospray source. The peptides were separated by an Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column (250 mm × 75 μm; 2 μm-C18) with a linear gradient of solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 99.9% ACN) from 2% to 30% for 1 h at 350 nL/min. The MS was operated between MS scan and MS/MS scan automatically with a cycle time of 2s. Eluted peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120K with scan range 350-1800 m/z, and the most abundant ions bearing 2-6 charges were selected for MS/MS analysis. Automatic gain control (AGC) for the full MS scan was set as 2 × 105 with maximum injection time (MIT) as 50 ms, and AGC of 104 and MIT of 35 ms were set for the MS/MS scan. A dynamic exclusion time of 36 s was applied to prevent repeated sequencing of the most abundant peptides

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.0) was used to search the IP-MS data to identify MPK4 interacting proteins. FDR cutoffs for both peptide and protein identification were set as 1%, and at least of two peptides per protein was also applied for confident protein identification.  To measure the relative protein abundance in IP samples upon flg22 treatment, label free quantification using MaxQuant was performed. Proteins identified and quantified in at least three out four replicates were considered as true identifications. Proteins identified from the WT control plants represented proteins unspecifically bound to the resin, and were removed from the MPK4-interacting lists in the other two groups. The intensity of MPK4-associating proteins with and without flg22 stimulation was log2 transformed, and a median-based normalization was applied. The normalized data were subjected to principle component analysis and clustering analysis using R (version 3.3.1). To visualize the protein abundance change in a heatmap, the log2 transformed protein intensity data were compared with the median for that protein in all the samples. Thus, a negative value (represented in blue) indicates abundance lower than median and a positive value (represented in red) indicates above-median intensity. Two criteria were used to identify significant proteins: 1) fold change more than 1.5 times, and 2) p value from student t test less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Arabidopsis MAP kinase 4 (MPK4) has been proposed to be a negative player in plant immunity, and it is also activated by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as flg22. The molecular mechanisms by which MPK4 is activated and regulates plant defense remain elusive. In this study, we investigated Arabidopsis defense against a bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato ( Pst) DC3000 when Brassica napus MPK4 ( BnMPK4) is overexpressed. We showed an increase in pathogen resistance and suppression of jasmonic acid (JA) signaling in the BnMPK4 overexpressing (OE) plants. We also showed that the OE plants have increased sensitivity to flg22-triggered reactive oxygen species (ROS) burst in guard cells, which resulted in enhanced stomatal closure compared to wild-type (WT). During flg22 activation, dynamic phosphorylation events within and outside of the conserved TEY activation loop were observed. To elucidate how BnMPK4 functions during the defense response, we used immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry (IP-MS) to identify BnMPK4 interacting proteins in the absence and presence of flg22. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed a shift in the MPK4-associated protein network, providing insight into the molecular functions of MPK4 at the systems level.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis mpk4; innate immunity; protein-protein interaction; flg22; kinase substrate; ip-ms

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Pacific Northwest National Lab

### Submitter
Tong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
University of Florida


