### Accession
PXD014407

### Title
EVALUATION OF THE EFFECTS OF HUMIC ACIDS ON MAIZE ROOT ARCHITECTURE BY LABEL-FREE PROTEOMICS ANALYSIS

### Description
Humic substances have been widely used as plant growth promoters to improve the yield of agricultural crops. Root soluble protein profiles of 11 days after planting, cultivated with and without humic acids (50 mg C/L), were analysed using the label-free quantitative proteomic approach. The effects on root architecture, such as induction of lateral root and biomass increase were accompanied by changes in the proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein precipitation was conducted using 500 mg of root tissue from a pool of five roots from control and humic acids treated plants, harvestde at 11 days after planting, resulting in three protein extracts for each treatment. Frozen roots were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen using a pestle and mortar. The proteins from each sample were extracted using 4 mL of extraction buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8; 0.7 M sucrose; 100 mM EDTA; 1% (w/v) CHAPS; 14 mM DTT; 20 mg/mL of Roche protease inhibitor) and vortexed to homogeneize. After centrifuging at 16,000 x g for 20 min at 4ºC, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and precipitation buffer (12.5% (w/v) TCA and 0.125% (w/v) DTT in pure acetone) was added. Pellets were incubated at -20 ºC for 1 h and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 20 min at 4 ºC, then washed three times with pure methanol, twuice with pure acetone, and once with acetone containing 0.1 % (w/v) DTT. This was followed by centrifuging at 10,000 x g for 30 min at 4 ºC. The dried protein pellets were then suspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5 M urea. After sonicating for 30 min in ice and centrifuging at 10,000 x g for 30 min at 15 ºC, the protein in the supernatant were quantified using the Bradfrod assay. An aliquot of each samp0le (1mg/mL) was first treated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min and then with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin was added to the sample for overnight digestion at 37 ºC. All samples were vacuum-dried and reconstituted using 0.1 % formic acid. Three biological replicates were produced for each of the control and humic acids treated plants.

### Data Protocol
An aliquot containing 4.5 microliters of each particular sample was loaded onto a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scienntific, Waltham, MA), which was connected to a Nano flow LC (nLC-MS/MS) with an EASY-nLC system (proxeon Biosystems, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) through a Proxeon Nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separeted by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical PicoFrit column (20 cm X ID 75 mm, 5 mm particle size, New objective, Woburn, MA), at a flow rate 0f 300 nL/min over 45 min. The Nano electrospray voltage was set to 1.7 KV and the source temperature was 275 ºC. All operational procedures for the  LTQ Orbitrap Velos were input in the data-dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectrum (m/z 300-1,600) was obtained from the Orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 1e6. Resolution in the Orbitrap was a set to r=60,000 and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states greater equal 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value 5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy collision induced dissociation (CID) as dissociation or fragmention method, with normalized collision energy of 35%. The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 s, and repeat count of 1. An activation q of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was used. Initially, the RAW files were viewd in Xcalibur v.2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and a subsequent data search was conducted of the Zea mays database download from Uniprot in September 2015, using PatternLab (v.4.0.0.5) for the proteomics computacional environment and the Comet algortthm (v.20144.011). Parameters used were as follows: fully tryptic peptides; up to two missed clevages; carbamidomethylation as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine as a variable modification; and a peptide precursor tolerance of 40 ppm. The Search Engine Processor was used for post-processing of the peptide spectrum matches to achieve a protein list with less than 1% FDR, false discovery range. Proteins identified in at least two replicate samples were considered for further analysis. The PatternLab TFold module was used to identify differentially expressed proteins in the two treatments. The TFold module uses a p-value-dependent fold-change cutoff to maximize the nunmber of identifications that satisfy a theoretical FDR estimator (in this case, the Benjamini-Hochberg). Fold-changes were calculated as the average spectral counts obtained in the reference control roots (CR) divided by those obtained in humic acid roots.

### Publication Abstract
Humic substances have been widely used as plant growth promoters to improve the yield of agricultural crops. However, the mechanisms underlying this effect remain unclear. Root soluble protein profiles in plants 11 days after planting and cultivated with and without humic acids (HA, 50&#x2009;mg&#x2009;CL<sup>-1</sup>), were analyzed using the label-free quantitative proteomic approach. Cultivation of maize with HA resulted in higher fresh weight of roots than in untreated plants (control). Plants treated with HA showed increased number, diameter and length of roots. In the proteomics analysis, differences were detected in the following categories: energy metabolism, cytoskeleton, cellular transport, conformation and degradation of proteins, and DNA replication. Thirty-four proteins were significantly more abundant in the seedlings treated with HA, whereas only nine proteins were abundant in the control. The effects on root architecture, such as the induction of lateral roots and biomass increase were accompanied by changes in the energy metabolism-associated proteins. The results show that the main effect of HA is protective, mainly associated with increased expression of the 2-cys peroxidase, putative VHS/GAT, and glutathione proteins. Indeed, these proteins had the highest fold-difference. Overall, these results improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of HA-promoted plant growth.

### Keywords
Label-free proteome, Sustainable agriculture  technology, Maize, Humic acids

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Rosane Nunes

### Lab Head
Dr Marcia Regina Soares da Silva
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


