### Accession
PXD000999

### Title
DeMix:efficient identification of co-fragmented peptides

### Description
A data analysis workflow with a simple deconvolution method based on high resolution data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cell lysate trypsin digestion. SDC. 150min LC-MS/MS with 2h non-linear gradient. Top-20 DDA.

### Data Protocol
OpenMS, peak centroiding, feature detection ProteoWizard, format convertion Morpheus, database searching MaxQuant/Mascot/MS-GF+  search engines for comparative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Based on conventional data-dependent acquisition strategy of shotgun proteomics, we present a new workflow DeMix, which significantly increases the efficiency of peptide identification for in-depth shotgun analysis of complex proteomes. Capitalizing on the high resolution and mass accuracy of Orbitrap-based tandem mass spectrometry, we developed a simple deconvolution method of "cloning" chimeric tandem spectra for cofragmented peptides. Additional to a database search, a simple rescoring scheme utilizes mass accuracy and converts the unwanted cofragmenting events into a surprising advantage of multiplexing. With the combination of cloning and rescoring, we obtained on average nine peptide-spectrum matches per second on a Q-Exactive workbench, whereas the actual MS/MS acquisition rate was close to seven spectra per second. This efficiency boost to 1.24 identified peptides per MS/MS spectrum enabled analysis of over 5000 human proteins in single-dimensional LC-MS/MS shotgun experiments with an only two-hour gradient. These findings suggest a change in the dominant "one MS/MS spectrum - one peptide" paradigm for data acquisition and analysis in shotgun data-dependent proteomics. DeMix also demonstrated higher robustness than conventional approaches in terms of lower variation among the results of consecutive LC-MS/MS runs.

### Keywords
Hela, Deep proteomics, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Head Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics Karolinska Institutet Scheelesväg 2, SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Bo Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Division of Chemistry I, Head Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics Karolinska Institutet Scheelesväg 2, SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden


