### Accession
PXD011321

### Title
The dynamic proteome of Influenza A virus infection

### Description
We combined metabolic pulse labeling and quantitative shotgun proteomics to globally monitor protein synthesis upon infection of human cells with a human- and a bird-adapted IAV strain. While production of host proteins was remarkably similar, we observed striking differences in the kinetics of viral protein synthesis over the course of infection. Most importantly, the matrix protein M1 was inefficiently produced by the bird-adapted strain at later stages.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells were fully labeled in SILAC DMEM supplemented with glutamine, 10 % FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine, antibiotics and with either heavy (R10K8, “SILAC - H”), medium (R6K4, “SILAC - M”) or light (R0K0, “SILAC - L”) arginine and lysine. Cells were cultured in SILAC - L/M/H medium for at least 6 passages. 10 cm dishes of confluent light labeled cells were mock-infected, while heavy and medium labeled cells were infected with either Pan or Mal strain at an MOI of 3 (PFU). Virus was allowed to attach to the cells for 45 min on ice. Cells were washed with pre-warmed PBS before infection medium was added (SILAC DMEM containing the respective SILAC AA, 0.2 % BSA, 2 mM glutamine, antibiotics). Prior to pulse labeling cells were washed with pre-warmed PBS. Methionine depleted infection medium additionally containing 100 µM L-Azidohomoalanine (Anaspec) was added for different 4 h intervals to the cells. Cells were washed in PBS, scraped from the dish and frozen until further sample processing. Lysis and enrichment for newly synthesized proteins was done using Click-It protein enrichment kit (Invitrogen).10% of sample were directly subjected to Wessel-Flügge precipitation and served as the input, 90% were used for enrichment of newly synthesized proteins. Three different mass spectrometers were used with different HPLC systems and gradient(naming in the raw-file): Grobi/Bibo/Kermit: Q-Exactive, with EASY nLC set-up 15cm column in house packed, 2 h gradient, IEF fractionated for AHA-enriched samples. Waldorf: Q-Exactive Plus, EASY nLC set-up 2m monolithic column with 8 hour gradient for unfractionated AHA enriched samples and 4 h gradient for input. Tiffy: LTQ Orbitrap Velos, EASY nLC set-up 15cm column in house packed, 4 h gradient for both IEF fractionated samples and input.

### Data Protocol
Raw files for AHA-SILAC were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.1 Default settings were kept except that ‘requantify’ option was turned on. Label-free quantification via iBAQ calculation was enabled. Lys4/Arg6 and Lys8/Arg10 were set as labels and oxidation of methionines, n-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues were defined as variable modifications. The in silico digests of the human Uniprot database (downloaded January 2018), the protein sequences of twelve Pan and Mal Influenza virus proteins and a database containing common contaminants were done with Trypsin/P. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein level and was assessed by in parallel searching a database containing the reverted sequences from the Uniprot database. The resulting text files were filtered to exclude reverse database hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site (that is protein identifications that are only explained by a modified peptide). Plotting and statistics were done using R.

### Publication Abstract
Pandemic influenza A virus (IAV) outbreaks occur when strains from animal reservoirs acquire the ability to infect and spread among humans. The molecular basis of this species barrier is incompletely understood. Here we combine metabolic pulse labeling and quantitative proteomics to monitor protein synthesis upon infection of human cells with a human- and a bird-adapted IAV strain and observe striking differences in viral protein synthesis. Most importantly, the matrix protein M1 is inefficiently produced by the bird-adapted strain. We show that impaired production of M1 from bird-adapted strains is caused by increased splicing of the M segment RNA to alternative isoforms. Strain-specific M segment splicing is controlled by the 3' splice site and functionally important for permissive infection. In silico and biochemical evidence shows that avian-adapted M segments have evolved different conserved RNA structure features than human-adapted sequences. Thus, we identify M segment RNA splicing as a viral host range determinant.

### Keywords
Influenza, A549, Human flu, Silac, Aha, Avian flu, Protein de novo synthesis

### Affiliations
Proteome Dynamics, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Boris Bogdanow

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine


