### Accession
PXD040733

### Title
cryo-EM study of human liver cell lysate

### Description
This is the proteomic analysis data of Human liver cell lysate subjected to cryo-EM study.

### Sample Protocol
Human liver cell was lysed and fractionated by size exclusion chromatography. Two protein fractions were collected and subjected to protein digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all of the experimental peptide MS/MS spectra against the UniProt human proteome database using a database search engine, MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.1). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas variable modifications included oxidation of methionine to methionine sulfoxide and acetylation of N-terminal amino groups. For peptide/protein identification, strict trypsin specificity was applied, the minimum peptide length was set to 6, the maximum missed cleavage was set to 2, and the cutoff false discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
We applied raw human liver microsome lysate to a holey carbon grid and used cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to define its composition. From this sample we identified and simultaneously determined high-resolution structural information for ten unique human liver enzymes involved in diverse cellular processes. Notably, we determined the structure of the endoplasmic bifunctional protein H6PD, where the N- and C-terminal domains independently possess glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and 6-phosphogluconolactonase enzymatic activity, respectively. We also obtained the structure of heterodimeric human GANAB, an ER glycoprotein quality-control machinery that contains a catalytic &#x3b1; subunit and a noncatalytic &#x3b2; subunit. In addition, we observed a decameric peroxidase, PRDX4, which directly contacts a disulfide isomerase-related protein, ERp46. Structural data suggest that several glycosylations, bound endogenous compounds, and ions associate with these human liver enzymes. These results highlight the importance of cryo-EM in facilitating the elucidation of human organ proteomics at the atomic level.

### Keywords
Human liver

### Affiliations
CWRU
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,cleveland,OH,USA

### Submitter
zhemin zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W.
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,cleveland,OH,USA


