### Accession
PXD016766

### Title
Benchmarking the Orbitrap Tribrid Eclipse for Next Generation Multiplexed Proteomics

### Description
The rise of sample multiplexing in quantitative proteomics for the dissection of complex phenotypic comparisons has been advanced by the development of ever more sensitive and robust instrumentation. Here, we evaluated the utility of the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (advanced quadrupole filter, optimized FTMS scan overhead) and new instrument control software features (Precursor Fit filtering, TurboTMT and Real-time Peptide Search filtering). Multidimensional comparisons of these novel features increased total peptide identifications by 20% for SPS-MS3 methods and 14% for HRMS2 methods. Importantly Real-time Peptide Search filtering enabled a ~2X throughput improvement for quantification. Across the board, these sensitivity increases were attained without sacrificing quantitative accuracy. New hardware and software features enable more efficient characterization in pursuit of comparative whole proteome insights.

### Sample Protocol
TMT11-labeled triple knockout (TKO) yeast standards were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (A40938). Pellets from eleven human cell lines (RKO, A549, U87 MG, HCT116, HEK293T, HeLa, MCF7, U2OS, SUM159, PANC1 and Jurkat) were lysed, reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with LysC/Trypsin as described previously.2 Peptide digests were aliquoted to desired concentrations and labeled with TMT11 reagents. The labeled peptides were mixed and desalted (50 mg C18 SepPak, Waters) prior to basic pH reversed-phase fractionation. 96 fractions were collected and consolidated into 24 samples, out of which 12 nonadjacent ones were analyzed on the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a SEQUEST-based in-house pipeline.  carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), TMT of peptide N termini and lysine residues (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications, while the oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a linear discriminant analysis and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Turbotmt, Quantitative proteomics, Eclipse, Instrumentation, Tmt, Orbitrap, Real-time search, Precursor fit filter

### Affiliations
Cell biology, Harvard medical school
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Qing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P Gygi
Cell biology, Harvard medical school


