### Accession
PXD038950

### Title
Mitotic bookmarking redundancy by nuclear receptors mediates robust post-mitotic reactivation of the pluripotency network.

### Description
Mitotic bookmarking transcription factors (TFs) are thought to mediate rapid and accurate post-mitotic gene reactivation. However, the loss of individual bookmarking TFs often leads to the deregulation of only a small proportion of their mitotic targets, raising doubts on the significance and importance of their bookmarking function. Here, we used targeted proteomics of the mitotic bookmarking TF ESRRB, an orphan nuclear receptor, to discover an unexpected redundancy among members of the protein superfamily of nuclear receptors. Focusing on the nuclear receptor NR5A2, which together with ESRRB is essential in maintaining pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells, we demonstrate conjoint bookmarking activity of both factors on promoters and enhancers of a large fraction of active genes, particularly the most rapidly and strongly reactivated ones. Upon fast and simultaneous degradation of both factors during mitotic exit, hundreds of mitotic targets of ESRRB/NR5A2, including key players of the pluripotency network, display attenuated transcriptional reactivation. We propose that redundancy in mitotic bookmarking TFs, especially nuclear receptors, confers robustness to the reestablishment of gene regulatory networks after mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
Asynchronous and mitotic cells were obtained during successive experimental rounds, fixed with DSG (2 mM; Sigma, 80424-5 mg) for 50 min at RT followed by 10 min with formaldehyde (1%, Thermo, 28908), sonicated as previously described10 and stored at -80°C until 300.106 cells for each were accumulated. Next, ESRRB and control immunoprecipitations (IP) were performed in parallel in triplicates using 50.106 cells per IP and a standard ChIP procedure with anti-ESRRB (Perseus Proteomics, H6-705-00) and control antibodies (ref), except that after the last wash the beads were resuspended in 2x LDS buffer/100mM DTT, incubated for 35 min at 95°C while shaking and spun for 10 min at RT at maximum speed. Samples were stored at -20°C until further processing. The eluates, after equilibrating their temperature to RT, were alkylated by incubating with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark and then loaded onto 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies). Due to DSG/FA crosslinking, the proteins appeared as a smear upon SDS-PAGE electrophoresis; therefore, the bands corresponding to heavy and light chains of the IP antibodies were not cut out to avoid losing potentially relevant proteins. All proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2-hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8)56. Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing all mouse protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in 2016 using Andromeda search engine57. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach58. Table S1 reports all the proteins identified by MS in triplicate control and ESRRB IPs in asynchronous and mitotic cells, along with quantifications, normalized intensities and additional metrics. Razor and unique peptides were used to compute a fold enrichment and p-value between the ESRRB and control IP in either asynchronous or mitotic cells using the DEseq package59. Proteins displaying a fold change above 5 and a p-value below 0.05 in either asynchronous or mitotic cells were selected for further analyses. This list was filtered based on 'Reverse' hits, 'Contaminants' and 'identified by site' parameters. All detected immunoglobulins as well as other proteins belonging to the top 1000 frequently identified proteins in MS datasets (https://www.thegpm.org/lists/index.html) were ignored. This led us to 105 proteins identified as associated with ESRRB in either asynchronous or mitotic cells, available in Fig.S1 and in Table S2. Proteins displaying a p-value below 0.05 were considered as positive mitotic hits. However, we further classified them as high or low confidence depending on their general abundance in mitotic cells and their identification after Formaldehyde-only fixation (FA). To do this, we performed an additional round of MS using the mitotic replicate 2 for ESRRB IP together with its corresponding input (DSG/FA fixed) as well as an IP/Input generated in parallel after FA fixation. Proteins displaying higher Razor and unique peptides in both the DSG/FA and FA IPs compared to their respective inputs were considered of high confidence (Table S2). These 105 hits were analysed using the String database60: first, all proteins were used as an input to identify functionally related groups (subnetworks) based on Ontology annotations; second, all possible functional and biochemical interactions between each protein and the rest was computed; third, subnetworks were connected using the sum of all the interaction scores existing between all individual proteins of each group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Es cells, Esrrb, Mitotic bookmarking, Nuclear receptors, Nr5a2, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz 55128, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz 55128, Germany


