### Accession
PXD020610

### Title
Histone proteomic associated with epigenetic studies revealed a Ghost proteome in PC1/3 KD macrophages involved in anti - tumoral resistance under IL - 10 stimulation

### Description
In our previous work, our investigation on macrophages has allowed us to show that the inhibition of the enzyme proprotein convertase (PC1/3) controls the activation of macrophages. We demonstrated that PC1/3 knockdown (KD) in macrophages would exhibit an increased secretion of pro-inflammatory and anti-tumoral factors. In this biological context, we assessed for histone modifications and for the presence and contribution of a “Ghost proteome” in these macrophages. In addition, we have identified a set of alternative proteins (AltProts) that have a key role in regulating various signaling pathways. In this study, to further investigate the underlying mechanisms involved in resistance of PC1/3 KD macrophages to anti-inflammatory stimuli, we have conducted a proteomics-systems biology study to assess the epigenome variation focusing on histone modifications and to investigate for  the potential contribution  of AltProts in regulating PC1/3 KD macrophages resistance. Results from our study have indicated the presence of significant variations in histone modifications along with the identification of 28 AltProts with in part involved in anti-tumoral resistance under IL-10 stimulation. These findings highlight that key role of altered epigenome histone modifications in driving resistance and indicates that, like the reference proteins, AltProts have major impact in the field of epigenetics and regulation of gene expression as shown in our results

### Sample Protocol
2 000 000 of NR8383 PC1/3-KD and NT cells were plated on sterile 6 well plates and starved overnight in Ham’s F12K medium supplemented with 2% FBS. Cells were treated with 20ng/ml of IL-10 in serum-free medium during 24 h or left untreated. After stimulation cells were collected, washed once with ice-cold PBS and then lysed with RIPA buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris, 5mM EGTA, 2mM EDTA, 100mM NaF, 10mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1% NP40, 1mM PMSF, and 1X protease inhibitors) for total protein extraction. Sonication of 30 seconds was performed 3 times and cell debris were removed by centrifugation (20000 g, 10min, 4 °C). Supernatants were collected and protein concentrations were measured using a Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   Histone extraction. NT or PC1/3-KD cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS and then treated with The EpiQuik™ Total Histone Extraction Kit    Analysis of post-translational changes on histones. EPIGENTEK's EpiQuik Histone H3 Modification Multiplex Assay Kit (colorimetric) is used according to the manufacturer's protocol. 100 ng of histone extraction was used for the assays.   Proteomic analyses. For protein processing, a shotgun bottom-up approach was applied. 30 µl volume of each sample was prepared after the normalization in the previous step, to obtain a final concentration of 1.5 µg/µl per sample. An equal volume of reduction solution (DTT 0.1 M) was added to each sample then incubated 40 min at 56 °C. Using FASP method14 the samples were processed. This technique utilizes a filter with a nominal molecular weight limit of 30,000 (Amicon Ultra-0.5 30k, Millipore). After transferring the samples into the FASP filters, alkylation step was done using IAA solution (0.05 M) for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Digestion was then carried overnight at an incubation temperature of 37°C using LysC/trypsin (40 µg/ml in 50 mM Tris-HCL solution at pH 8). The filters containing the digests were then rinsed using 50 µl of saline solution (0.5 M) and the enzyme activity was stopped with 10 µl of TFA 5% for each tube. Enrichment and desalting were then performed for each sample with a ZipTip C-18 (Millipore) before undergoing LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data acquisition. The analyses were carried out by an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC chromatography (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The analysis was performed in reverse phase and the sample was loaded into a pre-concentration column (75 μm DI × 2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific). Using an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 50 cm , 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5% to 35%, for 2 hours) at 300 nL/min flow rate the peptides were separated. MS analysis was performed by Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, a mass range of m/z 300-1600, an AGC of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The MS/MS was performed independent data mode, defined to analyze the 10 most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). For MS/MS parameters, the resolution is set to 17,500 FWHM, a mass range of 200-2000 m/z, an AGC of 5e4 ions, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The isolation window is set at 4.0 m/z.    Data analyses. All data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 13. Proteins were identified by comparing all the spectra with the proteome reference database of Rattus norvegicus (Uniprot, release April 2017, 7983 entries) 14. The digestion parameters were defined using trypsin with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation was defined as variable modifications. The Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as fixed modifications. The Label-free quantification (LFQ) was done keeping the default parameters of the software. As for initial mass tolerance, 6 ppm was selected for MS mode, and 20 ppm was set for fragmentation data regarding MS/MS tolerance. The identification parameters of the proteins and peptides were performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, and a minimum of 2 peptides per protein in which 1 was unique. The statistical analysis of identified proteins was performed by Perseus software version 1.5.2.6 15. The matrix was filtered by removing the potential contaminant, reverse and only identified by site. Then, the samples were grouped into 4 categories: NT, NT-IL10, KD, and KD-IL-10. Statistical analysis was performed by ANOVA test with a p-value of 5%. Hierarchical clustering and profile plot were performed and visualized by Perseus 15. For the Alternative Proteins (AltProt), Proteome Discoverer V2.3 (Thermo Scientific) is used, the protein database was downloaded from Openprot (https://openprot.org/) 2 and included RefProt, novel isoforms and AltProts predicted from both Ensembl and RefSeq annotations (Rnor_6.0.84, Rnor_6.0) for a total of 293303 entries 16. The following processing and consensus parameters are used with: Trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages, methionine oxidation as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as static modification, Precursor Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm and Fragment mass tolerance: 0.1 Da. The validation was performed using Percolator with a protein strict FDR set to 0.001%. A consensus workflow was then applied for the statistical arrangement, using the high confidence protein identification. Results are filtered to keep master protein and high confidence protein FDR.    Sub-network Enrichment Pathway Analysis. Using Elsevier’s Pathway Studio (version 11.0/ /Elsevier), all relationships between the differentially expressed proteins among all conditions were depicted based on the Ariadne ResNet database17. For proteins identified in NT or KD with or without IL-10 treatment Subnetwork Enrichment Analysis (SNEA) algorithm was used to detect the statistically significant altered biological pathways in which the identified proteins are involved. This algorithm uses Fisher’s statistical test to detect any nonrandom associations between two categorical variables organized by a specific relationship. Also, this algorithm starts by creating a central “seed” from all the relevant identities in the database and builds connections with associated entities based on their relationship with the seed17. SNEA compares the sub-network distribution to the background distribution using one-sided Mann-Whitney U-Test, and calculates a p-value, thus representing a statistical significance between different distributions. In all analysis that we performed, the GenBank ID was used to form experimental groups based on the different conditions present for analysis. The pathway networks were reconstructed based on biological processes and molecular functions for each single protein, along with its associated targets17. In addition, we performed a targeted protein pathway analysis for PD using the protein list identified in the different clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Our previous investigation on macrophages has allowed us to show that the inhibition of the enzyme proprotein convertase (PC1/3) controls the activation of macrophages. We demonstrated that PC1/3 knockdown (KD) in macrophages exhibits an increased secretion of proinflammatory and antitumoral factors. In this biological context, we assessed the presence of histone modifications and the presence and contribution of a "<i>ghost proteome</i>" in these macrophages. We identified a set of alternative proteins (AltProts) that have a key role in the regulation of various signaling pathways. In this study, to further investigate the underlying mechanisms involved in the resistance of PC1/3-KD macrophages to anti-inflammatory stimuli, we have conducted a proteomic system biology study to assess the epigenome variation, focusing on histone modifications. Results from our study have indicated the presence of significant variations in histone modifications along with the identification of 28 AltProts, which can be correlated with antitumoral resistance under IL-10 stimulation. These findings highlight a key role of altered epigenome histone modifications in driving resistance and indicate that like the reference proteins, AltProts can have a major impact in the field of epigenetics and regulation of gene expression, as shown in our results.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Epigenetic, Altprots, Histone, Macrophage

### Affiliations
PRISM
PRISM laboratory, Inserm U1192, University of Lille

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM laboratory, Inserm U1192, University of Lille


