### Accession
PXD042252

### Title
Multiplexed Quantitative Analyses Using Data-Dependent Acquisition Without Dynamic Exclusion for trace sample analysis

### Description
In this project, we applied our recently developed turboDDA method in the analysis of low amount of sample and iTRAQ labeled trace sample. Compared with standard data-ependent acquisition approach with dynamic exclusion, we detected improvment in spectral purity and quantification accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
We used 8 plex iTRAQ reagents (Cat#4390812, Sciex) to build a model three proteome peptide mixture sample from these aforementioned three digests (Scheme 1).  We labeled yeast peptides with all six reagents and mixed the differentially labeled peptides so that the ratio of reporter ions at channels 113 to 114 and 118 to 117 was 10:6; 114 to 115 and 117 to 116 was 6:1; and the ratio of 113 to 115 and 118 to 116 was 10:1. We then labeled human peptides with iTRAQ reagents that generate reporter ions at m/z of 113, 114, 115 and 119 and labeled E.coli peptides with iTRAQ reagents that generate reporter ions at m/z of 113, 114, 115 and 121, respectively. We combined equal amounts (1:1:1:1) of the differently tagged human and E.coli peptides and added this peptide mixture to the yeast peptides. We used this sample to measure the interference effect. With no interference, we expected ratios of channels 113 to 114, 114 to 115 and 113 to 115 to be equal to the ratios of channels 118 to 117, 117 to 116 and 118 to 116, respectively, for each yeast peptide ion selected for MS2 analysis (Scheme 1). Interference from human or/and E.coli peptide ions on yeast ions in channels 113, 114 and 115 was responsible for a leveling out of yeast reporter ion intensities so that ratios measured for channels 113, 114 and 115 were less than those measured for channels 116, 117 and 118 (Scheme 1). Furthermore, spiking human and E.coli digests into channels 119 and 121 makes these two channels can reflect the interference from human and E.coli. Comparable model samples to study the interference effect have been reported previously, but our approach allows people to directly observe interference from human and E.coli peptide ions from channels 119 and 121. After labeling, all aliquots were combined and the mixture was desalted using spin columns (Thermo Scientific, Cat#89852). The desalted peptide mixture was subsequently vacuum-centrifuged to dryness, resuspended in 100 μL of 5% formic acid and 1 μL of it was analyzed by LC-MS/MS each time.
Cell pellets were suspended in 50 µL cell lysis buffer (5% SDS, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 mM TEABC) by pipetting up and down. The cell suspension was then sonicated with a probe-tip sonicator for 2 pulse (10 sec on and 20 sec off for each pulse) on ice. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 13000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, with the supernatant transferred into a new 1.5 mL tube. Extracted proteins were processed with the suspension trapping (S-Trap) method as our reported before [reference: , Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2022, 414(8): 2585-2595]. Briefly, proteins were first reduced in 20 mM DTT by heating at 95 °C for 10 min. After cooling down, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 40 mM for alkylation in darkness at room temperature for 30 min. The cell lysate solution was acidified by aqueous phosphoric acid (a final concentration of ~1.2% phosphoric acid) and diluted by six volumes of the S-Trap buffer (90% aqueous methanol in 100 mM TEABC, pH 7.1). The acidified mixture was transferred onto a midi S-Trap column followed by centrifugation at 2000 g for 1 min. After washing with the S-Trap buffer three times, proteins on the column were digested with trypsin (an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50, w/w) at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were eluted by adding 50 μL of 0.2% formic acid and 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid subsequently. The elutes were combined and dried down with SpeedVac.
For proteome quantification, four biological repeats were processed for each cell line samples (A549 and Calu-6), and the peptides were labeled with iTRAQ 8 plex reagents as follows: four repeats of A549 digests were labeled with iTRAQ reagents 113, 114, 115, 116, and Calu-6 digests were labeled with 117, 118, 119 and 121, respectively. After labeling, all the eight digests were combined and dried with lyophilizer. The mixture sample was fractioned with the pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Cat# 84868) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification of iTRAQ labeled three proteome peptide mixture sample, the wiff files from the Sciex TripleTOF 6600 system were imported into MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against the fasta file combined by three databases from human (65,536 entries), yeast (6,068 entries) and E. coli (4,306 entries). Database search employed the following parameters: Reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 8plex for the iTRAQ 8-plex experiments, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, minimum peptide length of 6, and protein FDR 0.01. The precursor intensity filtering (PIF) was set to 0, 0.25, 0.5 or 0.75 when testing their effects on identification and quantification. Appropriate correction factors for the individual iTRAQ channels for both peptide N-terminal labelling and lysine side-chain labelling as per the iTRAQ Reagent Multiplex Kit were also configured into the database search.

### Publication Abstract
Despite continuous technological improvements in sample preparation, mass-spectrometry-based proteomics for trace samples faces the challenges of sensitivity, quantification accuracy, and reproducibility. Herein, we explored the applicability of turboDDA (a method that uses data-dependent acquisition without dynamic exclusion) for quantitative proteomics of trace samples. After systematic optimization of acquisition parameters, we compared the performance of turboDDA with that of data-dependent acquisition with dynamic exclusion (DEDDA). By benchmarking the analysis of trace unlabeled human cell digests, turboDDA showed substantially better sensitivity in comparison with DEDDA, whether for unfractionated or high pH fractionated samples. Furthermore, through designing an iTRAQ-labeled three-proteome model (i.e., tryptic digest of protein lysates from yeast, human, and <i>E. coli</i>) to document the interference effect, we evaluated the quantification interference, accuracy, reproducibility of iTRAQ labeled trace samples, and the impact of PIF (precursor intensity fraction) cutoff for different approaches (turboDDA and DEDDA). The results showed that improved quantification accuracy and reproducibility could be achieved by turboDDA, while a more stringent PIF cutoff resulted in more accurate quantification but less peptide identification for both approaches. Finally, the turboDDA strategy was applied to the differential analysis of limited amounts of human lung cancer cell samples, showing great promise in trace proteomics sample analysis.

### Keywords
Itraq, Turbodda

### Affiliations
Clinical Reaseach center for Reproduction and Genetics in Hunan Province, Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-XIANGYA, Changsha, Hunan, China
Research specialist

### Submitter
Ci Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Shen Zhang
Clinical Reaseach center for Reproduction and Genetics in Hunan Province, Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-XIANGYA, Changsha, Hunan, China


