### Accession
PXD036900

### Title
Biomarkers found in the tumor interstitial fluid may help explain the differential behavior among keratinocyte carcinomas

### Description
Keratinocyte carcinomas (KC) are the most common malignancy worldwide. This category of tumours groups both basal (BCC) and squamous (SCC) cell carcinomas. While the former rarely metastasizes (0.03-0.55%), the latter is more associated to a substantial risk of local recurrence, metastasis and death (1.5-4%). In addition, it is well known that the extracellular signals from tumour cells are involved in most of the steps triggering metastasis. This pro-metastatic signalling is mediated by proteins secreted by cancer cells, which constitute the tumour secretome and can be obtained from tumour interstitial fluid (TIF). The TIF baths the tumour and stromal cells and characterizes the tumour microenvironment. The proteomic study of TIF is of particular interest for explaining the metastatic potential of a tumour. In this work, we have analysed the proteomic composition of the TIF from BCC and SCC tumour biopsies and discovered a new set of extracellular proteins that could be useful as differential biomarkers. In addition, these proteins may help to understand the distinct invasive and metastatic abilities of the KC.

### Sample Protocol
Obtention of TIF samples The skin biopsies were obtained after surgical resection and extensively washed with a sterile dressing to eliminate blood clots. The size of the biopsies was 4 mm. The tumour samples were from the tumour surface, in an area with no apparent necrosis or inflammation. Immediately, the tissue was collected with sterile forceps and put on a plate (6-well) with 1 mL of PBS. The forceps were used to shake the tissue in the PBS and the washing was repeated three times. The biopsy was blotted gently with tissue paper to remove excess PBS and transferred to 2 mL centrifuge tubes. The TIFs were obtained by centrifugation at 10.000g for 20 minutes at 4ºC recovering 5-15 microliters accumulated at the bottom of the tube. PBSi (PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors) was added for a final volume of 50 μL. This last sample was stored at −80 °C until the proteomic analysis. Sample digestion A total of 27 TIF fluid samples were quantified with the colorimetric RC DCTM protein assay quantification kit and twelve micrograms of protein of each sample were digested with Lys-C and Trypsin. Briefly, the samples were diluted with 6M Urea/200mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer and reduced and alkylated with 10mM DTT (dithiothreitol) for 1h at 25ºC and 20mM IAA (iodoacetamide) for 30 minutes at 25ºC in the dark. Then, the samples were diluted with 200mM ABC to reach a final concentration of urea of 2 mol/L. Lys-C was added at 1:25 (w/w) (enzyme-to-protein ratio) and protein digestion was carried out at 30 °C for 16h. The samples were diluted again with 200mM ABC to reach a final concentration of urea of 0.8 mol/L. Trypsin was added at 1:25 (w/w) (enzyme-to-protein ratio) and protein digestion was carried out at 30 °C for 8h. The enzymatic reaction was stopped with FA (10% (v/v) final concentration). Desalting of the resulting peptides was performed with C18 microspin columns (The Nestgroup). Finally, the peptides were dried in the speedvac and stored at -80ºC until use. LC-MS/MS analysis One microgram of each sample was loaded to a 300 μm × 5 mm C18 PepMap100, 5mm, 100Å (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15μL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS C18 T3 (75 μm × 25 cm, 100Å, Waters) with a 90 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3% to 35 % B in 120 min, from 35 % to 50 % B in 5 min, from 50 % to 85% B in 2min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN) at 250 nL/min flow rate. The column outlets were directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by CID. The MSMS was detected in the Ion Trap (with Max Injection time of 35ms). The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 10,000 (CID) for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. The minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Data was acquired with Xcalibur software vs 4.0.27.10 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were processed using the Maxquant 1.6.3.4 software. The peaks lists were searched against a SwissProt Human Database downloaded in March, 2018 (20316 entries) with the help of the MaxQuant built-in search engine Andromeda. The false discovery rate (FDR) was assessed by using a decoy database. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation in cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation in methionines and acetylation at the protein N-terminal were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using 20ppm and 4ppm peptide tolerances for the first and main searches, and MS/MS match tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR <1%. The quantification of the proteins was performed with the LFQ algorithm. The statistical analysis was achieved in R (https://cran.r-project.org/) and Rstudio (https://www.rstudio.com/) with the help of ‘limma’ package.

### Publication Abstract
Basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) and cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) are the most frequent types of cancer, and both originate from the keratinocyte transformation, giving rise to the group of tumors called keratinocyte carcinomas (KCs). The invasive behavior is different in each group of KC and may be influenced by their tumor microenvironment. The principal aim of the study is to characterize the protein profile of the tumor interstitial fluid (TIF) of KC to evaluate changes in the microenvironment that could be associated with their different invasive and metastatic capabilities. We obtained TIF from 27 skin biopsies and conducted a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis comparing seven BCCs, 16 SCCs, and four normal skins. A total of 2945 proteins were identified, 511 of them quantified in more than half of the samples of each tumoral type. The proteomic analysis revealed differentially expressed TIF proteins that could explain the different metastatic behavior in both KCs. In detail, the SCC samples disclosed an enrichment of proteins related to cytoskeleton, such as Stratafin and Ladinin-1. Previous studies found their upregulation positively correlated with tumor progression. Furthermore, the TIF of SCC samples was enriched with the cytokines S100A8/S100A9. These cytokines influence the metastatic output in other tumors through the activation of NF-kB signaling. According to this, we observed a significant increase in nuclear NF-kB subunit p65 in SCCs but not in BCCs. In addition, the TIF of both tumors was enriched with proteins involved in the immune response, highlighting the relevance of this process in the composition of the tumor environment. Thus, the comparison of the TIF composition of both KCs provides the discovery of a new set of differential biomarkers. Among them, secreted cytokines such as S100A9 may help explain the higher aggressiveness of SCCs, while Cornulin is a specific biomarker for BCCs. Finally, the proteomic landscape of TIF provides key information on tumor growth and metastasis, which can contribute to the identification of clinically applicable biomarkers that may be used in the diagnosis of KC, as well as therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Squamous cell carcinoma, Basal cell carcinoma, Tumor interstitial fluid, Label free, Orbitrap dusion lumos

### Affiliations
Cell Cycle, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRBLLEIDA), University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Eloi Gari
Cell Cycle, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida (IRBLLEIDA), University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.


