### Accession
PXD013891

### Title
Meiosis-associated argonaute (MAGO) proteins are necessary for meiosis in maize

### Description
Plants do not specify their germline until late in their life cycle. Hence, the plant germline is normally specified from terminally differentiated somatic cells, though the precise mechanism(s) are unknown. We have found that male gametogenesis in maize is associated with the accumulation of distinct 21-nt phased small-interfering RNAs (phasiRNAs) generated by meiosis-associated argonaute (MAGO) proteins. MAGO1 accumulates in the epidermis of pre-meiotic anthers while MAGO2 is found in developing meiocytes. We have found that MAGO proteins are required for meiocyte development as mutants display chromosomal defects and male infertility. Furthermore, we detect the heat stress-induced activation of a distinct class of Long terminal repeat retrotransposons in the male germline of MAGO mutants. Our data suggests that MAGO proteins and the reproductive phasiRNAs play important roles protecting the germline from transposable elements during environmental stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Plant total protein purification For heat stress experiments, plants were transferred to Growth chambers for 72 hours after 7 weeks of growth in glass house conditions. Florets were harvest and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein were extracted by adding thrice the volume of extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM Na2MoO4, 1% (v/v) SDS, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µM Calyculin A, 1 mM NaVO4, 1 mM DTT, Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) to 0.5 g of tissue. After 30 min the samples were spun for 15 min at 4,000 g (4°C) to remove debris. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged for another 30 min at 16,000 g (4°C). The supernatant was again transferred to a new tube and treated using the FASP protocol as described previously (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Samples were loaded on Amicon® Ultra-2 mL Centrifugal Filters with a cutoff of 3 kDa and diluted with 1 ml 8 M urea until 1 ml of buffer was passed through the column. Reduction and alkylation of the cysteine residues was carried out by adding a combination of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, followed by six washes with 25 mM Hepes (pH 7.5). The protein was digested with trypsin (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade) overnight at 37 °C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). After the digested the peptides were suspended in 80% acetonitrile (AcN), 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the insoluble matter was spun down at 4000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was used the enrichment of phosphopeptides.  Phosphopeptide enrichment The enrichment of phosphopeptides was carried out as described previously with minor modifications (Thingholm et al., 2006). The peptide concentration was measured with a Qubit™ fluorometer (Invitrogen) and 1 g total peptides were used for each sample. The Titansphere TiO2 10 µm beads (GL Sciences Inc.) were equilibrated in a buffer containing 20 mg/mL 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB), 80% ACN and 5% TFA in a ratio of 10 µl DHBeq per 1 mg beads for 10 min with gentle shaking at 600 rpm. TiO2 beads were used in a ratio of 1:2 peptide-bead ration (w:w). The TiO2 solution was added to each sample and incubated for 60 min at room temperature. This step was repeated one more time. The samples were then spun down at 3000 g for 2 min and resuspended in 100 µL Wash buffer I (10% AcN, 5% TFA). The resuspended beads were added to self-made C8-columns. C8-colums were made of 200 µL pipette tips with 2 mm Empore™Octyl C8 (Supelco) discs. The columns were spun down at 2600 g for 2 min, washed with 100 µL Wash buffer II (40% AcN, 5% TFA) and 100 µL Wash buffer III (40% AcN, 5% TFA). The peptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads with 20 µL 5% ammonium hydroxide and subsequently with 20 µL 20% ammonium hydroxide in 25% AcN. Both eluates were pooled, the volume was reduced to 5 µL in a centrifugal evaporator (20 – 30 min) and acidified with 100 µL of buffer A (2% AcN, 1% TFA). Samples were desalted with a self-made C18 column (Empore™Octadecyl C18). C18 were made in the same way as the C8-columns. Before adding the samples, the C18-columns were activated with 50 µL methanol and washed with 50 µL AcN and 50 µL buffer A* (2% AcN, 0.1% TFA). Samples were loaded on the C18-column and spun at 2000 g for 7 min. The columns were washed with 50 µL ethyl acetate and 50 µL buffer A* and then eluted consecutively with 20 µL 40% AcN and 20 µL 60% AcN. Samples were then vacuum-dried and prior to MS analysis resuspended in 50 µL buffer A*.

### Data Protocol
Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. The samples were analysed with two columns, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) at 40C. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water containing 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 8 min at 10 µL min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 250 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B from 4% to 25% over 90 min, 35% B over 13 min, followed by 3 min wash at 80% B and a 14 min re-equilibration at 4% B. Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with 2x105 ion count target and maximum injection time 150 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5x103 and maximum injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on and instrument was run in top speed mode. The raw data were searched using MaxQuant engine (http://www.biochem.mpg.de/5111733/software) against the Uniprot Zea mays reference proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000007305) and the common contaminant database from MaxQuant. Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, and with oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances.  Scaffold (version 4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.  Additional analysis of phosphopeptides was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.2.2, https://maxquant.net/perseus/).

### Publication Abstract
Although plants are able to withstand a range of environmental conditions, spikes in ambient temperature can impact plant fertility causing reductions in seed yield and notable economic losses<sup>1,2</sup>. Therefore, understanding the precise molecular mechanisms that underpin plant fertility under environmental constraints is critical to safeguarding future food production<sup>3</sup>. Here, we identified two Argonaute-like proteins whose activities are required to sustain male fertility in maize plants under high temperatures. We found that MALE-ASSOCIATED ARGONAUTE-1 and -2 associate with temperature-induced phased secondary small RNAs in pre-meiotic anthers and are essential to controlling the activity of retrotransposons in male meiocyte initials. Biochemical and structural analyses revealed how male-associated Argonaute activity and its interaction with retrotransposon RNA targets is modulated through the dynamic phosphorylation of a set of highly conserved, surface-located serine residues. Our results demonstrate that an Argonaute-dependent, RNA-guided surveillance mechanism is critical in plants to sustain male fertility under environmentally constrained conditions, by controlling the mutagenic activity of transposons in male germ cells.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Zea mays, Argonaute, Proteomics, Meiosis, Maize

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jose Gutierrez-Marcos
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom


