### Accession
PXD001548

### Title
Rapid High-pH Reverse Phase StageTip for Sensitive Small-Scale Membrane Proteomic Profiling

### Description
Membrane proteins are crucial targets for cancer biomarker discovery and drug development. However, in addition to the inherent challenges of hydrophobicity and low abundance, complete membrane proteome coverage of clinical specimen is usually hindered by the requirement of large amount of starting materials. Towards comprehensive membrane proteomic profiling for small amounts of samples (< 10 µg), we developed high-pH reverse phase (Hp-RP) combined with stop-and-go extraction tip (StageTip) technique, as a fast (~ 15 mins.), sensitive, reproducible, high-resolution and multiplexed fractionation method suitable for accurate quantification of the membrane proteome. This approach provided almost 2-fold enhanced detection of peptides within transmembrane helix domains  compared with strong anion exchange (SAX) and strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTip techniques. More than 5000 proteins (63% membrane proteins) can be identified in only 10 µg of membrane protein digests, showing the superior sensitivity of the Hp-RP StageTip approach. The Hp-RP StageTip method enabled in-depth membrane proteome profiling of 11 lung cancer cell lines harboring different EGFR mutation status, which resulted in the identification of 3983 annotated membrane proteins. This provides the largest collection of reference peptide spectral data for lung cancer membrane sub-proteome. Finally, relative quantification of membrane proteins between Gefitinib-resistant and -sensitive lung cancer cell lines revealed several upregulated membrane proteins with key roles in lung cancer progression.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins from HeLa and lung cancer cell lines were extracted through a two-step centrifugation process and then digested using the gel-assisted digestion protocol.  The peptides were fractionated using three StageTip techniques: SAX, SCX, and Hp-RP (3 replicates for each) to evaluate the performance of the three techniques for the recovery of hydrophobic peptides.  Protein digests from the HeLa model cell line were used for this purpose.  The samples were injected into a Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface.   For the proteomic analysis of lung cancer cell lines, protein digests were run using both Synapt G1 HDMS and AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 instruments.

### Data Protocol
For the comparison of Hp-RP, SAX, and SCX StageTip techniques, the MS/MS spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot human database (version 57.8, 20102 entries) using SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.0. For the proteomic analysis of the lung cancer cell lines, the acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot human database (version 57.8, 20102 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.3.02).  Database search of spectra obtained from Synapt G1 HDMS were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.1 Da.  For spectra obtained from AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 System, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm were employed. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. Deamidation (Asn and Gln), oxidation (Met) and methylation (Cys) were selected as variable modifications.  Identifications with false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (p < 0.05) using Percolator scoring was employed. Membrane protein and TMH annotations were done using the HuMemProtDB, our in-house web-based tool developed at the Bioinformatics Lab., Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei Taiwan (Supporting Information).  Gravy (grand average hydropathy) values were calculated using the method of Kyte, J. and Doolittle, R.F. through the Protein Digestion Simulator tool from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (http://omics.pnl.gov/software/protein-digestion-simulator).  pI values were obtained from the Compute pI/Mw tool of ExPASy Bioinformatics Resource Portal (http://web.expasy.org/compute_pi/). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and BIOCARTA Pathway analysis of the upregulated proteins in Gefitinib resistant cell lines was performed using DAVID Functional Annotation version 6.7 (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/summary.jsp).

### Publication Abstract
Membrane proteins are crucial targets for cancer biomarker discovery and drug development. However, in addition to the inherent challenges of hydrophobicity and low abundance, complete membrane proteome coverage of clinical specimen is usually hindered by the requirement of large amount of starting materials. Toward comprehensive membrane proteomic profiling for small amounts of samples (10 &#x3bc;g), we developed high-pH reverse phase (Hp-RP) combined with stop-and-go extraction tip (StageTip) technique, as a fast (&#x223c;15 min.), sensitive, reproducible, high-resolution and multiplexed fractionation method suitable for accurate quantification of the membrane proteome. This approach provided almost 2-fold enhanced detection of peptides encompassing transmembrane helix (TMH) domain, as compared with strong anion exchange (SAX) and strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTip techniques. Almost 5000 proteins (&#x223c;60% membrane proteins) can be identified in only 10 &#x3bc;g of membrane protein digests, showing the superior sensitivity of the Hp-RP StageTip approach. The method allowed up to 9- and 6-fold increase in the identification of unique hydrophobic and hydrophilic peptides, respectively. The Hp-RP StageTip method enabled in-depth membrane proteome profiling of 11 lung cancer cell lines harboring different EGFR mutation status, which resulted in the identification of 3983 annotated membrane proteins. This provides the largest collection of reference peptide spectral data for lung cancer membrane subproteome. Finally, relative quantification of membrane proteins between Gefitinib-resistant and -sensitive lung cancer cell lines revealed several up-regulated membrane proteins with key roles in lung cancer progression.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, High-ph reverse phase stagetip, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Baby Rorielyn Dimayacyac-Esleta

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


