### Accession
PXD006108

### Title
Predictive biomarkers of sperm quality in sturgeon spermatozoa

### Description
In this study, we used the iTRAQ proteomics approach to perform proteomic profiling of spermatozoa associated with sperm quality in sturgeons. The results showed 291 and 359 differentially expressed proteins in A. baerii and A. schrenckii, respectively, of which 72 were common to both species and all were upregulated in high quality compared with low quality samples. The differentially expressed proteins were mainly categorized into the generation of precursor metabolites and energy and oxidation, and they were localized to the mitochondria. Three distinguishing pathways, Arginine and proline metabolism, Pyruvate metabolism and the Citrate cycle (TCA cycle) were found to play an important role in energy metabolism, and some substrates could be used in the sperm medium for storage and cryopreservation.

### Sample Protocol
Mature male and female A. baerii and A. schrenckii used in this study were cultured in the Hatchery for Chinese Sturgeon at Jingzhou, Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fisheries Science. Males (11 and 7 individuals for A. baerii and A. schrenckii, respectively) were induced using an intramuscular injection of approximately 5 µg/kg of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone A2 (LRH-A2) and 0.5 mg/kg domperidone (DOM). After 12 hrs, the sperm was obtained by gentle abdominal massage, taking special care to avoid blood, urine, or faecal contamination. Females were induced to ovulate first by an intramuscular injection of 5 µg/kg LRH-A2 24 h before stripping, and then by a second intramuscular injection of 9 µg/kg LRH-A2, 1 mg/kg DOM and 1 mg/kg of vitamin B1 12 h before stripping. The eggs were obtained by abdominal massage and stored in dry bowls. A sperm quality assessment was immediately performed, and it included motility and fertility. The spermatozoa from each individual in a group were pooled together for protein extraction (samples of A. baerii and A. schrenckii were pooled from 4 and 3 individuals, respectively). The total protein was extracted using the cold acetone method. Ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid (EDTA - 2 mM) and phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride (PMSF - 1 mM), dithiothreitol (DTT - 10 mM) were added, and the samples were ground to disrupt the cells. The samples were centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellets were discarded. DTT (10 mM) in 5 times the volume of cold acetone was added to the samples, followed by overnight incubation at −20°C and centrifugation at 25,000 × g at 4°C for 20 minutes, then the supernatant was discarded. To reduce the acidity, the pellet was washed with 10 mM DDT in 1.5 mL cold acetone and centrifuged at 25,000 × g at 4°C for 20 min. The acetone wash was repeated. The precipitate was dried in a vacuum concentrator for 5 min, and the dried pellet was lysed with 1 ml of protein extraction reagent [8 M urea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 30 mM HEPES, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 mM DTT] and sonicated for 5 min. The samples were centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C to remove non-soluble impurities. The protein concentration was determined with the 2-D Quant Kit (General Electric Company, USA). SDS-PAGE was performed to verify the protein quality and concentration. The spermatozoa from each individual in a group were pooled together for protein extraction (samples of A. baerii and A. schrenckii were pooled from 4 and 3 individuals, respectively). The total protein was extracted using the cold acetone method. Ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid (EDTA - 2 mM) and phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride (PMSF - 1 mM), dithiothreitol (DTT - 10 mM) were added, and the samples were ground to disrupt the cells. The samples were centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellets were discarded. DTT (10 mM) in 5 times the volume of cold acetone was added to the samples, followed by overnight incubation at −20°C and centrifugation at 25,000 × g at 4°C for 20 minutes, then the supernatant was discarded. To reduce the acidity, the pellet was washed with 10 mM DDT in 1.5 mL cold acetone and centrifuged at 25,000 × g at 4°C for 20 min. The acetone wash was repeated. The precipitate was dried in a vacuum concentrator for 5 min, and the dried pellet was lysed with 1 ml of protein extraction reagent [8 M urea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 30 mM HEPES, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 mM DTT] and sonicated for 5 min. The samples were centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C to remove non-soluble impurities. The protein concentration was determined with the 2-D Quant Kit (General Electric Company, USA). SDS-PAGE was performed to verify the protein quality and concentration. The iTRAQ labelling procedure was performed following the instructions provided in the iTRAQ labelling kit (Applied Biosystems), unless otherwise specified. For each protein sample, 100 μg of protein was denatured, and the cysteine residues were blocked as described in the iTRAQ protocol. The protein samples were digested with 5 μg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 36 h. The digested samples were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and the protein pellets were dissolved in 30 μL of 50% tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) together with 70 μL of isopropanol and labelled with the iTRAQ reagents according to the protocol of the 8-plex iTRAQ labelling kit. The trypsin-digested samples were analysed via matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight/time-of-filight (MALDI-TOF-TOF) to ensure complete digestion. iTRAQ tags 113–121 were added to the digested protein samples during labelling. The iTRAQ-labelled samples were then pooled and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation.

### Data Protocol
To predict the functions of the differentially expressed proteins, we analysed the proteins in terms of three aspects. First, we categorized the proteins functionally using the WEGO (web Gene Ontology Annotation Plot) web service (http://wego.genomics.org.cn/cgi-bin/wego/index.pl). The consensus or exemplar sequences of the proteins were then subjected to BLAST searches against the appropriate database, and the top hits were selected using an E-value cut-off of 10–5. Next, we performed a functional category gene enrichment test using Blast2GO to determine whether the differentially expressed proteins were significantly enriched in any functional subcategories. An FDR significance threshold of 0.05 was selected. Lastly, we mapped the differentially expressed proteins to biological pathways using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) resource (www.genome.jp/kegg/).

### Publication Abstract
Conventional sperm analysis (i.e., motility and fertility) has been used to evaluate sperm quality. Understanding the quality of sperm on the molecular level in the sturgeons, Acipenser baerii and A. schrenckii, is essential for the improvement of the conservation of genetic resources and farming performance. In this study, we used the iTRAQ proteomics approach to perform proteomic profiling of spermatozoa associated with sperm quality in sturgeons (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006108). The results showed 291 and 359 differentially expressed proteins in A. baerii and A. schrenckii, respectively, of which 72 were common to both species and all were upregulated in high quality compared with low quality samples. The differentially expressed proteins were mainly categorized into the generation of precursor metabolites and energy and oxidation, and they were localized to the mitochondria. Three distinguishing pathways, Arginine and proline metabolism, Pyruvate metabolism and the Citrate cycle (TCA cycle) were found to play an important role in energy metabolism, and some substrates could be used in the sperm medium for storage and cryopreservation. The quantity levels of two proteins, CKMT1 and LDHB, were verified by western blot analysis. Moreover, other potential biomarkers involved in oxidation reduction, ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent proteolysis, chaperones and binding activity were also discussed. Our study is the first to use the iTRAQ-based proteomics approach to analyse the sturgeon spermatozoa proteome, and the results that we obtained are valuable for the prediction of sperm quality and reproduction management in these threatened species.

### Keywords
Itraq; proteomics; spermatozoa; sturgeon; biomarker

### Affiliations
genedenovo
Key Laboratory of Freshwater Biodiversity Conservation, Ministry of Agriculture of China, Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuhan 430223, China

### Submitter
jingjing huang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Li
Key Laboratory of Freshwater Biodiversity Conservation, Ministry of Agriculture of China, Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuhan 430223, China


