### Accession
PXD003172

### Title
MS imaging of tryptic peptides in mouse brain measured at 50 µm pixel size

### Description
A coronal mouse brain section that was measured at 50µm pixel size revealed detailed histological structures such as the ependyma (consisting of one to two cell layers, which was confirmed by HE staining).

### Sample Protocol
A series of washing steps was applied to tissue sections for fixation and to remove salts and lipids. After two times in 70% ethanol for 30s and 100% ethanol for 15s the sample was washed in a solution of 90% ethanol, 9% glacial acid and 1% water. To remove the acid the glass slide was dipped in water for 2s to obtain optimal conditions for the trypsin application [40]. Trypsin (0.05 µg/µL in 10 mM NH4HCO3) was deposited with a home built spraying device. 15 cycles à 2 µL (flow rate 12 µL/min) for mouse brain and 15 cycles à 15 µL (flow rate 30 µL/min) for the whole mouse body were sprayed. Between spraying cycles the tissue section was placed for 10 min in a cell culture incubator (37°C, 100% relative humidity) and after the last spraying step it was incubated overnight.  After tryptic digestion matrix (30 mg/mL 2,5-DHB in Acetone:Water 1:1 + 0.1% TFA) was applied with an homebuilt pneumatic spraying device. Homogeneity and crystal size (5-15 µm) of the matrix were checked with a microscope.  In case of the whole body mouse section  the SunCollect (SunChrome, Friedrichsdorf, Germany) sprayer was used with 10 µL/min and 17 cycles.MALDI MS imaging experiments were performed with 25 or 50 µm pixel size using an atmospheric pressure imaging ion source (AP-SMALDI10, TransMIT GmbH, Giessen, Germany) attached to an orbital trapping mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germany) [41][42]. The ion source was equipped with a nitrogen laser with a wavelength of λ=337 nm. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode at a mass resolution of 35,000-140,000 at m/z = 200 over a mass range of m/z = 600-1200 or m/z = 400-1600. Internal calibration was performed using m/z = 993.11210, a matrix cluster signal, as a lock mass, resulting in mass accuracy of better than 3 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Selected ion images of known peptide masses were generated using the in-house developed software package MIRION  [43] or MSI Reader [44] with a bin width of Δm/z = 0.01. Intensity values in the ion images were normalized to the highest intensity measured for each ion species separately. Apart from that images represent raw data without pixel-wise normalization, spatial interpolation or smoothing.

### Publication Abstract
On-tissue digestion has become the preferred method to identify proteins in mass spectrometry (MS) imaging. In this study, we report advances in data acquisition and protein identification for MS imaging after on-tissue digestion. Tryptic peptides in a coronal mouse brain section were measured at 50&#xa0;&#x3bc;m pixel size and revealed detailed histological structures, e.g., the ependyma (consisting of one to two cell layers), which was confirmed by H&amp;E staining. This demonstrates that MS imaging of tryptic peptides at or close to cellular resolution is within reach. We also describe a detailed identification workflow which resulted in the identification of 99 proteins (with 435 corresponding peptides), based on comparison with LC-MS/MS data and in silico digest. These results were obtained with stringent parameters, including high mass accuracy in imaging mode (RSME &lt;&#x2009;3&#xa0;ppm) and at least two unique peptides per protein showing consistent spatial distribution. We identified almost 50% of proteins with at least four corresponding peptides. As there is no agreed approach for identification of proteins after on-tissue digestion yet, we discuss our workflow in detail and make the corresponding mass spectral data available as "open data" via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD003172). With this, we would like to contribute to a more effective discussion and the development of new approaches for tryptic peptide identification in MS imaging. From an experimental point of view, we demonstrate the improvement due to the combination of high spatial resolution and high mass resolution/mass accuracy on a measurement at 25&#xa0;&#x3bc;m pixel size in mouse cerebellum tissue. A whole body section of a mouse pub imaged at 50&#xa0;&#x3bc;m pixel size (40&#xa0;GB, 230,000 spectra) demonstrates the stability of our protocol. For this data set, we developed a workflow that is based on conversion to the common data format imzML and sequential application of freely available software tools. In combination, the presented results for spatial resolution, protein identification, and data processing constitute significant improvements for the field of on-tissue digestion. Graphical abstract MS imaging of coronal mouse brain cerebellum with a pixel size of 25&#xa0;&#x3bc;m: A Optical image, B myelin staining, C H&amp;E staining, and D MS image overlay (RGB) of tryptic peptides m/z&#x2009;=&#x2009;726.4045&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.005, HGFLPR + H<sup>+</sup> (red), m/z&#x2009;=&#x2009;536.3173&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.005, AKPAK + Na<sup>+</sup> (green), and m/z&#x2009;=&#x2009;994.5436&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.005, WRQLIEK + Na<sup>+</sup> (blue).

### Keywords
Proteins, Mouse brain, Trypsin, Tryptic peptides

### Affiliations
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University Giessen Schubertstrasse 60, D-35392 Giessen Germany
Chair of Bioanalytical Sciences and Food Analysis University of Bayreuth E.-C.-Baumann-Str. 20 95326 Kulmbach Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Roempp

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Römpp
Chair of Bioanalytical Sciences and Food Analysis University of Bayreuth E.-C.-Baumann-Str. 20 95326 Kulmbach Germany


