### Accession
PXD022124

### Title
A Bothrops jararaca venom subproteome to benchmark a spectral clustering algorithm by controlling the selection bias

### Description
The clustering of mass spectra is a critical component of many proteomics applications. The clustering validation science is just as important, having evolved side by side with the clustering algorithms themselves. In this work, we build on Rieder et al. 's cluster validation framework, and we discuss the problem of selection bias in cluster validation measures; we introduce an assessment measure that is biased toward the number of peptide ion species; we introduce a cluster assessment framework for proteomics and demonstrate its importance by evaluating the performance of 8 clustering algorithms in 7 proteomics datasets, and we discuss the tradeoff between assessment measures. Finally, the validation methods presented here can be of broad applicability be-yond the clustering of mass spectra. This PRIDE entry describes in detail sample preparation, LC-MS/MS analysis, and protein identification of one of the proteomics datasets used in this work (> 10 kDa Bothrops jararaca snake venom proteome).

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized pooled venom from juvenile/adult, male/female Bothrops jararaca snakes was kindly provided by Instituto Butantan (São Paulo, Brazil). According to Brazilian law 13.123/2015 and decree 8772/2016, access to the Brazilian fauna's genetic heritage was registered in the National System of Genetic Resource Management and Associated Traditional Knowledge (SisGen) under code AF0A111. Crude venom (10 mg) was solubilized in 10 mL of cold water (0 to 1°C) followed by molecular size exclusion fractionation/concentration using 10 kDa cut-off membrane 15 mL device (Amicon - Millipore, EUA). Centrifugation step was performed at 4 °C and 4.500 xg for approximately one hour or until reaching about 4 mL of concentrated venom solution (depleted of < 10 kDa polypeptides). Next, this venom solution was diluted 10x in cold water and submitted to bicinchoninic acid protein quantitation. A volume containing 100 µg of total protein was dried entirely using a vacuum centrifuge concentrator, solubilized in 20 μL of 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate with 8 M urea, and submitted to in-solution digestion following these steps: (1) reduction with 100 mM DTT for three h at 37 °C; (2) alkylation with 400 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature, in the dark; (3) dilution of urea from 8M to 1M with water; (4) digestion with porcine trypsin (E:S 1:50 m/m) for 20 h at 37 °C, followed by 30 min incubation at 56 °C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 10 % (v/v) formic acid (q.s.p.1%), and the sample desalted using in-house made micro columns packed with Poros R2 resin (Life Technologies, EUA). The tryptic digest was dried and solubilized in 100 µL of 1% (v/v) formic acid. Before mass spectrometry analysis, the digest was diluted 5X in formic acid 1%. The tryptic digest was analyzed in technical triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo, EUA). For each replicate, four μL of desalted tryptic peptides were applied to a 2-cm-long (100 μm inner diameter) trap column packed with 5 μm, 200 Å Magic C18-AQ matrix (Michrom Bioresources, USA) followed by separation on a 30-cm-long (75 μm inner diameter) column, packed with 3 µm, 200 Å Magic C18-AQ matrix. Chromatography was performed on an Easy II nanoLC (Thermo Scientiﬁc, USA). The samples were loaded onto the trap column at 2 μL/min, whereas the chromatography separation was carried out at 200 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Separation conditions were as follows: 2 to 40% of B during 162 min; up to 80% B in 4 min; 80% B for 2 min. Eluted peptides were directly introduced into a nanoESI Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo, EUA). The ionization spray voltage was set to 3.1 kV, the capillary temperature to 250 °C and tube lens voltage to 60 V. MS scans (300 a 1.500 m/z) were acquired in profile mode with one microscan, high resolution (FWHM 70,000 at m/z 200) and automatic gain control (AGC)  and maximum injection time were set to 1x10E6 and 100 ms, respectively. For each MS spectrum, up to 12 most intense ions were submitted to HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30 % and isolation window and isolation offset of 3.0 and 0.5 m/z, respectively. The MS/MS spectra (200 a 2.000 m/z) were acquired in centroid mode with one microscan, resolution of 17,500, AGC target value of 5x10E4, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was activated and set to 60 s, and precursor ions with charge states unassigned or equal to 1 were precluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic identifications were performed with the PatternLab for Proteomics 4 software that is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org. The target-decoy database consisted of UniProt Serpentes (taxonomy id 8570 - 156,122 entries - May 12, 2019) and 123 common contaminants plus reversed versions of all entries. The Comet 2016.01 rev. 3 search engine, embedded into PatternLab, was used for identifying all mass spectra. The search parameters considered: fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 550 and 5,500 Da, up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass, and bins of 0.02 m/z for MS/MS. Allowed fixed and variable modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine, respectively. The validity of the peptide-spectrum matches was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro). The identifications were grouped by charge state (2+ and ≥ 3+) and then by tryptic status, resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each group, the XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaPPM, and Peak Match values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. The identifications were sorted in nondecreasing order according to the discriminator score. A cut-off score was accepted at a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 2% at the peptide level based on the number of decoys. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in an FDR independent of charge state or tryptic status. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of five amino acid residues and a protein score greater than 3 were imposed. Finally, identifications deviating by more than 10 ppm from the theoretical mass were discarded. This last filter led to FDRs, now at the protein level, lower than 1% for all search results.

### Publication Abstract
In proteomics, the identification of peptides from mass spectral data can be mathematically described as the partitioning of mass spectra into clusters (i.e., groups of spectra derived from the same peptide). The way partitions are validated is just as important, having evolved side by side with the clustering algorithms themselves and given rise to many partition assessment measures. An assessment measure is said to have a selection bias if, and only if, the probability that a randomly chosen partition scoring a high value depends on the number of clusters in the partition. In the context of clustering mass spectra, this might mislead the validation process to favor clustering algorithms that generate too many (or few) spectral clusters, regardless of the underlying peptide sequence. A selection bias toward the number of peptides is desirable for proteomics as it estimates the number of peptides in a complex protein mixture. Here, we introduce an assessment measure that is purposely biased toward the number of peptide ion species. We also introduce a partition assessment framework for proteomics, called the Partition Assessment Tool, and demonstrate its importance by evaluating the performance of eight clustering algorithms on seven proteomics datasets while discussing the trade-offs involved. SIGNIFICANCE: Clustering algorithms are widely adopted in proteomics for undertaking several tasks such as speeding up search engines, generating consensus mass spectra, and to aid in the classification of proteomic profiles. Choosing which algorithm is most fit for the task at hand is not simple as each algorithm has advantages and disadvantages; furthermore, specifying clustering parameters is also a necessary and fundamental step. For example, deciding on whether to generate "pure clusters" or fewer clusters but accepting noise. With this as motivation, we verify the performance of several widely adopted algorithms on proteomic datasets and introduce a theoretical framework for drawing conclusions on which approach is suitable for the task at hand.

### Keywords
Venomics, Bothrops jararaca, Spectral clustering, Algorithm

### Affiliations
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz
Laboratory of Toxinology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

### Submitter
Richard Hemmi Valente

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Hemmi Valente
Laboratory of Toxinology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


