### Accession
PXD012437

### Title
MHC immunopeptidome of JY cells analysed by EThcD or HCD at Orbitrap Fusion after mild acid elution

### Description
To understand and treat immunology-related diseases, a comprehensive, unbiased characterization of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptide ligands is of key importance. Preceding the analysis by mass spectrometry, MHC peptide ligands are typically isolated by MHC immunoaffinity chromatography (MHC-IAC). Less often, mild acid elution (MAE) is used to extract MHC class I peptide ligands. MAE may provide a cheap alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells, but it is thought to be hampered by the high number of contaminating peptides not derived from the MHC. Here, we optimized the MAE protocol yielding MHC peptide ligand purities of more than 80%. We discovered distinct cysteinylation frequencies at individual positions of MHC peptide ligands and propose that MAE conserves the native cysteinylation pattern of MHC peptide ligands better than MHC-IAC.  Key features of the observed cysteinylation pattern were independent of the applied fragmentation methods HCD or EThcD. Our improved and carefully documented MAE workflow represents a high-quality, cost-effective alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells and should be applicable also in laboratories not specialized in MHC peptide ligand analyses.

### Sample Protocol
We performed two parallel MAEs with 5 ∙ 108 JY cells each. All steps from harvesting of the cells until ultracentrifugation were performed at 4 °C or on ice. Cells were harvested and washed 3 times with PBS at 211 g using 10 min centrifugations. They were then gently pipetted up and down for 1 min in MAE buffer. We used 4 ml MAE buffer per MAE consisting of 131 mM citric acid, 66 mM Na2HPO4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 µM aprotinin and 25 mM iodoacetamide adjusted to pH = 3.3 with NaOH. Additionally, the MAE buffer was supplemented with the protease inhibitors leupeptin at 1 mg/L, pepstatin at 0.7 mg/L and the glycyl-methionine (GM) dipeptide at 10 mM. All tubes used during or after the treatment of cells with MAE buffer were either certified to be free of plasticizers (Eppendorf), or they were extensively washed with acid and water before usage. Following the 1 min treatment with MAE buffer, cells were immediately removed by centrifugation at 300 g for 5 min. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 350 g for 10 min, further cleared at 3345 g for 15 min, subjected to ultracentrifugation at 257,000 g for 1 h and frozen at -80 °C.  The obtained peptide solution was further purified on Oasis HLB columns (size 1 cm3, 30 mg sorbent; Waters, product no.: WAT094225) prewashed with 80% acetonitrile (CH3CN) / 0.2% TFA and 100% CH3CN. After equilibration with 2% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA, sample loading and washing with 2% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA, peptides were eluted with 60% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA. The eluate was filtered through a prewashed 4 ml Amicon ultrafilter device with 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off (Merck Millipore, Cat.-No. UFC800324) at 4 °C. The ultrafilter was rinsed with 60% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA recovering sticky peptides. After vacuum centrifugation of the ultrafiltrates, peptides were finally cleaned using C18-ZipTips (Merck Millipore) prewashed with 80% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA. We equilibrated and washed the ZipTips with 0.1% TFA and eluted using 60% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA followed by a second vacuum-centrifugation.   The volume of the concentrated samples was adjusted for LC-MS injections of 5 µl per run using 1% CH3CN / 0.05% TFA. For the comparison of EThcD versus HCD, LC-MS ready samples originating from the two parallel MAEs were pooled and mixed excluding an influence of sample processing variability on the comparison of fragmentation methods. Doing so, we ensured that each LC-MS run corresponded to about 5 ∙ 107 cells.  We used an Orbitrap Fusion which was coupled online to an ultra high performance LC (1290 Infinity, Agilent) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex, Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 5 min onto a 2 cm x 100 µm C18 trapping column packed in-house with C18 beads of 3 µm diameter (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were then separated on a 50 cm x 75 µm column in-house filled with C18 beads of 2.7 µm diameter (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, Agilent). Separation was run at 21 °C using a flow rate of approximately 300 nl/min and a 90 min gradient ranging from 5.6% CH3CN to 32% CH3CN in 0.1% HCOOH. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 Th. The measured MS1 m/z range was 400 Th - 650 Th, and only 2+ and 3+ charged precursors were allowed for fragmentation. The Top Speed method was applied with cycle times of 3 s to fragment the most abundant precursor ions either by HCD or by EThcD. Selected precursors were isolated at an isolation width of 1.6 Th and dynamically excluded from repeated fragmentation for 18 s. We applied a collision energy of 35% for HCD, a supplemental activation collision energy of 40% for EThcD, and we recorded MS2 spectra at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 Th in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Automatic Gain Control targets were 400,000 ions to be reached in maximal 50 ms for MS1 and 50,000 ions to be reached in maximal 250 ms for MS2.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 from Thermo Fisher utilizing Sequest HT as a search engine and allowing 10 ppm MS1 and 0.02 Da MS2 mass tolerance. For EThcD spectrum matching, c and z ions obtained a weight of 1 while the weight of b and y ions was reduced to 0.5. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation and cysteinylation of cysteine were set as variable modifications. The target protein database consisted of the human Swiss-Prot database (release 27 September 2013; 20,279 proteins; www.uniprot.org) supplemented with contaminant protein sequences. Our peptide spectral match false discovery rate (PSM FDR) cut-off of ≤5% was calculated by Percolator using the reversed target protein sequences as a decoy database. Only peptides of 8 to 12 amino acids in length were allowed. Additionally, we filtered obtained peptides to be identified with search engine rank 1 and to have a Sequest XCorr ≥2. For calculating MHC allotype distributions, peptides differing only in the modification status of methionine or cysteine were considered as equal.

### Publication Abstract
To understand and treat immunology-related diseases, a comprehensive, unbiased characterization of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptide ligands is of key importance. Preceding the analysis by mass spectrometry, MHC class I peptide ligands are typically isolated by MHC immunoaffinity chromatography (MHC-IAC) and less often by mild acid elution (MAE). MAE may provide a cheap alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells but has been hampered by the high number of contaminating, MHC-unrelated peptides. Here, we optimized MAE, yielding MHC peptide ligand purities of more than 80%. When compared with MHC-IAC, obtained peptides were similar in numbers, identities, and to a large extent intensities, while the percentage of cysteinylated peptides was 5 times higher in MAE. The latter benefitted the discovery of MHC-allotype-specific, distinct cysteinylation frequencies at individual positions of MHC peptide ligands. MAE revealed many MHC ligands with unmodified, N-terminal cysteine residues which get lost in MHC-IAC workflows. The results support the idea that MAE might be particularly valuable for the high-confidence analysis of post-translational modifications by avoiding the exposure of the investigated peptides to enzymes and reactive molecules in the cell lysate. Our improved and carefully documented MAE workflow represents a high-quality, cost-effective alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Cysteinylation, Mild acid elution, Mhc bound peptides, Hla ligandome, Ethcd, Hcd

### Affiliations
1.) Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands  2.) Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University,
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics,
Padualaan 8, 
3584 CH, Utrecht

### Submitter
Theo Sturm

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
1.) Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands  2.) Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands


