### Accession
PXD017881

### Title
Establishment of a novel in vitro transcription assay

### Description
RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) transcriptional recycling is an underappreciated mechanism for which the required factors and contributions to overall gene expression levels are poorly understood. We describe an in vitro methodology facilitating unbiased identification of putative RNA Pol II transcriptional recycling factors and quantitative measurement of transcriptional output from recycled transcriptional components. By combing our in vitro transcription assays with other experiments (e.g. in vivo dynamic ChIP-seq assays), we identified PAF1 complex components and phospho-MED1 as drivers for transcription recycling,  revealing a new layer in controlling Pol II-dependent transcription. Our findings also point to RNA Pol II transcription recycling as a mechanism that functions aberrantly in disease states such as cancer, and indicate the potential to target factors such as PAF1 and phospho-MED1 that drive RNA Pol II recycling in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
In this experiment, all protein samples were subjected to digestion with trypsin, and were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Nano LC system coupled with an Obitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with an ESI nanospray source by Creative Proteomics (Shirley, NY). Briefly, the samples were reduced by 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1 hr and alkylated by 20 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 1 hr. Free trypsin was added into the protein solution at a ratio of 1:50, and the solution was incubated at 37°C overnight. Samples were cleaned up with C18 tips, and the extracted peptides were lyophilized to near dryness. Peptides were resuspended in 2-20 μl of 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. 5 µl of sample was loaded onto a 100 μm×10 cm in-house made column packed with a reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated at an analytical flowrate of 600 nl/min with a linear gradient (A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile): from 6% to 9% B for 8 min, from 9% to 14% B for 16 min, from 14% to 30% B for 36 min, from 30% to 40% B for 15 min and from 40% to 95% B for 3 min, eluting with 95% B for 7 min. Data dependent acquisition was performed using the in positive ion mode. Survey spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 and a mass range from 300 to 1800 m/z. Up to 20 of the most intense ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were isolated, fragmented and analyzed in the LTQ part of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
MS files were analyzed and searched against a human protein database based on UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2018) using Peaks Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada). The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable), deamidation (NQ) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da. Only high confidence identified peptides (FDR 1%) were chosen for downstream protein identification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
In vitro transcription, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Duke University
Department of Pathology and Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA

### Submitter
Zhong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Qianben Wang
Department of Pathology and Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA


