### Accession
PXD031767

### Title
Chromatin profiling in human neurons reveals aberrant roles for histone acetylation and BET family proteins in schizophrenia

### Description
Schizophrenia (SZ) is a psychiatric disorder with complex genetic risk dictated by interactions between hundreds of risk variants. Epigenetic factors, such as histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs), have been shown to play critical roles in many neurodevelopmental processes, and when perturbed may also contribute to the precipitation of disease. Here, we apply an unbiased proteomics approach to evaluate combinatorial histone PTMs in human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived forebrain neurons from individuals with SZ. We observe hyper-acetylation of H2A.Z and H4 in neurons derived from SZ cases, results that were confirmed in postmortem human brain. We demonstrate that the bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) protein, BRD4, is a bona fide ‘reader’ of H2A.Z acetylation, and further provide evidence that BET family protein inhibition ameliorates transcriptional abnormalities in patient-derived neurons. Thus, treatments aimed at alleviating BET protein interactions with hyperacetylated histones may aid in the prevention or treatment of SZ.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were extracted from nucleoli and about 10ug was chemically derivatized, followed by digestion to tryptic peptides following the method outlined by Sidoli et al., 2016. The derivatized samples were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Mass Spectrometry Analysis -  A 75 µm ID x 17 cm, in-house packed (with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) nano-column was fitted onto an EASY-nLC nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, Ca, USA) to separate the peptidesin a HPLC gradient comprising 2% to 28% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 95% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) over 45 minutes, from 28% to 85% solvent B in 5 minutes, 85% B for 10 minutes and a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. The nLC was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) was performed. Full scan MS (m/z 300−1100) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5x10e5. MS/MS was carriedout in in centroid mode in the ion trap with sequential isolation windows of 50 m/z with an AGC target of 3x10e4, a CID collision energy of 35 and a maximum injection time of 50 msec,.   Reference:  Sidoli S, Bhanu NV, Karch KR, Wang X, Garcia BA. Complete Workflow for Analysis of Histone Post-translational Modifications Using Bottom-up Mass Spectrometry: From Histone Extraction to Data Analysis. J Vis Exp. 2016 May 17;(111). doi: 10.3791/54112.

### Data Protocol
An in-house software, EpiProfile (Yuan et al., 2015) was used to calculate peptide relative ratio using the total area under the extracted ion chromatograms of all peptides with the same amino acid sequence (including all of its modified forms) as 100%.    Ref: Yuan ZF, Lin S, Molden RC, Cao XJ, Bhanu NV, Wang X, Sidoli S, Liu S, Garcia BA.  EpiProfile Quantifies Histone Peptides With Modifications by Extracting Retention Time and Intensity in High-resolution Mass Spectra.Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Jun;14(6):1696-707. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.046011.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent labeling (CL) in combination with mass spectrometry can be used as an analytical tool to study and determine structural properties of protein-protein complexes. However, data from these experiments is sparse and does not unambiguously elucidate protein structure. Thus, computational algorithms are needed to deduce structure from the CL data. In this work, we present a hybrid method that combines models of protein complex subunits generated with AlphaFold with differential CL data via a CL-guided protein-protein docking in Rosetta. In a benchmark set, the RMSD (root-mean-square deviation) of the best-scoring models was below 3.6&#x2009;&#xc5; for 5/5 complexes with inclusion of CL data, whereas the same quality was only achieved for 1/5 complexes without CL data. This study suggests that our integrated approach can successfully use data obtained from CL experiments to distinguish between nativelike and non-nativelike models.

### Keywords
Rna-seq, Schizophrenia, Histone modifications, Bet proteins, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Raymond H. Wittcoff Distinguished Professor and Head Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO 63110
Washington University

### Submitter
Natarajan Bhanu

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A Garcia
Raymond H. Wittcoff Distinguished Professor and Head Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO 63110


