### Accession
PXD024358

### Title
Gel-like inclusions of C-terminal fragments of TDP-43 sequester and inhibit proteasomes

### Description
TDP-43 inclusions enriched in C-terminal terminal fragments of ~25 kDa ("TDP-25") are associated with neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Here, we analyzed gain-of-function mechanisms of TDP-25 combining cryo-electron tomography, proteomics and functional assays. We show that TDP-25 inclusions are amorphous with gel-like properties. Inclusions sequester proteasomes adopting exclusively substrate-processing conformations. This leads to proteostasis impairment, further enhanced by pathogenic mutations. These findings bolster the importance of proteasome dysfunction in ALS/FTD.

### Sample Protocol
Beads were resuspended in 155µl denaturing buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris/HCl pH7.5, 1mM dithiotreitol). Proteins were digested off the beads with LysC (220ng/sample) at RT for 1 hour while the beads were shaken at 1200rpm (Themomixer C, Eppendorf). The suspension was diluted 4-fold to lower urea concentration permitting trypsin digestion. Iodoacetamide (final 5mM) to alkylate cysteines and trypsin (220ng/sample) were added to digest for another hour before the supernatant was transferred to another tube and digested overnight. The digest was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 1% v/v and half of the peptide solution was further processed by desalting chromatography on three disks of C18 material using the STAGE-tip format. Briefly, STAGE-tips were washed with 100µl buffer B (50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid), conditioned with 100µl methanol, washed twice with 100µl buffer A (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid), loaded with sample peptides, washed twice with 100µl buffer A, and subjected to peptide elution by 60µl of buffer B. The eluate was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were re-suspended in 10µl 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid and stored at -20°C. Peptide concentration was measured spectrophotometrically at 280nm and 500ng of peptide/sample were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
To process MS raw files, we employed the MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.15 (Jürgen Cox & Mann, 2008), searching against the UniProtKB rat FASTA database using canonical and isoform protein sequences downloaded in March 2018. Default search parameters were utilized unless stated differently. In brief, tryptic peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids, a maximum mass of 4600 Da, and two miscleavages at maximum were searched. Carbamidomethlyation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. A maximum of five modifications per peptide was permitted.  A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level.  The search feature “Match between runs,” which allows the transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of MS/MS-based identification after nonlinear retention time alignment was enabled with a maximum retention time window of 0.7 min. Protein abundances were normalized with the MaxLFQ label-free normalization algorithm built into MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Tdp-43, Ftd, Proteasomes, Als

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany  NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany  NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


