### Accession
PXD024282

### Title
A Semi-automated Paramagnetic Bead-based Platform for Isobaric Tag Sample Preparation

### Description
The development of streamlined and high-throughput sample processing workflows is important for capitalizing on emerging advances and innovations in mass spectrometry-based applications. While the adaptation of new technologies and improved methodologies is fast paced, automation of upstream sample processing often lags. Here we have developed and implemented a semi-automated paramagnetic bead-based platform for isobaric tag sample preparation. We benchmarked the robot-assisted platform by comparing the protein abundance profiles of six common parental laboratory yeast strains in triplicate TMTpro16-plex experiments against an identical set of experiments in which the samples were manually processed. Both sets of experiments quantified similar numbers of proteins and peptides with good reproducibility. Using these data, we constructed an interactive website to explore the proteome profiles of six yeast strains. We also provide the community with open-source templates for automating routine proteomics workflows on an opentrons OT-2 liquid handler. The robot-assisted platform offers a versatile and affordable option for reproducible sample processing for a wide range of protein profiling applications.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP for 20 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min, and quenched with 10 mM DTT for 20 min, all at room temperature. Single‐Pot Solid‐Phase‐enhanced Sample processing (SP3) as described previously was used during protein isolation and digestion. Reactions were performed in a 96-well plate (200µL maximum volume) using an 8-channel pipette. In brief, 2 µL of each bead type were added to 40 µg of protein in 40 µL total volume, as prepared above. Neat ethanol was added to a final concentration of 50%. The beads were carefully triturated 10 times. The samples were held to the magnet for 2 min and the supernatant was aspirated. The beads (with bound protein) were washed 3 times with 80% ethanol in the same manner. For protein digestion, we added 50 µL of 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and Lys-C overnight at room temperature, followed by trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C on an orbital shaker (Jitterbug Heated Microplate Shaker). Both enzymes were added a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio in the presence of beads. Following digestion, we added a final volume of 30% acetonitrile to the eluted peptides and labelled the 40 µg of peptide with 80 µg of TMTpro16 reagent directly into the digestion mixture (still in the presence of beads) for 1 hr. The reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Following quenching, the samples were held to the magnet for 2 min after which the supernatant was collected. The beads were then washed with 40 µL of 200 mM EPPS pH8.5, which was combined with the initial elution. The samples are mixed at a 1:1 ratio across all channels.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all S. cerevisiae entries from UniProt (downloaded August 2020). Each database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading (column normalization). Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled to a percent of the total, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.

### Publication Abstract
The development of streamlined and high-throughput sample processing workflows is important for capitalizing on emerging advances and innovations in mass spectrometry-based applications. While the adaptation of new technologies and improved methodologies is fast paced, automation of upstream sample processing often lags. Here we have developed and implemented a semiautomated paramagnetic bead-based platform for isobaric tag sample preparation. We benchmarked the robot-assisted platform by comparing the protein abundance profiles of six common parental laboratory yeast strains in triplicate TMTpro16-plex experiments against an identical set of experiments in which the samples were manually processed. Both sets of experiments quantified similar numbers of proteins and peptides with good reproducibility. Using these data, we constructed an interactive website to explore the proteome profiles of six yeast strains. We also provide the community with open-source templates for automating routine proteomics workflows on an opentrons OT-2 liquid handler. The robot-assisted platform offers a versatile and affordable option for reproducible sample processing for a wide range of protein profiling applications.

### Keywords
Rts, Automation, Sp3, Opentrons, Faims, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA


