### Accession
PXD023131

### Title
Characterization of Citrullination Sites in Neutrophils and Mast Cells Activated by Ionomycin via Integration of Mass Spectrometry and Machine Learning

### Description
Citrullination is an important post-translational modification implicated in many diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Alzheimer's disease and cancer. Neutrophil and mast cells have different protein-arginine deiminases expression profile and ionomycin induced activation make them the ideal cellular models to study proteins susceptible to citrullination.  We performed high resolution mass spectrometry and stringent data filtration to identify citrullination sites in neutrophil and mast cells treated with and without ionomycin. We identified a total of 831 validated citrullination sites on 393 proteins. Several of these citrullinated proteins are important component of pathways involved in innate immune responses.  Using this benchmark primary sequence dataset, we developed machine learning models to predict citrullination in neutrophil and mast cells proteins. Our neutrophil protein citrullination prediction model achieved greater than 76% accuracy and 0.39 Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) on an independent validation set. In summary, this study provides the largest number of validated citrullination sites in neutrophil and mast cell proteins. The use of our novel motif analysis approach to predict citrullination sites will facilitate the discovery of novel protein substrates of protein-arginine deiminases (PADs), which may be key to understanding immunopathologies of various diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from neutrophils treated with ionomycin/calcium (to induce calcium flux and PAD activation) were digested for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. We performed nanoflow LC-MS of peptide samples from neutrophils treated with/without  ionomycin on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer in FT-FT mode and Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Synthetic peptides corresponding to questionable targets were used to further confirm the MS data. Resulting raw data was searched using MaxQuant (MQ,1.6.0.16) and compared to other software. Search parameters included 5 missed trypsin cleavages, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of N, Q and R residues. Neutral loss (43.0058 Da) annotation option was enabled, especially to confirm the citrullination sites in addition to 0.9840 Da mass shift for deimidation. MS/MS spectra were manually evaluated.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis parameters Identification of citrullination modification on peptides was performed using Andromeda search engine through MaxQuant (MQ,1.6.0.16) 41. Mass spectrometry data was searched against Uniprot human protein database (June 2018 download) with common laboratory contaminants. The search parameters included carbamidomethylation on Cys as a fixed modification, deamidation on Asn and Gln, deimination on Arg and oxidation on Met were set as variable modifications. Protein digestion parameter was set to maximum 5 missed cleavages by trypsin. Deimination (R) (+0.98401 Da) was added to modifications.local xml file with three neutral loss specificities HCNO (43.0058 Da), H2C2N2O2(86.0116 Da), and H3C3N3O3(129.0174 Da), for up to 3 isocyanic acid loss to confirm the citrullination sites. Global protein quantitation was carried out using label free quantitation (LFQ) approach. Match between runs (MBR) was enabled to achieve precursor level quantitation using accurate mass and retention time information. Relative abundance of proteins in each sample obtained by enabling intensity based absolute quantification, (iBAQ) in MaxQuant software 42. For comparison, data was also searched using Mascot (v2.7.0), Sequest HT and Byonic (v3.10.10) through Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4) platform with the same search criteria described above. Manual annotation of MS/MS spectrum was also carried out using Protein Prospector online search tool and MaxQuant spectrum viewer.

### Publication Abstract
Citrullination is an important post-translational modification implicated in many diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Alzheimer's disease, and cancer. Neutrophil and mast cells have different expression profiles for protein-arginine deiminases (PADs), and ionomycin-induced activation makes them an ideal cellular model to study proteins susceptible to citrullination. We performed high-resolution mass spectrometry and stringent data filtration to identify citrullination sites in neutrophil and mast cells treated with and without ionomycin. We identified a total of 833 validated citrullination sites on 395 proteins. Several of these citrullinated proteins are important components of pathways involved in innate immune responses. Using this benchmark primary sequence data set, we developed machine learning models to predict citrullination in neutrophil and mast cell proteins. We show that our models predict citrullination likelihood with 0.735 and 0.766 AUCs (area under the receiver operating characteristic curves), respectively, on independent validation sets. In summary, this study provides the largest number of validated citrullination sites in neutrophil and mast cell proteins. The use of our novel motif analysis approach to predict citrullination sites will facilitate the discovery of novel protein substrates of protein-arginine deiminases (PADs), which may be key to understanding immunopathologies of various diseases.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Neutrophils, Mast cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Dynamic Omics, Antibody Discovery and Protein Engineering (ADPE), R&D AstraZenecaGaithersburg, Maryland, US, 20878.
MedImmune

### Submitter
Raghothama Chaerkady

### Lab Head
Dr Sonja Hess
Dynamic Omics, Antibody Discovery and Protein Engineering (ADPE), R&D AstraZenecaGaithersburg, Maryland, US, 20878.


