### Accession
PXD010601

### Title
Mouse Podocyte Proteome -  ARP3 Controls the Podocyte Architecture at the Kidney Filtration Barrier

### Description
Label-free expression proteomics analysis of FACS-sorted mouse podocytes versus non-podocytes

### Sample Protocol
In principle isolation was performed as previously described (Boerries et al., 2013). In brief, kidneys were dissected together with the abdominal aorta and transferred into dishes filled with 37 °C prewarmed Hank’s buffered salt solution (HBSS). Each kidney was perfused slowly through the renal artery with 4 ml 37 °C warm bead solution and 1 ml bead solution plus enzymatic digestion buffer (containing: collagenase 300 U/ml (Worthington, Collagenase Type II, Lakewood, NJ), 1 mg/ml pronase E (Sigma P6911, Schnelldorf, Germany) DNase I 50 U/ml (AppliChem A3778, Darmstadt, Germany). Kidneys were minced, further digested and then after several mechanical dissociation steps inserted into a magnetic particle concentrator and the separated glomeruli were washed twice. Isolation of podocytes followed several steps of mechanical dissociation and final FACS sorting for GFP+ cells only. Podocytes and respective non-podocytes from 3 individual animals each were pooled (each app. 1 Mio cells). Isolated protein fractions were furthermore analyzed using unlabeled mass spectrometry as previously described (Boerries et al., 2013). Samples were taken up in SDS–PAGE loading buffer. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma–Aldrich) for 30 min at 25°C. Proteins were separated by 4–12% Bis–Tris gradient SDS–PAGE gels (Invitrogen). Gel lanes were cut into 10 fractions and proteins therein were digested with trypsin (Promega)(Shevchenko et al., 2006), and resulting peptides were desalted on STAGE Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007).  BOERRIES, M., GRAHAMMER, F., EISELEIN, S., BUCK, M., MEYER, C., GOEDEL, M., BECHTEL, W., ZSCHIEDRICH, S., PFEIFER, D., LALOE, D., ARRONDEL, C., GONCALVES, S., KRUGER, M., HARVEY, S. J., BUSCH, H., DENGJEL, J. & HUBER, T. B. 2013. Molecular fingerprinting of the podocyte reveals novel gene and protein regulatory networks. Kidney Int, 83, 1052-64. RAPPSILBER, J., MANN, M. & ISHIHAMA, Y. 2007. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc, 2, 1896-906. SHEVCHENKO, A., TOMAS, H., HAVLIS, J., OLSEN, J. V. & MANN, M. 2006. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc, 1, 2856-60.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software(Cox and Mann, 2008) was used for data search for identification and quantification of peptides and proteins. A full length UNIPROT mouse database was used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification,

### Publication Abstract
Podocytes, highly specialized epithelial cells, build the outer part of the kidney filtration barrier and withstand high mechanical forces through a complex network of cellular protrusions. Here, we show that Arp2/3-dependent actin polymerization controls actomyosin contractility and focal adhesion maturation of podocyte protrusions and thereby regulates formation, maintenance, and capacity to adapt to mechanical requirements of the filtration barrier. We find that N-WASP-Arp2/3 define the development of complex arborized podocyte protrusions in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Loss of dendritic actin networks results in a pronounced activation of the actomyosin cytoskeleton and the generation of over-maturated but less efficient adhesion, leading to detachment of podocytes. Our data provide a model to explain podocyte protrusion morphology and their mechanical stability based on a tripartite relationship between actin polymerization, contractility, and adhesion.

### Keywords
Gfp, Mouse, Glomerulus, Lc-ms/ms, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


