### Accession
PXD010221

### Title
Proteomics analysis of DUX4-expressing myoblasts

### Description
DUX4 is a double homeodomain transcription factor whose misexpression in the muscle causes facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD). The transcriptional activity of DUX4 has been extensively characterized, and is thought to be the primary driver of FSHD pathogenesis. Yet, DUX4 expression lowers the protein level of an RNA quality control factor, UPF1, without affecting its transcript level, hinting at post-transcriptional regulatory activity downstream of DUX4 expression. How extensive the post-transcriptional activity of DUX4 is, and how relevant it is to FSHD pathogenesis, is unknown. In order to gain insight into DUX4-induced post-transcriptional gene regulation, we measured transcript and protein levels in DUX4 expressing cells via RNA-seq and SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry, respectively. We show that DUX4 transcriptional targets are robustly translated, including those genes previously identified as potential FSHD biomarkers. However, comparing the overall pattern of gene expression changes for RNA versus protein reveals striking differences in the most highly activated pathways, with the former showing changes in RNA processing and splicing, and the latter affecting the humoral immune response, proteolysis and exocytosis, among other pathways. Consistent with a misregulation of exocytosis, fluorescence imaging shows fragmented golgi apparatus in DUX4-expressing cells. Of the genes that showed discordant RNA and protein expression levels, post-transcriptional buffering was particularly evident for genes involved in stress response and may explain why DUX4-expressing cells succumb to toxicity despite robust transcriptional activation of stress response genes. Moreover, several genes involved in RNA decay including UPF1, UPF3B, SMG6 and XRN1 showed downregulation at the protein level, which may explain the massive inhibition of RNA quality control in DUX4-expressing cells. These results highlight the importance of considering post-transcriptional gene regulation in DUX4-expressing cells in order to fully understand the FSHD disease process.

### Sample Protocol
Myoblast cell lines were adapted in light or heavy SILAC media (F12 without Lys/arg supplemented with 20% dialyzed FBS and Lys0/Arg0 or Lys8/Arg10) for 2 weeks. Cells in light media were transduced with GFP-expressing lentivirus, while cells in heavy media were transduced with DUX4 lentivirus. After various times, cells were harvested in TRIzol reagent and frozen at -80deg C.   Protein was isolated from the TRIzol reagent, pellet resuspended in sample buffer (5% SDS and 0.5M unbuffered Tris) and solubilized by boiling at 95degC for 5 minutes followed by 5 cycles of sonication (15sec ON, 45sec OFF; low setting). 25ug each of protein (quantified by BCA assay) GFP and DUX4 samples were mixed. The mixed samples were electrophoresed on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris 1mm gel using MOPS buffer. The gel was fixed in 50% methanol/7% acetic acid for 15 minutes, stained with Gel Code blue stain for 1 hour and washed in water overnight. The stained lanes were cut using a grid cutter (The Gel Company, Inc.) resulting in 12-16 samples.  Each sample as subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion, desalted with C18 ZipTips, and analyzed by shotgun LC-MS/MS on either an OrbiTrap Elite or OrbiTrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The samples in this dataset come from two different experiments - In the first experiment, DUX4 or GFP was expressed via lentiviral transduction for 24 or 36 hours. The control (GFP) samples were “light” and DUX4-expressing samples were “heavy”. After mixing the control and DUX4 lysates, the samples from each time point were fractionated into 12 fractions and have the suffix of SJ005-SJ016 for the 24-hour sample and the suffix of SJ017-SJ028 for the 36-hour sample. In the second experiment, DUX4 was induced using a small molecule doxycycline for 14 hours (or not, in the case of control) and the labels were swapped for two replicate samples, each fractionated into 16 fractions. Files with the suffix of 31-46 correspond to replicate # 1, where DUX4-expressing samples are heavy-labeled and the control samples are light. Files with suffix of 47-62 correspond to replicate # 2, where the labels were swapped; DUX4-expressing samples are light, and control samples are heavy.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 using SEQUEST as the search engine and peptide validation was performed with Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
DUX4 is a transcription factor whose misexpression in skeletal muscle causes facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD). DUX4's transcriptional activity has been extensively characterized, but the DUX4-induced proteome remains undescribed. Here, we report concurrent measurement of RNA and protein levels in DUX4-expressing cells via RNA-seq and quantitative mass spectrometry. DUX4 transcriptional targets were robustly translated, confirming the likely clinical relevance of proposed FSHD biomarkers. However, a multitude of mRNAs and proteins exhibited discordant expression changes upon DUX4 expression. Our dataset revealed unexpected proteomic, but not transcriptomic, dysregulation of diverse molecular pathways, including Golgi apparatus fragmentation, as well as extensive post-transcriptional buffering of stress-response genes. Key components of RNA degradation machineries, including UPF1, UPF3B, and XRN1, exhibited suppressed protein, but not mRNA, levels, explaining the build-up of aberrant RNAs that characterizes DUX4-expressing cells. Our results provide a resource for the FSHD community and illustrate the importance of post-transcriptional processes in DUX4-induced pathology.

### Keywords
Fshd, Silac, Dux4, Gelc-ms, Myoblasts

### Affiliations
University of Colorado School of Medicine Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Denver, CO
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Philip Gafken

### Lab Head
Dr Sujatha Jagannathan
University of Colorado School of Medicine Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Denver, CO


