### Accession
PXD020448

### Title
Role of Astrocytes in critical periods

### Description
Brain postnatal development is characterized by critical periods of experience dependent remodeling. Maturation of local circuits inhibitory neurons terminate this period of enhanced plasticity. Astroglial cells are known to influence excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission as well as network activity through active signaling mechanisms. Although these can be developmentally regulated, the role of astrocytes in the timing of post-natal critical period is unknown. Here we show in the visual cortex that astrocytes con-trol the maturation of inhibitory neurons and thereby closure of the critical period. We uncover a novel underlying pathway involving regulation of the extracellular matrix that allows interneurons maturation via astroglial connexin signaling. We find that timing of the critical period closure is controlled by a marked upregulation of the astroglial protein connexin 30 that inhibits expression of the matrix degrading enzyme MMP9 through the RhoA-GTPase pathway. Our results thus demonstrate that astrocytes not only influ-ence neuronal activity but are also key elements in the experience–dependent wiring of brain circuits. Therefore, astrocytes represent a new cellular partner to consider in our understanding of the post-natal shaping of neuronal activities, hence providing a new target to alleviate malfunctions associated to im-paired closure of the critical period and settling of synaptic circuits.

### Sample Protocol
After rapid extraction of the brain, coronal slices (400 µm) containing the visual cortex were cut by mean of a vibratome (Leica VT1200S) in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid containing (in mM): 119 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 2.5 CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 1 NaH2PO4, 26.2 NaHCO3 and 11 glucose.. V1 area was rapidely dissected out and samples were placed in a EDTA free lysis buffer containing 0,32M sucrose, 5 mM HEPES, 10 mM MgCl2 before centrifugation (8 min at 1700 g) at 4°C. The supernatant was incubated overnight with anti-Cx30 biotinylated (using anti-Cx30 rabbit polyclonal 71-2200, Zymed and Biotinylation kit/Biotin conjugation kit ab201795, abcam) or Lectin from Wisteria Floribunda, biotin conjugate (1:500, L1516-2MG, Sigma-Aldrich) and coupled with streptavidin beads (Immuno-precipitation Kit – Dynabeads Protein G, 10007D, Invitrogen). The beads were then washed once in 100µl lysis buffer and twice in 100 μL of ABC buffer (25 mM NH4HCO3). Finally, beads were re-suspended in 100 μl of ABC buffer and digested by adding 0.20 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto homemade Tips packed with Empore™ C18 Extraction Disks (3M™ Discs 2215) for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness before LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra were recorded for the biotinylated WFA lectine pull down on a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) and an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) foro the Cx30 pull down.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Mus Musculus Swiss-Prot database (UP 000000589 containing 17038 sequences) and also a databank of the common contaminants containing 245 sequences for the Cx30 pull downs using Sequest–HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Ox-idized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.5 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator (The et al., 2016) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) and missed cleavages of peptides were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) based on two-tailed T-tests was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR.  Protein from the biotinylated WFA lectine pull down with at least three total peptides in all replicates (n=3), a 1.5-fold enrichment and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched in sample comparison. Unique proteins were considered with at least three total peptides in all replicates. Protein selected were further analyzed with Reactome pathway analysis (https://reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#TOOL=AT, Jassal et al., 2020). Considering the lack of func-tional annotation in Mus Musculus, protein pathways were retrieved from the mapping of selected proteins to Homo Sapiens.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pnn, Cx30, Visual cortex, Wfa, Astrocytes

### Affiliations
Head of the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics facility (LSMP) at Institut Curie, France
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics facility (LSMP) at Institut Curie, France


