### Accession
PXD002541

### Title
HL-1 mRNA interactome -  The Cardiomyocyte RNA-Binding Proteome: Links to Intermediary Metabolism and Heart Disease

### Description
RNAsfunction as compositionally diverse ribonucleoprotein (RNP) comlplexes, formed through interactions with RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). We explored the murine cardiomyocyte RBP repertoire.

### Sample Protocol
RNA was crosslinked with UV light and subsequently mRNA was captured with oligodT beads, the interactome was detemined using protein digest and lableing approaches, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
raw data was analysed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 and the search output was subsequently interpreted with limma and R

### Publication Abstract
RNA functions through the dynamic formation of complexes with RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in all clades of life. We determined the RBP repertoire of beating cardiomyocytic HL-1 cells by jointly employing two in&#xa0;vivo proteomic methods, mRNA interactome capture and RBDmap. Together, these yielded 1,148 RBPs, 391 of which are shared with all other available mammalian RBP repertoires, while 393 are thus far unique to cardiomyocytes. RBDmap further identified 568 regions of RNA contact within 368 RBPs. The cardiomyocyte mRNA interactome composition reflects their unique biology. Proteins with roles in cardiovascular physiology or disease, mitochondrial function, and intermediary metabolism are all highly represented. Notably, we identified 73 metabolic enzymes as RBPs. RNA-enzyme contacts frequently involve Rossmann fold domains with examples in evidence of both, mutual exclusivity of, or compatibility between RNA binding and enzymatic function. Our findings raise the prospect of previously hidden RNA-mediated regulatory interactions among cardiomyocyte gene expression, physiology, and metabolism.

### Keywords
Mrna interactome

### Affiliations
EMBL
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
EMBL


