### Accession
PXD016757

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid proteomic profiling in nusinersen-treated patients with spinal muscular atrophy Cerebrospinal fluid proteomic profiling in nusinersen-treated patients with spinal muscular atrophy

### Description
Promising results from recent clinical trials on the approved antisense oligonucleotide nusinersen in pediatric patients with 5q-linked spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) still have to be confirmed in adult patients but are hindered by a lack of sensitive biomarkers that indicate an early therapeutic response. Changes of the overall neurochemical composition of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) under therapy may yield additive diagnostic and predictive information.  With this prospective proof-of-concept and feasibility study, we evaluated non-targeted CSF proteomic profiles by mass spectrometry along with basic CSF parameters of 10 adult patients with SMA types 2 or 3 before and after 10 months of nusinersen therapy, in comparison with 10 age- and sex-matched controls. These data were analyzed by bioinformatics and correlated with clinical outcomes assessed by the Hammersmith Functional Rating Scale Expanded (HFMSE). CSF proteomic profiles of SMA patients differed from controls. Two groups of SMA patients were identified based on unsupervised clustering. These groups differed in age and expression of proteins related to neurodegeneration and neuroregeneration. Intraindividual CSF differences in response to nusinersen treatment varied between patients who clinically improved and those who did not. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PDX015117. Comparative CSF proteomic analysis in adult SMA patients before and after treatment with nusinersen identified subgroups and treatment-related changes and may therefore be suitable for diagnostic and predictive analyses.

### Sample Protocol
An appropriate volume of CSF from patients or controls at each timepoint containing 100 µg of protein was processed for proteomic analysis. The volumes of all CSF specimens in a single experiment were equalized by adding 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; Sigma-Aldrich, München, Germany, catalogue number: 09830-500G). For protein reduction, dithiotreitol (DTT; Sigma-Aldrich, catalogue number: D9779-1G) was added to a final concentration of 1.4 mM, and samples were incubated at 600 rounds per minute (rpm) and 45°C for 30 minutes on a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, catalogue number: 5382000015). Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma-Aldrich, catalogue number: I1149-5G) to a final concentration of 2.75 mM and incubating samples in the dark at 600 rpm and 25°C for 30 minutes. Thereafter, protein was precipitated to remove the solvent as described (Wessel & Flugge 1984). After precipitation, pellets were resuspended in 142 µL ABC and incubated at 600 rpm and 25°C for 60 minutes. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA, catalogue number: V5280) was added at a ratio of 1:25 to protein concentration and samples were incubated at 600 rpm and 37°C overnight. Enzymatic activity was stopped by adding 7.5 µL 20% trifluoracetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich, catalogue number: 302031-100ML). Samples were centrifuged at 16,200 g for 2 minutes and the peptides-containing supernatant was kept and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. Peptide concentration was measured using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Life Technologies GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany, catalogue number: 23275). Four µg of peptides were diluted to 20 µL with 0.1% TFA and 500 ng were loaded on a cartridge trap column, packed with Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA, catalogue number: 069690). Peptides were subsequently eluted over a 120 minutes gradient ranging from 2 to 95% acetonitrile (ACN; Fisher Scientific GmbH, Schwerte, Germany, catalogue number: A955-1) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column. Peptides were analyzed on a QExactive-HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA, catalogue number: 0726042) using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) strategy. Precursor scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 followed by fragment scans of the 15 most abundant ions at a resolution of 30,000. Acquired fragment ions were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Raw data files from mass spectrometer were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0, RRID:SCR_014485) using standard conditions. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values from MaxQuant analysis were used for further data preparation with Perseus (version 1.6.2.2, RRID:SCR_015753). LFQ intensity value matrix was filtered for possible contaminants and log transformed. Missing values were imputed with a normal distribution with a downshift accounting for likely low abundance missing values. The resulting matrix was normalized, and a z-score calculated. MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org, RRID:SCR_004055) via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaino et al. 2013, RRID:SCR_003411) with the dataset identifier PDX015117.  Differential protein analysis Resulting matrix files were further analyzed with R (www.r-project.org, version 3.6.0, RRID:SCR_001905) using customized scripts. For differential expression the r-based package “limma” (version 3.40.2) was used and a p-value < 0.05 adjusted with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for multiple testing was considered significant. Proteins with a significant p-value and a log2 fold-change > 1 or < -1 were used in the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN Inc., RRID:SCR_008653).  Dimensionality reduction, clustering and correlation network analysis Principle component analysis (PCA) is a common method for linear dimensionality reduction that can visualize high dimensional data in a two-dimensional diagram using principle components (Jolliffe & Cadima 2016). We implanted PCA in R with the function “prcomp”, and visualization was done with the package “ggplot2” (version 3.2.1). Unsupervised clustering was performed using the package “ConsensusClusterPlus” (version 1.48.0) in R. K-means algorithms try to find different subgroups where the data points of the members have a high similarity. K-means distance clustering was considered most suitable for the present dataset and clusters ranging from k = 2 to k = 4 were evaluated. A weighted protein correlation network analysis (WPCNA) can identify clusters of proteins that show high intensity correlation and therefore similar concurrent regulation (Horvath & Dong 2008). Subsequent association with clinical variables identifies correlations between protein clusters and variables. We implemented the WPCNA with the R package “WGCNA” (version 1.68) with minor adaptations for the use in protein analysis. Soft threshold was automatically picked, and the network type was defined as signed hybrid. Associations with cluster assignments were calculated using the package “globaltest” (version 5.38.0). All R scripts are customized implementations of above-mentioned packages, and the source code can be made available upon reasonablerequest.

### Publication Abstract
Promising results from recent clinical trials on the approved antisense oligonucleotide nusinersen in pediatric patients with 5q-linked spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) still have to be confirmed in adult patients but are hindered by a lack of sensitive biomarkers that indicate an early therapeutic response. Changes in the overall neurochemical composition of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) under therapy may yield additive diagnostic and predictive information. With this prospective proof-of-concept and feasibility study, we evaluated non-targeted CSF proteomic profiles by mass spectrometry along with basic CSF parameters of 10 adult patients with SMA types 2 or 3 before and after 10&#xa0;months of nusinersen therapy, in comparison with 10 age- and gender-matched controls. These data were analyzed by bioinformatics and correlated with clinical outcomes assessed by the Hammersmith Functional Rating Scale Expanded (HFMSE). CSF proteomic profiles of SMA patients differed from controls. Two groups of SMA patients were identified based on unsupervised clustering. These groups differed in age and expression of proteins related to neurodegeneration and neuroregeneration. Intraindividual CSF differences in response to nusinersen treatment varied between patients who clinically improved and those who did not. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016757. Comparative CSF proteomic analysis in adult SMA patients before and after treatment with nusinersen-identified subgroups and treatment-related changes and may therefore be suitable for diagnostic and predictive analyses.

### Keywords
Antisense oligonucleotide (aso), Cerebrospinal fluid (csf), Mass spectrometry (ms), Proteomics, Nusinersen, Spinal muscular atrophy (sma)

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Kessker

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Wick
Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


