### Accession
PXD032749

### Title
Macrophomina phaseolina Secretome LC-ESI-MS-MS

### Description
Macrophomina phaseolina is a global devastating necrotrophic fungal pathogen. It causes charcoal rot disease in more than 500 host plants. It is essential to understand the host microbe interaction and the diseases pathogenesis which can ensure global agricultural crop production and security. An array of virulence factors of M. phaseolina were identified which were found to be involved in pathogenesis of other plant pathogenic fungi also. In conclusion the present study has provided a better understanding of how necrotrophic fungi M. phaseolina modulates host plant defensive processes.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome proteins were subjected to ammonium sulphate cut followed by dialysis. Proteins were then lyophilized and dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Total protein concentration were kept at 1 mg. Tetra-fluoro ethanol ,Dithiothretol and Iodoacetamide were added to the sample. Sample was then subjected to overnight trypsin digestion. Formic acid was added to the sample and centrifugation was done for collection of clear soup. The sample was loaded to a Waters-Xevo-G2-X’S-QTof machine. BEH C 18 column (Waters) was used in the instrument. The machine used MSE scanning technique where MS and MS/MS took place simultaneously. Sodium formamide was used as primary standard and leucine enkephalin was used as secondary standard. Ramp collision energy was set at 18 to 40 V. MS and MS/MS thresholds were set at 150 and 20 counts respectively. The run time was set 1 hour. In 1st 5(0-5 minute) minutes the column was being equilibrated. In the next 45 minutes (5-50 minute) the peptides were eluted from the column with ACN gradient 0-90%. In the last 10 minutes (50-60 minute) the column was being washed.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS-MS data was analysed by Waters Progenesis QiP software. Peak generating software used was Waters Mass Lynx 4.1. The peptides detected by LC-MS/MS were matched with Macrophomina phaseolina MS6 database downloaded from Uniprot in FASTA format. Ion matching requirement was set as follows : Fragments/ peptide: 2 or more; Fragments/ protein 2 or more; Peptides/ protein 1 or more. MS threshold was set at 150 counts and MS/MS threshold was set at 40 counts.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Macrophomina phaseolina</i> is a global devastating necrotrophic fungal pathogen. It causes charcoal rot disease in more than 500 host plants including major food crops, pulse crops, fiber crops, and oil crops. Despite having the whole-genome sequence of <i>M. phaseolina</i>, understanding the <i>M. phaseolina</i> genome-based plant-pathogen interactions is limited in the absence of direct experimental proof of secretion. Thus, it is essential to understand the host-microbe interaction and the disease pathogenesis, which can ensure global agricultural crop production and security. An <i>in silico</i>-predicted secretome of <i>M. phaseolina</i> is unable to represent the actual secretome. We could identify 117 proteins present in the secretome of <i>M. phaseolina</i> using liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032749. An array of putative virulence factors of <i>M. phaseolina</i> were identified in the present study using solid-state culture. Similar virulence factors have been reported in other plant pathogenic fungi also. Among the secretory fungal proteins with positive economic impacts, lignocellulolytic enzymes are of prime importance. Further, we validated our results by detecting the cell wall-degrading enzymes xylanase, endoglucanase, and amylase in the secretome of <i>M. phaseolina</i>. The present study may provide a better understanding about the necrotrophic fungi <i>M. phaseolina</i>, which modulate the host plant defense barriers using secretory proteins.

### Keywords
Macrophomina phaseolina, Secretome, Lc-esi-ms-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University Of Calcutta
Department of Biochemistry, University of Calcutta

### Submitter
NILANJAN SINHA

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sanjay Ghosh
Department of Biochemistry, University of Calcutta


