### Accession
PXD022973

### Title
Characterization of WN NS3 and AspN proteases

### Description
Characterization of WN NS3 protease and characterization of AspN protease with double digestion protocol

### Sample Protocol
All protease digestions were performed in 96FASP plates with MWCO 10 kDa (Acroprep AdvanceTM) by adapting a 96FASP sample preparation protocol for protease digestion under native conditions28,29. The first step was to wash the filter units to remove any residual glycerol. For this 100 µl of 20 mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8 were added to the wells and the plate was centrifuged at 1300g for 10 minutes before repeating this step once more. Afterwards, native cell lysate standardized in 20 mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8 was added at a final 50 µg of total protein per well and mixed with the investigated proteases at 1/50 [E]/[S] ratio. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 4 hours before the flow-through was collected by a 15 min centrifugation at 1300g in a low binding 96-well conical plate. In case of AspN sample, Trypsin was added to the sample for 2 hours at 37C for a second digestion step. The collection step was repeated by adding 100 µl of MS-grade water to the wells for collecting the flow-through. The fractions were transferred to low-binding tubes (Eppendorf) and concentrated on the SpeedVac to complete dryness. The samples were stored at -80 °C until analysis. Before analysis, the samples were re-suspended in 20 µl of MS-grade water with 0.1 % formic acid and the peptide concentration was determined with Nanodrop UV spectrometer. The sample concentration was adjusted to 1 µg/µl with water with 0.1 % formic acid. The LC-MS/MS analysis of the protease-digested samples was performed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fischer Scientific) interfaced with an Easy 1000 nano-LC unit (Thermo Fischer Scientific), coupled online with the nano-electrospray. The LC-MS/MS was operated with the Xcalibur software package (Thermo Fischer Scientific). For the analysis, 1 µg of sample was loaded directly on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 75 µm x 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 2µm, 100A, Thermo Fischer Scientific). The flow rate on the nano-LC was set to 300 nl/min and the peptides were chromatographically separated with a 5 – 35 % 120 minute linear acetonitrile/water gradient in 0.1% formic acid. During the entire run, the MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in positive ion mode with 2.0 kV voltage in the mass range of 350 to 1600 m/z, set to the profile mode and a resolution of 120.000 at 400 m/z. For peptide fragmentation, a CID fragmentation method with normalized collision energy 35 was used and the MS/MS spectra were obtained from the 15 most intense precursor ions from the full MS spectra. During the entire run, precursors with repeat count of 1 were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Precursors with charges +2, +3 and +4 were considered and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in the ion trap analyzer in the centroid mode with normal scan rate and standard settings.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in R (version 3.4.3) using the workflow deposited on Github (https://github.com/anfoss/HTPS_workflow) under MIT license. Briefly, the script recovers the cleavage sequences from the identified peptides and transfers them into a positional matrix (amino acids upstream the cleavage site occupy P8-P1 position and amino acids downstream P1'-P8' position). A frequency matrix is generated counting the abundance of amino acids per position and normalized for all identified peptides. To harmonize the multivariate protease specificity data, the positional occurrences of amino acids are converted into protease frequency matrices. In parallel, a random frequency matrix of the same size is generated by sampling the same number of amino acids as contained in the frequency matrix from the natural distribution of amino acids in HTPS_DB.fasta. The proteases were first compared in terms of numbers of generated cleavages under different tested conditions. To compare proteases in terms of significantly different positional features, a two-side paired t-test was employed to evaluate similarity between frequency matrices or differential frequency matrices and thus to evaluate the similarities/differences between the tested proteases. In case of AspN an other two-side paired t-test was employed to evaluate significative differential frequency compared to the matrix obtained from tryptic cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are among the largest protein families and critical regulators of biochemical processes like apoptosis and blood coagulation. Knowledge of proteases has been expanded by the development of proteomic approaches, however, technology for multiplexed screening of proteases within native environments is currently lacking behind. Here we introduce a simple method to profile protease activity based on isolation of protease products from native lysates using a 96FASP filter, their analysis in a mass spectrometer and a custom data analysis pipeline. The method is significantly faster, cheaper, technically less demanding, easy to multiplex and produces accurate protease fingerprints. Using the blood cascade proteases as a case study, we obtain protease substrate profiles that can be used to map specificity, cleavage entropy and allosteric effects and to design protease probes. The data further show that protease substrate predictions enable the selection of potential physiological substrates for targeted validation in biochemical assays.

### Keywords
Htps, Protease characterization

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


