### Accession
PXD015767

### Title
SMOC1 as a therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes

### Description
Inter-tissue communication is a fundamental feature of systemic metabolic regulation and the liver is central to this process. We have identified sparc-related modular calcium-binding protein 1 (SMOC1) as a glucose-responsive hepatokine and potent regulator of glucose homeostasis. Acute administration of recombinant SMOC1 improves glycemic control and insulin sensitivity, independent of changes in insulin secretion. SMOC1 exerts its favourable glycemic effects by inhibiting cAMP-PKA-CREB signaling in the liver, leading to decreased gluconeogenic gene expression and suppression of hepatic glucose output. Over expression of SMOC1 in the liver or once-weekly injections of a stabilized SMOC1-FC fusion protein induces durable improvements in glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in db/db mice, without significant adverse effects on adiposity, liver histopathology or inflammation. Furthermore, SMOC1 correlates with systemic insulin sensitivity and is decreased in obese, insulin resistant humans. Together, these findings identify SMOC1 as a potential pharmacological target for the management of glycemic control in type 2 diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
The protein was extacted with sodium deoxycholate, reduced, alkylated and digested with trysin. Sodium deoxycholate was precipitated and phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2 beads. Total proteome and phosphproteome was analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid.

### Data Protocol
All generated files were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and its implemented Andromeda search engine to obtain protein identifications as well as their label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensities. Database searching was performed with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) as variable modifications; up to 2 missed cleavages permitted; mass tolerance of 20 ppm; 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification; and minimum 2 peptides for pair-wise comparison in each protein for label-free quantitation. The human protein sequence database was downloaded from Uniprot/SwissProt, containing 20,244 proteins. The MaxQuant result output was further processed with Perseus (Version 1.5.0.40) (Tyanova et al., 2016), a module from the MaxQuant suite. After removing reversed and known contaminant proteins, the LFQ values were log2 transformed and the reproducibility across the biological replicates was evaluated by a Pearson’s correlation analysis. The replicates were grouped accordingly and all proteins were removed that had less than two “valid value” in each group. The missing values were replaced by imputation and two sample t-test (FDR < 5%) were performed to obtain a list of significantly regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Smoc1, Type 2 dibetes

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine Dentistry and Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Cheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew J Watt
Department of Physiology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine Dentistry and Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia


