### Accession
PXD030283

### Title
Potential Role of Lysine Acetylation in Antibiotic Resistance of Escherichia coli

### Description
Antibiotic resistance is increasingly becoming a serious challenge to public health. The regulation of metabolism by post-translational modifications (PTMs) has been widely studied; however, the comprehensive mechanism underlying the regulation of acetylation in bacterial resistance against antibiotics is unknown. Herein, with Escherichia coli as the model, we performed quantitative analysis of the acetylated proteome of wild-type sensitive strain (WT) and ampicillin- (Re-Amp), kanamycin- (Re-Kan), and polymyxin B-resistant (Re-Pol) strains. Based on bioinformatics analysis combined with biochemical validations, we found that a common regulatory mechanism exists between the different resistant strains. Acetylation negatively regulates bacterial metabolism to maintain antibiotic resistance, but positively regulates bacterial motility. Further analyses revealed that key enzymes in various metabolic pathways were differentially acetylated. Particularly, pyruvate kinase (PykF), a key glycolytic enzyme regulating bacterial metabolism, and its acetylated form were highly expressed in the three resistant types and were identified as reversibly acetylated by the deacetylase CobB and the acetyl-transferase PatZ, and also could be acetylated by non-enzyme AcP in vitro. Further, the deacetylation of Lys413 of PykF increased the enzyme activity by changing the conformation of ATP binding site of PykF, resulting in an increase in energy production, which in turn increased the sensitivity of drug-resistant strains to antibiotics. This study provides novel insights for understanding bacterial resistance and lays the foundation for future research on regulation of acetylation in antibiotic-resistant strains.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and affinity enrichment of acetylated peptides The protein digestion and affinity enrichment of the acetylated peptides were performed as described in a study conducted by us previously (27). Briefly, the protein extract was reduced with 8 M urea and 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, 37℃, 1 h) and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, 25 °C, 30 min). Samples were transferred into the 30 kDa ultracentrifugal filters (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Shanghai, China) and washed thrice with 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Protein and trypsin were mixed at a mass ratio of 30:1 for digestion at 37 °C for 16 h. Then, the peptides were lyophilised at -80°C for further analysis. The α-AcK antibody beaded agarose kit (PTM biolabs, Hangzhou, China) was used for enriching acetylated peptides. The lyophilised peptide was dissolved in 200 μL of pre-cold IP Buffer, then gently mixed with antibody conjugated beads. The ratio of peptides to beads was 3 mg peptides to 30μL of drained antibody beads. After incubating at 4°C overnight, the peptides were washed with wash buffer I and wash buffer II thrice and the acetylated peptides were eluted with 100 μL of elution buffer. Finally，the elutes were dried for MS analysis. Data-independent acquisition by MS Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and diluted to 0.5 μg/μL. To build the precursor ion library, 1 μL of each sample was taken to prepare a mixed sample. IRT-standard provided by the iRT-Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) at 1/10 by volume was added to all the samples. The mixed sample was analysed thrice by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The DDA library building parameters were set as follows: ion source type: NSI, positive ion reflection mode; ion transfer tube temperature: 320℃; pressure mode: standard; default charge state: 2; do data dependent experiment if no target species are found: False; MSn Level: 1; detection type: ion trap; resolution: 60K; mass range: normal; scanning range: 400-1500 m/z; maximum injection time: 50 ms; mass tolerance low: 10; mass tolerance high: 10 ; filter type: intensity threshold; signal strength: 50000; separation mode: quadrupole; activation type: HCD; and collision energy: 30%. Next, each individual sample was analysed in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with the same instrument. Three biological replicates were performed for each sample. The DIA parameter setting was basically the same as that of the DDA analysis except for the following: MS scan range, 350–1200 m/z; MS/MS scan range, 200–2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data processing To build a DDA library, the following command was used to search the original DDA file: Customise the Sequest HT (v2.5) engine in Proteome Discoverer software version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Uniprot-E. coli K12 FASTA database and iRT standard peptide sequence customisation. Compare with reference database in FASTA format, the search parameters were set as follows: MS tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance is 0.02 Da; enzyme: trypsin; static modification: carbamidomethylation (C); dynamic modification: oxidation of methionine, deamination of Q and N, N-terminal Acetyl and acetylation of K. Filter peptides to obtain high confidence (FDR, 1%) with a minimum peptide length of seven aa. The selected protein meets the following conditions: (1) protein level FDR ≤ 1%; (2) unique peptides ≥ 2. The pdResult file searched by DDA was exported from PD software and imported into Spectronaut software version 10 (Biognosys) to construct an ion spectrometry library. Next, we used the following command to convert the DIA original file to htrm format: HTRMS converter provided by Spectronaut. Finally, the DIA htrm file, the DDA original file, the DDA pdResult file, and the customised Uniprot-E. coli K12 database + iRT standard peptide FASTA file were loaded into Spectronaut, and processed through the BGS factory settings. Basically, the default parameters were used, except the enzyme Modify from trypsin/P to trypsin and add acetylation of K. Protein was inferred by software, standard q value of 0.01 was used to obtain the quantitative information at protein level, which was used for subsequent analysis.  Bioinformatics analysis In order to obtain the actual change intensity of acetylation, we used the following formula to deduct the protein background: (A/a)/(B/b), where ‘A’ represents the quantitative acetylation value of resistant strains, ‘a’ represents the quantitative protein of resistant strains, ‘B’ represents the WT strain quantitative acetylation value, and ‘b’ represents the quantitative protein value of the WT strain. In this way, we obtained the relative up-down fold change relative to that of the WT strain and the subsequent data analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed in Blast2GO(57) with Fisher's exact test of FDR < 0.05. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was performed in the “Wu Kong” platform. Functional protein domains were predicted with Pfam 31.0 database(58). “Wu Kong” platform was also used for the analysis of amino acid sequences and generation of the sequence logos.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance is increasingly becoming a challenge to public health. The regulation of bacterial metabolism by post-translational modifications (PTMs) has been widely studied. However, the mechanism underlying the regulation of acetylation in bacterial resistance to antibiotics is still unknown. Here, we performed a quantitative analysis of the acetylated proteome of a wild-type (WT) Escherichia coli (E. coli) sensitive strain and ampicillin- (Re-Amp), kanamycin- (Re-Kan), and polymyxin B-resistant (Re-Pol) strains. Based on bioinformatics analysis combined with biochemical validations, we found a common regulatory mechanism between the different resistant strains. Our results showed that protein acetylation negatively regulates bacterial metabolism to regulate antibiotic resistance and positively regulates bacterial motility. Further analyses revealed that key enzymes in various metabolic pathways were differentially acetylated. In particular, pyruvate kinase (PykF), a glycolytic enzyme that regulates bacterial metabolism, and its acetylated form were highly expressed in the three resistant strains and were identified as reversibly acetylated by the deacetylase CobB and the acetyl-transferase PatZ (peptidyl-lysine <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase). Results showed that PykF also could be acetylated by nonenzymatic acetyl phosphatase (AcP) <i>in vitro</i>. Furthermore, the deacetylation of Lys413 in PykF increased PykF enzymatic activity by changing the conformation of its ATP binding site, resulting in an increase in energy production which, in turn, increased the sensitivity of drug-resistant strains to antibiotics. This study provides novel insights for understanding bacterial resistance and lays the foundation for future research on the regulation of acetylation in antibiotic-resistant strains. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> The misuse of antibiotics has resulted in the emergence of many antibiotic-resistant strains which seriously threaten human health. Protein post-translational modifications, especially acetylation, tightly control bacterial metabolism. However, the comprehensive mechanism underlying the regulation of acetylation in bacterial resistance remains unexplored. Here, acetylation was found to positively regulate bacterial motility and negatively regulate energy metabolism, which was common in all antibiotic-resistant strains. Moreover, the acetylation and deacetylation process of PykF was uncovered, and deacetylation of the Lys 413 in PykF was found to contribute to bacterial sensitivity to antibiotics. This study provides a new direction for research on the development of bacterial resistance through post-translational modifications and a theoretical basis for developing antibacterial drugs.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification; escherichia coli; acetylation; pykf; antibiotic resistance

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Zuye  Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


