### Accession
PXD040422

### Title
PPP2R1A mutations cause ATR inhibitor synthetic lethality in ARID1A deficient ovarian clear cell carcinoma

### Description
Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is a cancer of unmet need characterized by ARID1A mutation. Prior work identified an ARID1A/ATR synthetic lethality, information that led to phase II clinical trials. Using genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis and interference screens, we identified protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) subunits, including PPP2R1A, as determinants of ATRi sensitivity in ARID1A mutant OCCC. Analysis of an OCCCs cohort indicated that >1/3 possessed both PPP2R1A and ARID1A loss-of-function mutations. CRISPR-prime editing demonstrated that oncogenic PPP2R1A p.R183 missense mutations enhance in vitro and in vivo ATRi sensitivity in ARID1A mutant OCCC. OCCC patients with both ARID1A and PPP2R1A mutations also showed clinical responses to ATRi in a phase II trial. Mechanistically, this synthetic lethal effect is dependent upon WNK1 kinase, which opposes PP2A function. This data suggests that co-occurrence of PPP2R1A and ARID1A mutations in OCCC should be assessed as a biomarker of ATRi response in on-going clinical trials.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 150 μL lysis buffer of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) on ice, with 15 sec of pulsed probe sonication followed by heating at 90 °C for 5 min and another round of sonication for 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Quick Start Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein aliquots of 60 μg were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin at final concentration 75 ng/μL (Pierce). Peptides were labelled with the TMTpro reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled sample was acidified at 1% formic acid, the precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was SpeedVac dried.  High-pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation and phosphopeptide enrichment  Peptides were fractionated with high-pH Reversed-Phase (RP) chromatography using the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide. The TMTpro labelled peptides were fractionated at 0.2 mL/min with the following gradient: 5 minutes at 5% B, up to 12% B in 3 min, for 32 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec and SpeedVac dried.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed in 24 peptide fractions with the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo) using a modified protocol in a well plate tip-array format. A volume of 50 μL resin/buffer was transferred on top of 10 μL filter tips that were fitted on a 96-well plate using a tip rack. The resin was washed three times with 40 μL wash/binding solution and centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 μL wash/binding solution and loaded onto the tip-columns with the resin. After 30 min, the resin was washed three times with wash/binding solution and the flow-throughs were collected in a clean 96-well plate with centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min each time. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 40 μL elution buffer in a clean 96-well plate with centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min, transferred in glass vials (Waters, P/N 186005669CV) and SpeedVac dried. The flow-throughs were orthogonally pooled into 12 samples for total proteome analysis.  LC-MS analysis  LC-MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, trapping column at flow rate 10 μL/min and analysed with an Acclaim PepMap (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column connected to a stainless-steel emitter. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. For the phosphopeptide analysis, the separation method was as follows: for 60 min gradient 5%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B at flow rate 300 nL/min. For the flow-through analysis a 90 min gradient 5%-38% B was used. MS scans were acquired in the range of 375-1,500 m/z with mass resolution of 120k, AGC 4×105 and max IT 50 ms. Precursors were selected with the top speed mode in 3 sec cycles and isolated for HCD fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy was 36% with AGC 5×104 and max IT 86 ms at 50k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further fragmentation for 30 seconds (or 45 sec for flow-throughs) with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and quantification  The mass spectra were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the SequestHT search engine for peptide identification and quantification. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were 20 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed-cleavages. TMTpro at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Oxidation of M, Deamidation of N/Q and Phosphorylation of S/T/Y were selected as dynamic modifications. Spectra were searched against reviewed UniProt Homo Sapiens protein entries, peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered at q-value<0.01 based on target-decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMTpro quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm. Only peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise>3 were used and phosphorylation localization probabilities were estimated with the IMP-ptmRS node. Statistical analysis of the proteomics data was further performed with the Perseus platform https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovarian clear cell carcinoma, Synthetic lethality, Atr, Arid1a

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics Institute of Cancer Research


