### Accession
PXD035013

### Title
Mass spectrometry of immunoprecipitations from control and Er blood group

### Description
Immunoprecipitates were prepared from test Er(a+b-) donor RBCs and negative control Er(a-b+) (P1) RBCs using anti-Era plasma from P3 (5:1 ratio of plasma to cells) and proteomic analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
The immunopreciptes were run on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel until the dye front had migrated approximately 1cm into the separating gel. Each gel lane was then excised as a single slice and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd.).  The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400 000 and a max injection time of 100ms.  Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7), with monoisotopic peak determination set to peptide and using an intensity range from 5E3 to 1E20. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, max injection time of 50ms and HCD collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded January 2021; 169297 sequences) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) as a fixed modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the identification of the high-incidence red cell antigen Era nearly 40 years ago, the molecular background of this antigen, together with the other 2 members of the Er blood group collection, has yet to be elucidated. Whole exome and Sanger sequencing of individuals with serologically defined Er alloantibodies identified several missense mutations within the PIEZO1 gene, encoding amino acid substitutions within the extracellular domain of the Piezo1 mechanosensor ion channel. Confirmation of Piezo1 as the carrier molecule for the Er blood group antigens was demonstrated using immunoprecipitation, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knockout, and expression studies in an erythroblast cell line. We report the molecular bases of 5 Er blood group antigens: the recognized Era, Erb, and Er3 antigens and 2 novel high-incidence Er antigens, described here as Er4 and Er5, establishing a new blood group system. Anti-Er4 and anti-Er5 are implicated in severe hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Demonstration of Piezo1, present at just a few hundred copies on the surface of the red blood cell, as the site of a new blood group system highlights the potential antigenicity of even low-abundance membrane proteins and contributes to our understanding of the in&#xa0;vivo characteristics of this important and widely studied protein in transfusion biology and beyond.

### Keywords
Human, Red blood cells, Lcms

### Affiliations
School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University Walk, University of Bristol  NHS Blood and Transplant Filton Bristol
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Ashley Toye

### Lab Head
Dr Ash Toye
School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University Walk, University of Bristol  NHS Blood and Transplant Filton Bristol


