### Accession
PXD026764

### Title
Compositional analysis of extracellular aggregates in the eyes of patients with exfoliation syndrome and exfoliation glaucoma.

### Description
Exfoliation syndrome (XFS) is a condition characterized by the production of insoluble fibrillar aggregates (exfoliation material; XFM) in the eye and elsewhere. Many patients with XFS progress to exfoliation glaucoma (XFG), a significant cause of global blindness. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze the composition of XFM in lens capsule specimens and aqueous humor samples from XFS and XFG patients and individuals without XFS.    Pieces of lens capsule and samples of aqueous humor were obtained with consent from patients undergoing cataract surgery. Tryptic digests of capsule or aqueous samples were analyzed by HPLC-mass spectrometry and relative differences between samples were quantified using the tandem mass tag technique. The distribution of XFM on the capsular surface was visualized by scanning electron microscopy and super-resolution light microscopy.    A small set of proteins was consistently upregulated in XFS samples, including microfibril components fibrillin-1 (FBN1), latent TGFBeta-binding protein-2 (LTBP-2), and LTBP-3. Lysyl oxidase-like 1 (LOXL1), a protein linked strongly to XFS in genetic studies, was an abundant XFM protein. Ligands of the TGFBeta superfamily were prominent, including LEFTY2, a protein known for its role in establishing the embryonic body axis. Elevated levels of LEFTY2 were also detected in aqueous humor from XFG patients and confirmed by ELISA.  This analysis verified the presence of several suspected XFM proteins and identified novel components. Quantitative comparisons between patient samples revealed a consistent XFM proteome. The expression of FBN1, LOXL1, and LEFTY2 was particularly strong in XFG patients in comparison to XFS patients.

### Sample Protocol
IRB-approved (IRB # 201802119) samples were from cataract surgery patients at the Washington University Ophthalmology Service. XFS patients were diagnosed during clinical examinations. Patients with XFS and glaucomatous cupping, retinal nerve fiber thinning, and/or visual field loss were categorized as XFG patients. Patients with cataract and other forms of glaucoma were classified as CAT/GL, and patients without other comorbidities undergoing cataract surgery were included as controls (CAT).  During eye surgery, a 1.0 mm paracentesis was created, and a sample of aqueous humor (0.1 ml) was withdrawn from the anterior chamber using a 27-gauge blunt cannula attached to a 1 ml syringe. The aqueous was placed in a microfuge tube and frozen on dry ice. The anterior chamber was reformed with balanced salt solution, followed by injection of an ophthalmic viscoelastic. Next, a temporal clear corneal incision was created through which capsulorhexis forceps were introduced into the anterior chamber to complete a continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis. The resulting flap of lens capsule with an attached layer of epithelial cells was placed in a microfuge tube. Lens capsule samples were stripped of adherent epithelial cells by immersion in 0.5% sodium deoxycholate in water.  Decellularized lens capsules were frozen at -80C until used for mass spectrometric analysis.    Capsules were thawed, 150 microliters of 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB added, and samples vortexed. Tissues were homogenized using a Bioruptor Pico sonication device (Diagenode Diagnostics, Cat # B01060010) by adding 30 mg of extraction beads (Cat # C20000021) and 20 30-sec on/off cycles with water bath temp of 4C. A Pierce BCA protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) was performed (samples had 21-55 micrograms of protein, 39 ave.). Half of each sample was transferred to 1.5 ml Lobind tubes (Eppendorf, Enfield, CT), 3.4 microliters of 0.5 M DTT added, and samples incubated at 95C for 10 min. After reduction, samples were alkylated with 7.8 microliters of 0.5 M IAA at RT for 30 min in dark. Samples were acidified with 8.5 microliters of 12% phosphoric acid, and 562 microliters of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB added. Samples were transferred to S-trap micro columns (Protifi) inserted into 1.5 ml centrifuge tubes, and liquid removed by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 3 min. S-traps were then washed 6x by adding 150 microliters 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB and centrifugation as above. S-traps were transferred to Lobind centrifuge tubes, 40 microliters of 80 nanogram/microliter sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Cat # V5111) in 50 mM TEAB added, and digestion done at 37C overnight. After digestion, 20 microliter of 50 mM TEAB was added, samples incubated at 37C for 15 min, and peptides eluted by sequential addition of 50 microliters of TEAB, 50 microliters 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and 50 microliters of 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid, with centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 4 min. Combined fractions were dried, dissolved in 100 microliters of water, and peptide concentrations determined using a Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat # 23275). 7.5 microgram of peptide per sample was dried and redissolved in 20 microliters of 100 mM TEAB.   Preparation of thawed aqueous humor (AH) digests was similar, except 75 microliters of each AH sample had 19 microliters of 20% SDS added with vortexing. A Pierce BCA proteins assay was performed, and 107 to 373 micrograms of protein was obtained (234 ave.). 75 microliters of each AH sample were digested using the S-trap protocol, as described above. Following solubilization of the peptide digest in 100 microliters of water, a peptide assay was performed, and 10 micrograms of peptide from each AH sample dried and dissolved in 20 microliters of 100 mM TEAB.  For capsule digest labeling, 200 microgram portions of Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat # 90309) and TMT11-131C reagent (Cat # PIA34807) were dissolved in 12 microliters of anhydrous acetonitrile, the 20 microliter peptide samples added, and labeling performed by shaking at RT for 1 h. For AH digest labeling, 16-plex TMTpro reagents in 500 microgram portions (Cat # A44522) were dissolved each in 52 microliters of anhydrous ACN, 12 microliters of reagent mixed with 10 micrograms of digest, and incubation as above.  Following labeling, 2 microliters of labeled peptide from each capsule or AH digests were pooled for analysis by a 2 h LC-MS/MS method using an Orbitrap Fusion instrument to volumetrically normalize each sample based on total reporter ion intensities. The frozen 30 microliter portions of each TMT labeled sample were thawed, 2 microliters of 5% hydroxylamine added, samples incubated at RT for 15 min, and about 32 micrograms of peptides in the pooled capsule samples, and about 55 micrograms of peptides in the pooled AH samples were dried.

### Data Protocol
The multiplexed capsule samples and AH sample were dissolved in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH = 9 buffer, respectively and injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) at 3 microliters/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides from the capsules were eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 17, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, 40, and 90% ACN (11 fractions for BASS-929 – the 6 fractions for BASS-883 were 14, 20, 25, 30, 50, and 90%) in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 microliters/min flow rate, while peptides from AH were eluted using 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 35, 37, 40, 50, 90% ACN (18 fractions). Eluted peptides were diluted at a Tee with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 microliters/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC 2-micron C18 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were then separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliters/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Scientific) configured with an EasySpray NanoSource and version 3.3 of the control software. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65).  The binary instrument files were processed with the PAW pipeline. Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMT reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra in MS2 format. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMT labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues). Searches used UniProt proteome UP000005640 (human, taxon ID 9606) canonical FASTA sequences (20,603 proteins). Common contaminants (174 sequences excluding any albumins) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 41,554 sequences.  Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using interactive delta-mass and conditional Peptide-prophet-like linear discriminant function scores. Incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups, and protein families were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides for each protein.   The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein expression using the Bioconductor package edgeR within Jupyter notebooks. Result tables contained typical proteomics summaries, reporter ion intensities, and statistical testing results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lens capsule, Quantitative proteomics, Tmt labeling, Psr-ohsu, Exfoliation syndrome, Shotgun proteomics, Aqueous humor, Exfoliation glaucoma

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences Washington University School of Medicine  660 S. Euclid Ave, Box 8096 St. Louis, MO 63117  USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Steven Bassnett
Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences Washington University School of Medicine  660 S. Euclid Ave, Box 8096 St. Louis, MO 63117  USA


