### Accession
PXD023543

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of different parts of Taenia hydatigena

### Description
Taenia hydatigena, a globally distributed parasite, is a canine tapeworm and causes huge economic losses in the food industry. Using LC-MS/MS, the proteomes of T. hydatigena cyst scolex, designated as CS, and the cyst without the scolex, designated as CWS, were profiled and a total of 764 different proteins were identified, 664 of which were identified in CS, 412 identified in CWS and 312 in both. Comparative analysis revealed that CS had more abundant proteins associated with the growth and development, whilst CWS had more abundant proteins constituting a scaffolding and protective extracellular matrix. Consistent with the sequencing data, the abundance of the 5 selected proteins was validated to be higher in CWS than CS by Western blotting. The current data will provide a clue for further pinpointing a role of these proteins in the biology of T. hydatigena.

### Sample Protocol
Three fresh C. tenuicollis samples were carefully dissected from the mesentery of slaughtered adult sheep in an abattoir, Xingjiang Autonomous Region, China. After five washes with sterile and ice-cold PBS, individual cysts were scissored into two parts, the scolex, designated as CS, and the rest (the cyst without scolex), designated as CWS.  Afterwards, 50 mg of CS and CWS were promptly ground into powder with a mortar in liquid nitrogen, respectively, followed by the addition of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and then agitation overnight at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min at 4 °C, followed by sterilization using 0.22 μm filters (Millipore). The protein concentration was determined using Bradford (Beyotime). Protein samples were directly used or stored at −80 °C.

### Data Protocol
The protein preparations were separated by gel electrophoresis, and then protein strips were captured at different locations. The gel was enzymatically hydrolyzed, and the peptides were extracted using by a Shimadzu LC-20AD model nanoliter liquid chromatograph. The peptides were then analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Briefly, the separated peptides were ionized by a nanoESI source and then passed to a tandem mass spectrometer LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher) for data-dependent acquisition mode detection. The main parameters were set as follows: the ion source voltage was set to 2.2 kV; the MS1 scan range was 350 ~1500 m/z; the resolution was set to 30,000; the MS2 starting m/z was fixed at 100; the resolution was 7,500. The screening conditions for the MS2 fragmentation were charge 2+, 3+ and 4+ or higher, and the top 8 parent ions with the peak intensity exceeding 1,000. The ion fragmentation mode was higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) set to 35, and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 s. In this pipeline, the results from search engine were pre-processed and re-scored using Percolator to improve the matching accuracy. The output was then filtered by false discover rate (FDR, ≤0.01) at a spectral level to obtain a significant identified spectrum and peptide list. Then based on the parsimony principle, we performed protein inference on peptides and generated a series of protein groups. In order to obtain the abundance of each protein, this pipeline used BGI’s own software to complete the extraction of peptide extracted ion chromatograms and calculate the peak area. Then based on the intensity-based absolute-protein-quantification (iBAQ) algorithm, the total peak area in each protein group was divided by the number of theoretical peptides to obtain the final abundance of each protein.Due to the unavailability of the T. hydatigena genome, the protein data were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.3.03) against Taenia solium protein database retrieved from Gene DB (12,329 sequences, http://www.genedb.org/Homepage/Tsolium) with parameters as previously did. Protein identification was conducted as previously described (8). Gene Ontology (GO) terms (http://geneontology.org/) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/) were used to comparatively analyze the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cyst, Scolex, Taenia hydatigena

### Affiliations
College of Life Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, China

### Submitter
Mengting Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Mengting Cai
College of Life Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, China


