### Accession
PXD000732

### Title
Understanding the antimicrobial mechanism of TiO2-based nanocomposite films in a pathogenic bacterium

### Description
Understanding the antimicrobial mechanism of TiO2-based nanocomposite films in a pathogenic bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
Comparative proteomic study of Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteria grown in different composition media. The different cultures were labelled with iTRAQ reagent and analyzed in the TRIPLE-TOF mass spectrometer in a 250 chromatographic run. 15 precursors per 250 ms was adquired

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ quantitation was done with Mascot Quantitation Module using the median proteins and peptides ratios. Only the peptides with <1% FDR at peptide level was considered

### Publication Abstract
Titania (TiO&#x2082;)-based nanocomposites subjected to light excitation are remarkably effective in eliciting microbial death. However, the mechanism by which these materials induce microbial death and the effects that they have on microbes are poorly understood. Here, we assess the low dose radical-mediated TiO&#x2082; photocatalytic action of such nanocomposites and evaluate the genome/proteome-wide expression profiles of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 cells after two minutes of intervention. The results indicate that the impact on the gene-wide flux distribution and metabolism is moderate in the analysed time span. Rather, the photocatalytic action triggers the decreased expression of a large array of genes/proteins specific for regulatory, signalling and growth functions in parallel with subsequent selective effects on ion homeostasis, coenzyme-independent respiration and cell wall structure. The present work provides the first solid foundation for the biocidal action of titania and may have an impact on the design of highly active photobiocidal nanomaterials.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Quantitative, Itraq, Tio2

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Proteomics Facility, National Center for Biotechnology (CSIC). Madrid (Spain)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Pablo Albar Ramirez
Proteomics Facility, National Center for Biotechnology (CSIC). Madrid (Spain)


