### Accession
PXD030663

### Title
Cell-type-specific labeling and profiling of glycans in living mice

### Description
Metabolic labeling of glycans with clickable unnatural sugars has enabled glycan imaging and glycoproteomics in mixed cell populations.  However, in vivo labeling and profiling of cell-type-specific glycans remains challenging.  Here, we develop genetically encoded metabolic glycan labeling (GeMGL), a cell-type-specific strategy based on a bump-hole pair of an unnatural sugar and its matching engineered enzyme.  N pentynylacetylglucosamine (GlcNAl) serves as a bumped analog of N acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) that can be specifically incorporated into glycans of cells expressing an engineered mutant of UDP-GlcNAc pyrophosphorylase, AGX2F383G.  GeMGL with the 1,3-di-O-propionylated GlcNAl (1,3-Pr2GlcNAl) and AGX2F383G pair is demonstrated in cell co-cultures, and used for specific labeling of glycans in mouse xenograft tumors.  By generating a transgenic mouse line with AGX2F383G expressed under cardiomyocyte-specific promoter, we perform specific imaging of cardiomyocyte glycans in the heart and identified 582 cardiomyocyte O-GlcNAcylated proteins with no interference from other cardiac cell types.  GeMGL will facilitate cell-type-specific glycoproteomics in various tissues and disease models.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of 1,3-Pr2GlcNAl modified peptides, 5 mg (2.5 mL) proteins from metabolic labeling were incubated with 100 M azide-AC-biotin, CuSO4-BTTAA premixed mixture (50 M CuSO4, BTTAA/CuSO4 2:1, mol/mol) and 2.5 mM freshly prepared sodium ascorbate.  The samples were vortexed at R.T. for 2 h.  After click reaction, the proteins were precipitated by 25 mL methanol at -80 °C overnight.  After centrifugation (4 °C, 4200 g, 15 min) and washed with 10 mL ice-cold methanol, precipitants were resuspended in 2 mL PBS (pH 7.4) containing 1.2% SDS (wt/vol).  150 L streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed with PBS (pH 7.4) for three times, resuspended in 10 mL PBS, and transferred into protein solution.  The resulting mixture was incubated at R.T. for 4 h with gentle rotation, followed by washed with PBS for five times and Milli-Q water for five times and resuspended in 500 L 6 M urea in PBS.  To the mixture, 25 L 200 mM DTT in water was added, followed by incubated at 37°C for 15 min.  400 mM iodoacetamide in water was further added to beads, followed by incubation in dark at 35 °C for 30 min.  The beads were then collected by centrifugation and resuspended in 200 L 2 M urea in PBS containing 2g trypsin and 2 mM CaCl2.  Enriched proteins were digested with gentle rotation at 37 °C for 16 h, followed by washed with PBS andMilliQ-water for 5 times respectively.  Release of peptides from streptavidin beads was carried out by incubation with beads in 200 L 2% formic acid in water (vol/vol).  After cleaved twice with gentle rotation, the resulting supernatants were combined and evaporated in vacuum centrifuge, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. For identification of modified peptides, the LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with AcclaimTMPepMapTM 100 C18 75 m × 2 cm nanoViper (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as loading column, AcclaimTMPepMapTM 100 C18 75 m × 15 cm nanoViper RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as separating column, and an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The peptides were loaded onto the pre-column and separated by the separating column eluting with 7-30% B [A: 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (vol/vol)] during 68 min and then subjected to EThcD-based LC-MS/MS analysis.  The MS/MS fragmentation was performed in a data-dependent mode, of which 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 analysis.For dimethyl labeling, per 100 L peptides from Group I were reacted with 4 L 4% regular formaldehyde (CH2O, “light”) and 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN); per 100 L peptides from Group II were reacted with 4 L 4% deuterated formaldehyde (CD2O, “medium”) and 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN); per 100 L peptides from Group III were reacted with 4 L 4% deuterated and 13C-labeled formaldehyde (13CD2O, “heavy”) and 0.6 M sodium cyanoborodeuteride (NaBD3CN).  Peptides were labeled at R.T. for 1 h, followed by addition of 16 L 1% ammonia and 8 L formic acid (per 100 L peptides).  The “light”, “medium”, and “heavy” samples were combined and subjected for high-pH reverse phase HPLC fractionation. The combined peptides were separated into 20 fractions by a high-pH reverse phase C18 column (Agela Technologies) in Agilent HPLC system.  The elution buffer including buffer A (pH 10.0, adjusted by NH3·H2O): 2% acetonitrile (ACN) – 98% H2O and buffer B (pH 10.0, adjusted by NH3·H2O): 98% ACN– 2% H2O.  Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min during 20 min, with a gradient of 0% B (0 min), 5% B (0-0.1 min), 8% B (0.1-1 min), 14% B (1-7 min), 24% B (7-14 min), 40% B (14-16 min), 95% B (16-18 min) and 15% B (18-20 min).  The samples were separated at 45 °C and the column temperature was controlled by built-in column heater.  The 20 fractions were combined into 12 fractions, dried in SpeedVac (Eppendorf), re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (vol/vol) and subjected to analysis by LC-MS/MS. The protein identification was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were separated using a gradient of 3-10% B for 10 min, 10-37% B for 48 min, 37-100% B for 1 min, 100% B for 5 min, 100-3% B for 1 min, and 3% B for 3 min (A: 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (vol/vol)), and then subjected to HCD-based LC-MS/MS analysis.  Full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 400 to 1800 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with the mass resolution of 70000, followed HCD MS/MS scan on top 20 most intense precursors.  MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution setting of 17500 using the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
SwissPortHomo sapiens database was downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) on 4 November 2016.  The raw data files were subjected to database searches using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.8.2) integrated with Andromeda search engine.  The peptides with an Andromeda score ≥ 40 and delta score ≥ 8 were selected as modified peptides.  The sites with a localization score ≥ 0.75 were selected as high-confidence sites.  The O-GlcNAc sites located on the extracellular domains of membrane proteins or secreted proteins were excluded from the O-GlcNAc site list. SwissPortMus musculus database were downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) on 4 November 2016.  The HCD raw data files were searched using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.8.2) integrated with Andromeda search engine.  The default parameters were set as below. Briefly, carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and acetyl N-terminal were set as variable modifications; trypsin/P was set as digestion with maximum two missed; the maximal mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for the first search; the false discovery rate was set as 0.01 for protein identification and at least two unique peptides were required; the “requantify”and“match between runs” were enabled; proteins with at least two quantified peptides including one unique peptide were set as quantified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell-type-specific, Metabolic glycan labeling, Glycan

### Affiliations
Peking University
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Qitao Song

### Lab Head
Dr Xing Chen
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China


