### Accession
PXD008528

### Title
Exoproteome profiling reveals the involvement of the foldase PrsA in the cell surface properties and pathogenesis of S. aureus

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is a bacterial pathogen that produces and exports many virulence factors that cause human diseases. PrsA, a membrane-bound foldase that is found ubiquitously in Gram-positive bacteria, is required for the folding of exported proteins into a stable and active structure. However, the involvement of PrsA in post-translocational protein folding in S. aureus remains unclear. In this study, a PrsA-deficient mutant of S. aureus HG001 was constructed and prsA deletion was shown to enhance auto-aggregation and increase the ability of S. aureus HG001 to adhere to human lung epithelial cells. The lack of PrsA made the bacteria more sensitive to sonication-induced lysis. In a mouse infection model, mice that were infected with a prsA-knockout strain HG001ΔprsA had a higher survival rate than those infected with the wild-type strain. An iTRAQ-based quantitative exoproteome analysis was conducted to identify the proteins whose secretion was affected by PrsA. The exoproteomic analysis revealed that prsA deletion altered the amounts of several proteins that were related to the properties of the cell surface and virulence. These include proteins involved in cellular adhesion and cell wall synthesis such as extracellular adhesion protein (Eap), undecaprenyl-diphosphatase (UppP) and FmtA, and proteins involved in subverting host innate immunity such as immunoglobulin-binding proteins Spa and Sbi, chemotaxis inhibitory protein (CHIP) and staphylococcal complement inhibitor (SCIN). The results of this study suggested that PrsA is required for the post-translocational folding of many exported proteins and critically affects the cell surface properties and pathogenesis of S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of all strains were inoculated in 50 ml of fresh TSB to an OD578 of 0.05. After culturing at 37°C with shaking for 7 h, cells were harvested and adjusted to an OD578 of 7.0 with TSB. Ten milliliters of cells at an OD578 of 7.0 were centrifuged at 18000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed for the extraction of exoproteins. The remaining cell pellets were used for the extraction of cell wall-associated proteins. The culture supernatant was filtered through a 0.45 μm filter to remove cellular debris, and the proteins in the supernatant were precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) overnight. Proteins in the pellet were washed with cold acetone three times and then air dried. The pellets were dissolved in a buffer consisting of 4 M urea and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich).  Cell wall-associated proteins were extracted using a method described elsewhere. Briefly, the cell pellets from 10 ml of bacterial culture at an OD578 of 7.0 were washed twice with a digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 20 mM MgCl2) and treated with a digestion buffer containing 35% sucrose, protease inhibitor cocktail and 0.4 mg lysostaphin (Sigma -Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min at 37°C. After centrifugation (2500 g for 15 min at 4°C), the resulting supernatant was treated with 20 μg/ml DNase I and RNase A for 30 min at room temperature and was then centrifuged at 18000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The proteins in the supernatant were then concentrated using Amicon-Ultra4 centrifugal filters (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The protein concentrations of extracted exoproteins and cell wall-associated proteins were measured using a Bradford assay kit (Bio-Rad). For tryptic digestion of proteins, 20 μg protein samples were denatured with 8 M urea containing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 90 min at 37°C, and then alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min at room temperature. After desalting, the proteins were digested with modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. The labeling of iTRAQ reagent (AB Sciex, Forster City, CA, USA) was performed in compliance with the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, each tube of iTRAQ reporters was reconstituted with 70 μl ethanol. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 25 μl iTRAQ dissolution buffer. The peptides from the wild type HG001 and HG001ΔprsA were labeled with iTRAQ 114 and 115 tags, respectively. For the biological replicates, the iTRAQ 116 and 117 tags were respectively incubated with peptide samples from the HG001 and HG001ΔprsA, respectively, which were prepared in different batches. After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, the four labeled samples were pooled and then dried using vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
The protein database search was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the reporter ions quantifier node for the iTRAQ data analysis. The MS/MS spectra were searched using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.2.04, Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) against the UniProt S. aureus (strain NCTC 8325) sequence database (released on April 25, 2016, 2889 entries). For peptide identification, one missing tryptic cleavage was allowed. Mass tolerances of 10 ppm, 0.5 Da, and 0.05 Da were permitted for intact peptide masses, CID fragment ions, and HCD fragment ions, respectively. Oxidized methionine (+16 Da) was considered as a potential variable modification, and iTRAQ (N terminal, +144 Da), iTRAQ (K, +144 Da), and methyl methanethiosulfonate (C, +46 Da) were considered as the fixed modifications. The search results (peptide-spectrum match) wasere filtered using a high confidence of peptide identification in Proteome Discoverer to ensure that the overall false discovery rate was smaller than 0.01. The identifications of epithelial keratins and proteins with single peptide hits were excluded. Each quantified protein contained at least two quantifiable spectra. The criteria for determining whether proteins showed significantly altered levels were selected according to the iTRAQ-based comparison of protein ratios between equal amounts of the same cell extract.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a bacterial pathogen that produces and exports many virulence factors that cause diseases in humans. PrsA, a membrane-bound foldase, is expressed ubiquitously in Gram-positive bacteria and required for the folding of exported proteins into a stable and active structure. To understand the involvement of PrsA in posttranslocational protein folding in S. aureus, a PrsA-deficient mutant of S. aureus HG001 was constructed. Using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry analyses, the exoproteomes of PrsA mutant and wild type S. aureus were comparatively profiled, and 163 cell wall-associated proteins and 67 exoproteins with altered levels have been identified in the PrsA-deficient mutant. Bioinformatics analyses further reveal that prsA deletion altered the amounts of proteins that are potentially involved in the regulation of cell surface properties and bacterial pathogenesis. To determine the relevancy of our findings, we investigated the functional consequence of prsA deletion in S. aureus. PrsA deficiency can enhance bacterial autoaggregation and increase the adhesion ability of S. aureus to human lung epithelial cells. Moreover, mice infected with PrsA-deficient S. aureus had a better survival rate compared with those infected with the wild-type S. aureus. Collectively, our findings reveal that PrsA is required for the posttranslocational folding of numerous exported proteins and critically affects the cell surface properties and pathogenesis of S. aureus.

### Keywords
S. ureus, Prsa, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Chih-Ching Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Chih-Ching Wu
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan


