### Accession
PXD012587

### Title
Human enamel peptides LC-MS/MS.

### Description
Recently, enamel peptides revealed their critical role in sex classification of old skeletal remains. In particular, the presence of protein AMELY (amelogenin isoform Y) within the enamel dental tissue is restricted to the male sex only, while AMELX (isoform X) can be found in both sexes. AMELY can be easily detected through peptide SM(ox)IRPPY by means of LC-MS/MS and retrieved from ion chromatograms (exact mass [M+2H]+2 440.2233 m/z). In this paper, we exploited the dimorphic features of the amelogenin protein to unravel the sex of the so-called ‘Lovers of Modena’, two Late Antique individuals whose skeletons were intentionally buried hand-in-hand.

### Sample Protocol
To extract enamel proteins, each specimen was soaked in 200 μL of 5% HCl for 1h in an Eppendorf tube at room temperature. After 1h none of the samples (ca. 10 mg of enamel) was completely digested. The HCl was thus removed and retained in a new Eppendorf tube, to be processed through HyperSep™ SpinTips (Thermo Scientific) containing C18 resin. Tips were conditioned three times with 100% acetonitrile (50 μL each step) and three times with 0.1% formic acid (50 μL each step). Samples (200 μL of HCl) were loaded to the SpinTips in two steps of 100 μL each. Tips were thus washed three times using 50 μL of formic acid per step. Resin-bounded proteins were finally eluted two times using 10 μL of 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for each step. Samples were dried down at room temperature under a laminar flow hood (class 100). All the previous described protocols were performed at the Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences (Clean room facility, class 1000) and the Department of Life Sciences (Bioinorganic Chemistry and Bioelectrochemistry Lab) of the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. For UHPLC–HRMS analysis, dry extracted peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of a mixture of water: acetonitrile: formic acid 97:3:2, sonicated for 10 minutes at room temperature and centrifuged at 12100 r.c.f. for 10 minutes. 15 µL of this solution were injected in the instrument. A Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a Thermo high resolution Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) were used for the analysis. The column (Zorbax SB-C18 RRHT, 2.1x50mm, 1.8 μ particle size, Agilent Technologies), thermostatted at 25°C, was equilibrated with 0.3 mL/min of water 0.1% formic acid (A) with 2% acetonitrile (B); after sample injection (15 µl), B% was kept constant at 2% for 2’, then linearly increased from 2 to 28% in 64 minutes; B% was then brought to 95% in 4 minutes and kept at 95% B for 5 minutes, before the reconditioning step. Each sample required a total run time of 90 minutes. Centroided MS and MS2 spectra were recorded from 200 to 2000 m/z in Full MS/dd-MS² (TOP2) mode, at a resolution of 35000 and 17500, respectively. The two most intense multi-charged ions were selected for MS2 nitrogen-promoted collision-induced dissociation (NCE=28). Precursor dynamic exclusion (6 seconds) and apex triggering (1 to 5s) were set; peptide-like isotope pattern ions were preferred. The mass spectrometer was calibrated before the start of the analyses; an initial segment (0.1-0.7 minutes) with a lock mass (391.28429) was included in the MS method. More details are reported within the Supplementary Information.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data, converted into mascot generic format using MsConvert (v. 3.0.10730, ProteoWizard tools; Chambers et al., 2012), were searched against Swiss-Prot (accessed Oct 2018; 20350 sequences for Homo Sapiens) for peptide sequences and cRAP (116 sequences) for contaminants with MASCOT (Version 2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK). No proteolytic enzyme was selected, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification was set in search parameters. Deamidated asparagines/glutamine (NQ) and oxidated methionine (M) were set as variable modifications. One missed cleavage was allowed. Mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for the precursor ions (peak detection mismatch #13C = 1) and 0.05 Da for the product ions. An automatic decoy database search was used to estimate the false discovery rate; probability threshold was trimmed to get a FDR <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Recent work has disclosed the critical role played by enamel peptides in sex classification of old skeletal remains. In particular, protein AMELY (amelogenin isoform Y) is present in the enamel dental tissue of male individuals only, while AMELX (isoform X) can be found in both sexes. AMELY can be easily detected by LC-MS/MS in the ion extracted chromatograms of the SM<sub>(ox)</sub>IRPPY peptide (monoisotopic [M&#x2009;+&#x2009;2&#x2009;H]<sup>+2</sup> mass&#x2009;=&#x2009;440.2233&#x2009;m/z). In this paper, we exploited the dimorphic features of the amelogenin protein to determine the sex of the so-called 'Lovers of Modena', two Late Antique individuals whose skeletons were intentionally buried hand-in-hand. Upon discovery, mass media had immediately assumed they were a male-female couple, even if bad preservation of the bones did not allow an effective sex classification. We were able to extract proteins from the dental enamel of both individuals (~1600 years old) and to confidently classify them as males. Results were compared to 14 modern and archaeological control samples, confirming the reliability of the ion chromatogram method for sex determination. Although we currently have no information on the actual relationship between the 'Lovers of Modena' (affective? Kin-based?), the discovery of two adult males intentionally buried hand-in-hand may have profound implications for our understanding of funerary practices in Late Antique Italy.

### Keywords
Human, Archaeology, Peptides, Enamel, Sex

### Affiliations
Department of Cultural Heritage - University of Bologna
Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

### Submitter
Federico Lugli

### Lab Head
Dr Giulia Di Rocco
Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia


