### Accession
PXD013597

### Title
Comparison of proteome alternations during aging in temporal lobe from human and rhesus macaque

### Description
Aging of population is a great challenge of healthcare. In china, the number of the elderly is rapidly growing, and it was estimated that there will be approximately 400 million citizens above 65 years old in 2050.Study on the changes of brain during aging may help elucidate the mechanism of the pathological process, and hence prevent or treat these neurological diseases.Rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) and human have a genetic homology of 95%, and their anatomy structures or physiological process are highly similar, which make rhesus macaque one of the most important nonhuman primate models.Thus, the comparison between the change of protein profile during aging in human and rhesus macaque is still necessary, and the characteristics of proteins that are conservative or divergent are of interest.The aim of the(our) study is to identify the conservative changes of pathways during aging, and to reveal the potential difference between human and rhesus macaque so that relevant studies based on primate models can be interpreted more accurately.

### Sample Protocol
Specimens of healthy rhesus macaques were obtained from the Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College. Rhesus 1 (R1) and 2 (R2) were healthy 6-year- and 20-year-old rhesus macaques. All specimens were rinsed and cut into pieces thoroughly in ice-cold PBS, then centrifuged (12000rpm, 3min) to remove residual blood.

### Data Protocol
The human homologs of the identified protein from Macaca mulatta were paired according to the data from Ensembl BioMarts (http://www.ensembl.org/biomart/martview/) (Kinsella et al. 2011). Functional analysis and enrichment of proteins were conducted using DAVID (The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) (Huang, Sherman, and Lempicki 2008) (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp). The interaction between proteins was analyzed by STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) (http://string-db.org) with confidence level of medium (0.400) and interaction sources of “Experiments” or “Databases”. Pathway analysis was performed using the WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (http://www.webgestalt.org/) or in Cytoscape 3.6.1 software based on Wiki pathway database.

### Publication Abstract
Rhesus macaques are widely used as animal models for studies of the nervous system; however, it is unknown whether the alterations in the protein profile of the brain during aging are conserved between humans and rhesus macaques. In this study, temporal cortex samples from old and young humans (84 vs. 34&#xa0;years, respectively) or rhesus macaques (20 vs. 6&#xa0;years, respectively) were subjected to tandem mass tag-labeled proteomic analysis followed by bioinformatic analysis. A total of 3861 homologous pairs of proteins were identified during the aging process. The conservatively upregulated proteins (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;190) were involved mainly in extracellular matrix (ECM), focal adhesion and coagulation; while, the conservatively downregulated proteins (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;56) were enriched in ribosome. Network analysis showed that these conservatively regulated proteins interacted with each other with respect to protein synthesis and cytoskeleton-ECM connection. Many proteins in the focal adhesion, blood clotting, complement and coagulation, and cytoplasmic ribosomal protein pathways were regulated in the same direction in human and macaque; while, proteins involved in oligodendrocyte specification and differentiation pathways were downregulated during human aging, and many proteins in the electron transport chain pathway showed differences in the altered expression profiles. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013597. Our findings suggest similarities in some changes in brain protein profiles during aging both in humans and macaques, although other changes are unique to only one of these species.

### Keywords
Temporal lobe, Aging, Rhesus macaque

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China.


