### Accession
PXD003198

### Title
Characterisation of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma subtypes by global phosphotyrosine  profiling

### Description
Here we use high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS) to characterise the magnitude and complexity of global tyrosine phosphorylation PDAC. We profiled the endogenous tyrosine phosphorylation-based signaling in 36 cell lines from two cell line populations, quantifying around 2,000 tyrosine phosphorylation sites. This approach facilitated consistent segregation of PDAC cell lines into three subtypes with distinct signalling profiles, using both their global tyrosine phosphorylation patterns and a Random Forest derived 8 phosphorylation site signature. We extracted segregation-driving phosphosites, and subsequent pathway and network analysis to characterise the identified subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
Two cohorts of pancreatic cancer cell lines were used. Cohort 1 cell lines (termed the ATCC Cohort) were purchased from and authenticated by the American Type Culture Collection (AsPC-1, BxPC-3, CFPAC-1, Capan-1, Capan-2, HPAC, HPAF-II, Hs700T, Hs766T, Panc 02.03, Panc 03.27, Panc 04.03, Panc05.04, Panc 08.13, Panc 10.05, Panc-1, PL45, MiaPaca-2, SU.86.86, SW1990) and were used and cultured according to ATCC protocols (ATCC, VA, USA). Cohort 2 cell lines (termed the TKCC Cohort) were isolated from primary human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma xenografts in house (TKCC 2.1, TKCC 04, TKCC 05, TKCC 06, TKCC 07, TKCC 09, TKCC 10, TKCC 12, TKCC 14, TKCC 15, TKCC 16, TKCC 17, TKCC 18, TKCC 19, TKCC 22, TKCC 26, TKCC 27). Preparation of lysates for mass spectrometry analysis. 30mg of cell line lysate in 1mM urea was digested overnight (RT) with TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington, ratio of 1:100). Phosphopeptide immunoprecipitation. Purified peptides were lyophilized overnight and dissolved in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50mM MOPS with 10mM sodium phosphate dibasic, 130mM sodium chloride and 0.5% NP40) and sepharose 4B beads pre-conjugated to 100ug of PY100 antibody (Cell Signalling Technology) in a 1:4 ratio were added. Peptides were incubated with antibody overnight at 4C with nutation. Non-specific binding peptides were removed by three washes with IAP buffer and three washes with dH2O. pY peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 40% acetonitrile.LC –MS/MS, Identification and Quantitation. Eluted peptides were resuspended in MS loading buffer (2% MeCN, 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and were separated on a 12 cm 75 μM ID analytical column pulled to an internal diameter of 5 μM by a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments Co) and packed with C18 Magic reverse phase material using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC system. Peptides were separated over a gradient of 60 minutes at a ﬂow rate of 200 nL/min and electrosprayed directly into the MS using a spray voltage of 1.8-2.1 kV. Mass spectrometry was performed using either a Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc (San Jose, CA) Orbitrap Velos in positive ion mode for ATCC Cohort samples, or a Q-Exactive for TKCC Cohort samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analysed using MaxQuant software version 1.1.25. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the human Uniprot database release 2010_10, concatenated with known contaminants as well as the reversed sequences of all entries. A stepwise approach was developed to identify stable clustering topology. Firstly, hierarchical clustering was performed multiple times with an incremental inclusion of phosphorylation sites from top 10 variable to top 412 variable phosphorylation sites and the most frequent clustering topology identified.KOBAS was used to perform pathway enrichment analysis. The hypergeometric test was selected to test statistical enrichment of KEGG and Reactome pathways, and the p-values were corrected for multiple comparisons. The protein-protein interactions among proteins of interest were retrieved from the Protein Interaction Network Analysis platform, and substrate-kinase relationships were downloaded from the PhosphoSitePlus database. The networks were generated and visualized using a PINA Cytoscape plugin.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive characterization of signaling in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) promises to enhance our understanding of the molecular aberrations driving this devastating disease, and may identify novel therapeutic targets as well as biomarkers that enable stratification of patients for optimal therapy. Here, we use immunoaffinity-coupled high-resolution mass spectrometry to characterize global tyrosine phosphorylation patterns across two large panels of human PDAC cell lines: the ATCC series (19 cell lines) and TKCC series (17 cell lines). This resulted in the identification and quantification of over 1800 class 1 tyrosine phosphorylation sites and the consistent segregation of both PDAC cell line series into three subtypes with distinct tyrosine phosphorylation profiles. Subtype-selective signaling networks were characterized by identification of subtype-enriched phosphosites together with pathway and network analyses. This revealed that the three subtypes characteristic of the ATCC series were associated with perturbations in signaling networks associated with cell-cell adhesion and epithelial-mesenchyme transition, mRNA metabolism, and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling, respectively. Specifically, the third subtype exhibited enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple RTKs including the EGFR, ERBB3 and MET. Interestingly, a similar RTK-enriched subtype was identified in the TKCC series, and 'classifier' sites for each series identified using Random Forest models were able to predict the subtypes of the alternate series with high accuracy, highlighting the conservation of the three subtypes across the two series. Finally, RTK-enriched cell lines from both series exhibited enhanced sensitivity to the small molecule EGFR inhibitor erlotinib, indicating that their phosphosignature may provide a predictive biomarker for response to this targeted therapy. These studies highlight how resolution of subtype-selective signaling networks can provide a novel taxonomy for particular cancers, and provide insights into PDAC biology that can be exploited for improved patient management.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Pancreatic cancer, Phosphotyrosine, Shotgun, Subtypes, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Head, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University Head, Signalling Network Laboratory, Monash University Head, Biomedicine Discovery Institute Cancer Program, Monash University
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Emily Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Roger Daly
Head, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University Head, Signalling Network Laboratory, Monash University Head, Biomedicine Discovery Institute Cancer Program, Monash University


