### Accession
PXD008242

### Title
‘One-pot’ sample processing method for proteome-wide analysis of microbial cells and spores

### Description
Bacterial endospores, the transmissible forms of pathogenic bacilli and clostridia, are heterogeneous multilayered structures composed of proteins. These proteins protect the spores against variety of stresses, thus helping spore survival, and assist in germination, by interacting with the environment to form vegetative cells. Owing to the complexity, insolubility, and dynamic nature of spore proteins, it has been difficult to obtain their comprehensive protein profiles. The intact spores of Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus cereus, and Peptoclostridium difficile and their vegetative counterparts were disrupted by bead-beating in 6M urea under reductive conditions. The heterogeneous mixture was then double-digested with LysC and trypsin. Next, the peptide mixture was pre-fractionated with Zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (ZIC-HILIC) followed by reverse phase LC-FT-MS analysis of the fractions. ‘One-pot’ method is a simple, robust method that yields identification of >1000 proteins with high confidence, across all spore layers from Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus cereus, and Peptoclostridium difficile. This method can be employed for proteome-wide analysis of non-spore-forming as well as spore-forming pathogens. Analysis of spore protein profile will help to understand the sporulation and germination processes and to distinguish immunogenic protein markers.

### Sample Protocol
Phase bright spores of both the bacilli and the Peptoclostridium sp. were suspended in lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 5 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBiC) buffer (pH = 8.0) and disrupted with 0.1 mm zirconium-silica beads (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK) using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, Aix en Provence, France). A B. subtilis spore sample without urea was also used as a control to check effect of urea on protein extraction. Spores were disintegrated for 7 rounds (each round of 20s, 60 s pause between each round). Samples were placed on ice for 10 min after every 3 rounds to avoid protein degradation by overheating. To check the effect of bead-beating on proteins, a protein kit containing bovine serum albumin (BSA), myoglobin, β-casein and horse cytochrome C was used as bead-beating control. The total amount of protein material extracted from spore was estimated using the reducing agent-compatible version of bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). The reduction was carried out at 56°C for 1 h followed by alkylation by 15mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in dark. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM thiourea. Samples were then digested with LysC (1:200 w/w protease/protein) for 3 hrs at 37oC. Samples were diluted with 50 mM AmBiC and 20% ACN followed by digestion with trypsin (1:100 w/w protease/protein ratio) at 37oC for 18 hrs. The digestion reaction was quenched with the addition of TFA (pH < 4). All these steps were carried in a single tube and post digestion cell/spore debris was removed by centrifuging for 15 min at 13000 rpm. The supernatant containing peptides was transferred to a new tube and freeze dried. . This tryptic digest was re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA, cleaned up using C18 reversed phase TT2 TopTips (Glygen), according to the manufacturer's instructions and peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN and freeze dried.

### Data Protocol
Raw FT-MS/MS mass calibrated data of the HILIC fractions was processed as multi-file (MudPIT) with the MASCOT DISTILLER program, version 2.4.3.1 (64 bits), MDRO 2.4.3.0 (MATRIX science, London, UK). Peak-picking for both MS and MS/MS spectra were optimized for the mass resolution of up to 60000 (m/Δm). Peaks were fitted to a simulated isotope distribution with a correlation threshold of 0.7, and with a minimum signal-to-noise ratio of 2. The processed data, combined from the 10 HILIC peptide fractions, were searched in a MudPIT approach with the MASCOT server program 2.3.02 (MATRIX science, London, U.K.) against a complete B. subtilis 168,  B. cereus ATCC 14579, and P. difficile 630 ORF translation database (Uniprot 2017-02-13 update, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot) with redundancies removed using the DBToolkit-4.2.5 tool  (http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/bti588?ijkey=1d1b7RussnjgEkC&keytype=ref) and supplemented with the corresponding decoy database to determine FDR. Trypsin was used as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance and peptide fragment mass tolerance were set to 50 ppm. The search was repeated with the same parameters but with semi-trypsin as the enzyme to identify possible semi-tryptic peptides due to mechanical shearing and possible endogenous degradation of proteins. The MASCOT MudPIT peptide identification score was set to a cut-off of 20 with a false discovery rate of approximately 2% at the peptide level based on decoy database matches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zic-hilic, Proteomics, One-pot method, Mass spectrometry, Spores

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
Department of Mass Spectrometry of Bio-Macromolecules, Swammerdam Institue for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Bhagyashree Swarge

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Chris G. De Koster
Department of Mass Spectrometry of Bio-Macromolecules, Swammerdam Institue for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


