### Accession
PXD032312

### Title
Temporal Quantitative Proteomic Profiling of Murine Embryonic Heart Development

### Description
Comprehensive detail of the molecular mechanisms that govern heart development is essential for identifying the etiology of congenital heart disease. We used high-throughput quantitative proteomics to measure temporal changes in the cardiac proteome at eight critical stages of murine embryonic heart development. We identified more than 7,300 proteins, assessed global temporal changes in protein expression, identified cardiac protein interaction networks, and linked protein dynamics with molecular pathways. Using this dataset, we identified and defined a function for the mevalonate pathway in the regulation of embryonic cardiomyocyte proliferation and cell signaling. Overall, our proteomic datasets are an invaluable resource for studying molecular events that regulate embryonic heart development and that contribute to congenital heart disease.

### Sample Protocol
Pregnant dams were sacrificed and subjected to transcardial perfusion with heparinized phosphate buffer saline to prevent blood coagulation. Embryonic hearts were dissected into HEPES buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1.2% PVP, pH 7.4) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. To perform the protein extraction, hearts were thawed on ice and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 2% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitors 2 and 3 (Sigma). Samples were subjected to dounce homogenization. Subsequently, samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes followed by sonication. Heating and sonication steps were repeated three times. Samples were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature to remove insoluble debris. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Fifty µg of protein was reduced and alkylated with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 20 mM chloroacetamide, respectively, for 20 minutes at 70°C. Samples were then precipitated using a methanol/chloroform protocol. Protein pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Three biological replicates were collected for each embryonic age (E9.5, 10.5, 11.5, 12.5, 13.5, 14.5, 15.5, 16.5; for a total of eight ages).  Protein pellets were reconstituted with 2M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to digestion with LysC (Wako) for 2 h and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37C at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The resulting peptide samples were acidified, desalted using Thermo desalting spin columns, then the eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide concentration was determined using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. 15 µg of each sample was reconstituted with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, then individually labeled with 90 µg TMT 10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher) for 1 hr at room temperature. A pooled sample was created by combining a small amount of each sample then split into two aliquots, which were each labeled with two different TMT tags and used in all three TMT sets. Prior to quenching, the labeling efficiency was evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis of a pooled sample consisting of 1ul of each sample. After confirming >98% efficiency, samples were quenched with 50% hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%. Labeled peptide samples were combined, desalted using Thermo desalting spin column, and dried via vacuum centrifugation. The dried TMT-labeled samples (three TMT sets total) were fractionated using high pH reversed phase HPLC. The 96 resulting fractions were then concatenated in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and dried via vacuum centrifugation. LC/MS/MS: Three sets of 24 fractions were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a multi-notch MS3 method. Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–42% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4, set to ‘reporter ion MS3’ with ‘10plex TMT’. Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot mouse database (downloaded May 2019 containing 17,457 sequences), appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest HT within Proteome Discoverer. All fractions were searched with up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites, fixed modifications: TMT6plex peptide N-terminus and Lys, carbamidomethylation Cys, dynamic modification: N-terminal protein acetyl, oxidation Met. Precursor mass tolerance of 5ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.4 Da. Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1%.  Reporter abundance based on intensity, SPS mass matches threshold set to 50, and razor and unique peptides were used for quantitation. Data were further analyzed in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Quantitative proteomics, Development, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Conlon
Department of Biology, UNC-Chapel Hill


