### Accession
PXD003970

### Title
Decoding the complete arsenal for cellulose and hemicellulose deconstruction in the highly efficient cellulose decomposer Paenibacillus O199

### Description
The search for new enzymes and microbial strains to degrade plant biomass is one of the most important strategies for improving the conversion processes in the production of environment-friendly chemicals and biofuels. In this study, we report a new Paenibacillus isolate, O199, which showed the highest efficiency for cellulose deconstruction in a screen of environmental isolates. Here, we provide a detailed description of the complex multi-component O199 enzymatic system involved in the degradation of lignocellulose. We examined the genome and the proteome of O199 grown on complex lignocellulose (wheat straw) and on microcrystalline cellulose. The genome contained 476 genes with domains assigned to carbohydrate-active enzyme (CAZyme) families, including 100 genes coding for glycosyl hydrolases (GHs) putatively involved in cellulose and hemicellulose degradation. Moreover, 31% of these CAZymes were expressed on cellulose and 29% on wheat straw. Proteomic analyses also revealed a complex and complete set of enzymes for deconstruction of cellulose (at least 22 proteins, including 4 endocellulases, 2 exocellulases, 2 cellobiohydrolases and 2 -glucosidases) and hemicellulose (at least 28 proteins, including 5 endoxylanases, 1 -xylosidase, 2 xyloglucanases, 2 endomannanases, 2 licheninases and 1 endo--1,3(4)-glucanase). Most of these proteins were secreted extracellularly and had numerous carbohydrate-binding domains (CBMs). In addition, O199 also secreted a high number of substrate-binding proteins (SBPs), including at least 42 proteins binding carbohydrates. Interestingly, both plant lignocellulose and crystalline cellulose triggered the production of a wide array of hydrolytic proteins, including cellulases, hemicellulases and other GHs.  Our data provide an in-depth analysis of the complex and complete set of enzymes and accessory non-catalytic proteins—GHs, CBMs, transporters, and SBPs—implicated in the high cellulolytic capacity shown by this bacterial strain. The large diversity of hydrolytic enzymes and the extracellular secretion of most of them supports the use of Paenibacillus O199 as a candidate for second-generation technologies using paper or lignocellulosic agricultural wastes.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze protein expression, bacteria were pre-grown in GYM media for 24 h, and 1 mL of culture was inoculated in triplicate on 1 L of MM containing 0.5% w/v of either microcrystalline cellulose (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) or wheat straw that was finely milled and repeatedly washed with hot water to remove low-molecular-mass compounds while retaining plant cell wall biopolymers. Cultures were incubated for 7 days at 25 ºC in an orbital shaker. After harvest, cultures were centrifuged and proteins in supernatant were precipitated with 10% w/v trichloroacetic acid and resuspended in 8 M urea / 2 M thiourea buffer. Protein concentration was measured in every sample with Roti®-Nanoquant (Carl Roth, GmbH, Germany), and 25 g were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE using Criterion™ TGX™ Precast Gels (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Lanes were cut in ten equidistant pieces and subjected to trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were separated by RP chromatography using a nanoAQUITYTM UPLCTM system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a trapcolumn and separated on the analytical column using a binary 80 min gradient of buffer B (99.9 % ACN, 0.1 % acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 400 nL min-1. The UPLC system was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Full survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z range from 300 to 2,000) with a resolution of 30,000 and lock mass option enabled. MS/MS experiments in the LTQ XL were performed for the five most abundant precursor ions (CID), excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled after 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, spectra were searched against a database of Paenibacillus O199 containing sequences of all predicted proteins from its genome, including reverse sequences and sequences of common laboratory contaminants (13,098 entries). Database searches were performed using Sorcerer SEQUEST (Version v. 27 rev. 11, Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 4.0.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). SEQUEST was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was set as variable modification. For protein identification, a stringent SEQUEST filter for peptides was used (Xcorr versus charge state: 2,2, 3,3 and 3,8 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides and deltaCn value greater than 0.10) and at least two peptides per protein were required. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein quantification was based on the normalized spectrum abundance factor (NSAF), which is calculated as the number of spectral counts (SpC) that identify a protein, divided by protein length (L), and divided by the sum of SpC/L for all proteins in the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, Proteomics, Cellulose degradation

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Institute for Microbiology University of Greifswald Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstr. 15 17489 Greifswald Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Institute for Microbiology University of Greifswald Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstr. 15 17489 Greifswald Germany


