### Accession
PXD026691

### Title
Proteomic analysis of GBA iPSC-dopamine neurons

### Description
Heterozygous mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) are the strongest common genetic risk factors for Parkinson’s disease (PD) present in around 5-10% of PD patients, resulting in lower age of onset and exacerbating disease progression, including an increased risk of dementia. However, the exact mechanisms leading from dysfunction of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GCase) encoded by GBA to PD pathogenesis and neurodegeneration remain unclear.  Applying a novel multi-part enrichment workflow we have developed, we have isolated and quantified peptides with phosphorylation, cysteine-modification or N-linked glycosylation simultaneously. We applied this methodology to iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons from GBA-N370S PD patients and healthy age-matched controls, identifying large numbers of dysregulated native and modified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, alkylation, Lys-C and Trypsin digestion, iTRAQ 8-plex labeling, enrichment of phosphopeptides, sialylated glycopeptides and cysteine-modified peptides (using a CysTag), HILIC and high pH fractionation, nano-LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processes using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, ThermoFisher) and searched against the Swissprot human database using an in-house Mascot server (v2.3, Matrix Science Ltd.) and the Sequest HT search engine. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (HCD fragmentation), TMT 6-plex (Lys and N-terminal) as fixed modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin. Variable modifications were NEM on Cys and N-terminal acetylation along with phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, deamidation of Asn and N-Succinimidyl iodoacetate (SIA) on Cys for the phosphorylated, deglycosylated and CysPAT-modified groups, respectively. Only peptides with up to a q-value of 0.01 (Percolator), Mascot rank 1 and cut-off value of Mascot score > 15 were considered for further analysis. Only proteins with more than one unique peptide were considered for further analysis in the non-modified group. Subsequently, proteins which were at least 1.2-fold up- or down-regulated in the GBA patient neurons were selected and Student’s t-test with Benjamini-Hochbergs correction for multiple testing (FDR 0.1) was applied with a p-value cut-off of 0.05. Peptides with PTMs which 1. could be normalised to the level of the corresponding non-modified protein, 2. were at least 1.3-fold up- or down-regulated in the GBA patient neurons and 3. had a coefficient of variation (CV) of 30% or less were selected for further analysis. Furthermore, peptides with N-linked glycosylation (NxS/T/C motif) were manually sorted based on information from UniProt on known glycosylation and cellular localisation (Golgi/endosome/lysosome/membrane/extracellular) to exclude spontaneous deamidations.

### Publication Abstract
Variants at the GBA locus, encoding glucocerebrosidase, are the strongest common genetic risk factor for Parkinson's disease (PD). To understand GBA-related disease mechanisms, we use a multi-part-enrichment proteomics and post-translational modification (PTM) workflow, identifying large numbers of dysregulated proteins and PTMs in heterozygous GBA-N370S PD patient induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) dopamine neurons. Alterations in glycosylation status show disturbances in the autophagy-lysosomal pathway, which concur with upstream perturbations in mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activation in GBA-PD neurons. Several native and modified proteins encoded by PD-associated genes are dysregulated in GBA-PD neurons. Integrated pathway analysis reveals impaired neuritogenesis in GBA-PD neurons and identify tau as a key pathway mediator. Functional assays confirm neurite outgrowth deficits and identify impaired mitochondrial movement in GBA-PD neurons. Furthermore, pharmacological rescue of glucocerebrosidase activity in GBA-PD neurons improves the neurite outgrowth deficit. Overall, this study demonstrates the potential of PTMomics to elucidate neurodegeneration-associated pathways and potential drug targets in complex disease models.

### Keywords
Neuritogenesis/parkinson’s/proteomics/stem cells/glucocerebrosidase/post-translational modification

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Lab head, Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, OX1 3QX, Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Pia Jensen

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Wade-Martins
Lab head, Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, OX1 3QX, Oxford, UK


