### Accession
PXD018728

### Title
Connectivity mapping of glomerular proteins identifies dimethylaminoparthenolide as a new inhibitor of diabetic kidney disease

### Description
While blocking the renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) has been the main therapeutic strategy to control diabetic kidney disease (DKD) for many years, 25-30% of diabetic patients still develop the disease. In the present work we adopted a system biology strategy to analyze glomerular protein signatures to identify drugs with potential therapeutic properties in DKD acting through a RAAS-independent mechanism. Glomeruli were isolated from wild type and type 1 diabetic mice (Ins2Akita) treated or not with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) ramipril. Ramipril efficiently reduced the urinary albumin/creatine ratio (ACR) of Ins2Akita mice without modifying DKD-associated renal-injuries. Large scale quantitative proteomics was used to identify the DKD-associated glomerular proteins (DKD-GPs) that were ramipril-insensitive (RI-DKD-GPs). We then applied an in silico drug repurposing approach using a pattern-matching algorithm (Connectivity Mapping) to compare the RI-DKD-GPs’s signature with a collection of thousands of transcriptional signatures of bioactive compounds. The sesquiterpene lactone parthelonide was identified as one of the top compounds predicted to reverse the RI-DKD-GPs’s signature. Treatment of diabetic Ins2Akita mice with dimethylaminoparthenolide (DMAPT), a water soluble analogue of parthenolide, significantly reduced urinary ACR. However, in contrast to ramipril, DMAPT also significantly reduced glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Using a system biology approach we identified DMAPT, as a compound with a potential add-on value to standard-of-care ACEi-treatment in DKD.

### Sample Protocol
Renal glomeruli were isolated from 4 groups of mice: WT (wild type), DKD (diabetic kidney disease), DKD+R (DKD treated with ramipril), and  WT+R (WT treated with ramipril) using Dynabeads. Each group was composed of 8 animals. Isolated glomeruli were homogenized and centrifuged to remove beads and cell debris. The supernatant proteins were alkylated on cysteines and 10µg were concentrated in a single band on SDS-PAGE. The band was cut and digested  with trypsin. Digested peptides were extracted from the gel and subjects to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an UltiMate 3000 system (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein entries identified as potential contaminants from the ‘proteinGroups.txt’ files generated by MaxQuant were eliminated from the analysis, as were proteins identified by fewer than two peptides. Protein relative quantification was performed by comparisons of different groups of eight samples each (8 biological replicates per group: WT, DKD, DKD+R, WT+R). Protein intensities were normalized across all conditions by the median intensity. For each comparison, only proteins which were quantified in at least 4 biological replicates (4 intensities values retrieved by MaxQuant) in at least one of the groups were considered for further processing and statistical analysis (Filter 1, columns AR to AU, Table S1). Remaining missing values were then replaced by a constant noise value determined independently for each analytical run as the 1% percentile of the total protein population. Proteins with a p-value of less than 0.05 were considered as significantly varying between two groups.

### Publication Abstract
While blocking the renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) has been the main therapeutic strategy to control diabetic kidney disease (DKD) for many years, 25-30% of diabetic patients still develop the disease. In the present work we adopted a systems biology strategy to analyze glomerular protein signatures to identify drugs with potential therapeutic properties in DKD acting through a RAAS-independent mechanism. Glomeruli were isolated from wild type and type 1 diabetic (Ins2Akita) mice treated or not with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) ramipril. Ramipril efficiently reduced the urinary albumin/creatine ratio (ACR) of Ins2Akita mice without modifying DKD-associated renal-injuries. Large scale quantitative proteomics was used to identify the DKD-associated glomerular proteins (DKD-GPs) that were ramipril-insensitive (RI-DKD-GPs). The raw data are publicly available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018728. We then applied an in silico drug repurposing approach using a pattern-matching algorithm (Connectivity Mapping) to compare the RI-DKD-GPs's signature with a collection of thousands of transcriptional signatures of bioactive compounds. The sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide was identified as one of the top compounds predicted to reverse the RI-DKD-GPs's signature. Oral treatment of 2&#xa0;months old Ins2Akita mice with dimethylaminoparthenolide (DMAPT, a water-soluble analogue of parthenolide) for two months at 10&#xa0;mg/kg/d by gavage significantly reduced urinary ACR. However, in contrast to ramipril, DMAPT also significantly reduced glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Using a system biology approach, we identified DMAPT, as a compound with a potential add-on value to standard-of-care ACEi-treatment in DKD.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Nephropathy, Diabetic kidney disease

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1048, Institut of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease, Toulouse, France.  Université Toulouse III Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Joost P. Schanstra
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1048, Institut of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease, Toulouse, France.  Université Toulouse III Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse, France.


