### Accession
PXD008988

### Title
Dynamic changes in the protein localization in the nuclear environment in pancreatic β-cell after brief glucose stimulation

### Description
We focus on the characterization of proteins in the nuclear environment of β-cells after brief, high glucose-stimulation. We compared purified nuclei derived from β-cells stimulated with 17mM glucose for 0, 2, and 5 minutes using quantitative proteomics, a time frame that most likely does not result in translation of new protein in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
MS-based quantitative proteomics was applied to the subcellular nuclear fraction of INS-1E cells using stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) combined with peptide separation using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) and an Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS datasets from INS1E cells with high glucose-induced different time-points (0 minute (light), 2 minutes (medium), and 5 minutes (heavy)) were processed for protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer (v2.0, Thermo Scientific) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 2 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 0.05 Da, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Characterization of molecular mechanisms underlying pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell function in relation to glucose-stimulated insulin secretion is incomplete, especially with respect to global response in the nuclear environment. We focus on the characterization of proteins in the nuclear environment of &#x3b2;-cells after brief, high glucose stimulation. We compared purified nuclei derived from &#x3b2;-cells stimulated with 17 mM glucose for 0, 2, and 5 min using quantitative proteomics, a time frame that most likely does not result in translation of new protein in the cell. Among the differentially regulated proteins, we identified 20 components of the nuclear organization processes, including nuclear pore organization, ribonucleoprotein complex, and pre-mRNA transcription. We found alteration of the nuclear pore complex, together with calcium/calmodulin-binding chaperones that facilitate protein and RNA import or export to/from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Putative insulin mRNA transcription-associated factors were identified among the regulated proteins, and they were cross-validated by Western blotting and confocal immunofluorescence imaging. Collectively, our data suggest that protein translocation between the nucleus and the cytoplasm is an important process, highly involved in the initial molecular mechanism underlying glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Lc-msms, Gsis, Pancreatic beta-cells

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Taewook Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense, Denmark


