### Accession
PXD016588

### Title
Expression of proteins by a marine Brevibacterium casei #NIOSBA88 in response to Arsenic and Chromium

### Description
A marine bacterial isolate, Brevibacterium casei #NIOSBA88 was grown separately in Luria Bertini broth supplemented with 750 mg L-1 Arsenic (III) and 100 mg L-1 Chromium respectively. Similarly, the strain was grown in absence of Arsenic and Chromium, which served as an experimental control. The cells were harvested at different time intervals and proteins were extracted from the cell pellets using in-house protocol (Shah and Damare 2018). The extracted proteins were digested using trypsin following standard protocol. Tryptic digests were injected in LCMS QToF for obtaining spectral library which was used to identify the proteins against a species specific database in NCBI.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins extracted from the bacterial cells were digested using trypsin using in-solution digestion method. Around 150 microgram of protein extract was precipitated by methanol precipitation method. The protein precipitate was dissolved using 6M Urea, reduced using DTT, alkylated using IAA followed by digestion using MS-grade trypsin (overnight ~12h). These tryptic digests were injected into LCMS QToF (Agilent 6538 UHD)

### Data Protocol
The spectra generated by the LCMS QToF were acquired using Mass Hunter ver. 5.0.01 software. The spectra were searched using Spectrum Mill ver. 06.00.201. This software deconvulates the spectra and compares with the known peptide database. We used species specific database from NCBI [Brevibacterium casei (Txid- 33889)]. The results were obtained in the form of peptide and protein lists.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular response against different heavy metal stress differs with the metal. Arsenic and chromium are heavy metals and toxic to living systems. The concentration of these metals in seawater is very low. However, due to their solubility in nature, they actively enter cells via various transport mechanisms and cause damage to the cells. Brevibacterium casei #NIOSBA88, a marine-derived, gram-positive isolate was multi-metal tolerant. Proteomic analysis of this isolate in response to arsenic and chromium resulted in the identification of total 2549 proteins, out of which 880 proteins were found to be commonly expressed at 750&#xa0;mgL<sup>-1</sup> arsenic and 100&#xa0;mgL<sup>-1</sup> chromium and in absence of both the metals. In contrast, 533, 212, and 270 proteins were found to be unique in the absence of any metal, 750&#xa0;mgL<sup>-1</sup> of arsenic and 100&#xa0;mgL<sup>-1</sup> of chromium respectively. Proteins such as antibiotic biosynthesis monooxygenase, ArsR family transcriptional regulator, cytochrome C oxidase subunit II, and thioredoxin reductase were exclusively expressed only in response to arsenic and chromium. Other proteins like superoxide dismutase, lipid hydroperoxide reductase, and thioredoxin-disulfide reductase were found to be upregulated in response to both the metals. Most of the proteins involved in the normal cell functioning were found to be downregulated. Major metabolic functions affected include amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, translation, and energy metabolism. Peptide mass fingerprinting of Brevibacterium casei #NIOSBA88 exposed to arsenic and chromium respectively revealed the deleterious effect of these metals on the bacterium and its strategy to overcome the stress.

### Keywords
Trypsin digestion, Peptide mass fingerprinting, Lcms qtof

### Affiliations
Biological Oceanography Division, CSIR-National Insititute of Ocenography
CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography

### Submitter
Samir Damare

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Samir R Damare
Biological Oceanography Division, CSIR-National Insititute of Ocenography


