### Accession
PXD020231

### Title
Protein interaction AP-MS data for TAP-CSAG1 and TAP-CSAG2 from HEK293 cells

### Description
Ten 15 cm2 plates of HEK293 cells stably expressing TAP-vector, TAP-CSAG1, or TAP-CSAG2 were lysed with TAP lysis buffer (10% (v/v) glycerol, 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40, 10 mM NaF, 0.25 mM Na3VO4, 50 mM β-glyerolphosphate, 2 mM DTT, and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)) and cleared supernatants were bound to IgG-Sepharose beads (GE Amersham) and then washed in lysis buffer and TEV buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail). Protein complexes were cleaved off the beads by TEV protease (Sigma) and incubated with calmodulin-Sepharose beads (GE Amersham) in calmodulin binding buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Mg acetate, 1 mM imidazole, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40, 6 mM CaCl2, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and then washed in calmodulin rinse buffer (50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 75 mM NaCl, 1 mM Mg Acetate, 1 mM Imidazole, 2 mM CaCl2) before eluted with SDS sample buffer, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and stained with GelCode Blue stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before protein identification by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The gel bands were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) and alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma), washed, dried down, and rehydrated with a buffer containing trypsin (Promega). Proteolysis was performed overnight at 37 0C. Peptides were extracted in Acetonitrile, dried down in a speed vacuum and reconstituted in 5% (v/v) Formic acid.   The peptide mixture was separated on a nanoscale capillary reverse phase C18 column (75 id, 10cm) by a HPLC system (Thermo EASY-nLC 1000). Buffer A was 0.2% Formic acid and Buffer B was 70% Acetonitrile; 0.2% (v/v) Formic acid. The peptides were eluted over a 90-min liquid chromatography gradient by increasing organic from 12%-70%. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization, and detected by an inline mass spectrometer (Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Elite). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a high resolution survey scan in Orbitrap and 20 low resolution MS/MS scans in the ion) for each cycle.

### Data Protocol
UniProt human database was used for searching raw data with Sequest v.28 (rev. 12) search engine. The human database was concatenated with a reversed decoy database for evaluating false discovery rate. Mass tolerance of 25 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for product ions were used for database search. Two maximal missed cleavages and three maximal modification sites were allowed. The assignment of b, and y ions were used for identification. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57.02146 Da) was used for static modifications and Met oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was considered as a dynamic modification. Mass accuracy and matching scores filters were used for MS/MS spectra to reduce protein false discovery rate to <1%. Proteins identified in one gel lane were combined together and the total number of spectra, namely spectral counts (SC), matching to individual proteins may reflect their relative abundance in one sample after normalizing for protein molecular weight. The spectral counts between samples for a given protein were used to calculate the p-value which is derived by G-test.

### Publication Abstract
SIRT1 is a NAD<sup>+</sup> -dependent deacetylase that controls key metabolic and signaling pathways, including inactivating the p53 tumor suppressor. However, the mechanisms controlling SIRT1 enzymatic activity in the context of cancer are unclear. Here, we show that the previously undescribed CSAG2 protein is a direct activator of SIRT1. CSAG2 is normally restricted to expression in the male germline but is frequently re-activated in cancers. CSAG2 is necessary for cancer cell proliferation and promotes tumorigenesis in&#xa0;vivo. Biochemical studies revealed that CSAG2 directly binds to and stimulates SIRT1 activity toward multiple substrates. Importantly, CSAG2 enhances SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of p53, inhibits p53 transcriptional activity, and improves cell survival in response to genotoxic stress. Mechanistically, CSAG2 binds SIRT1 catalytic domain and promotes activity independent of altering substrate affinity. Together, our results identify a previously undescribed mechanism for SIRT1 activation in cancer cells and highlight unanticipated approaches to therapeutically modulate SIRT1.

### Keywords
Csag1 csag2

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Memphis, TN, 38105-3678, USA
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Patrick Potts

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Ryan Potts
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Memphis, TN, 38105-3678, USA


