### Accession
PXD034217

### Title
Establishment of TurboID proximity proteomics in the filamentous fungus Sordaria macrospora

### Description
Biotin identification (BioID) is a proximity-dependent labeling technique to study protein-protein co-localization in vivo. Although BioID has been applied in animal cells, plants and yeast, the method remained to be established in filamentous fungi. In this study, we established BioID for the filamentous fungus Sordaria macrospora using the well-characterized striatin interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complex as a proof of principle. In detail, the STRIPAK complex interactor 1 (SCI1) was fused to a codon-optimized TurboID biotin ligase. This SCI1-TurboID fusion protein complemented the Δsci1 deletion strain phenotype. The identification of the already known SmSTRIPAK components PRO11, SmMOB3, SmPP2Ac1 and PRO22 in a BioID experiment with SCI1-TurboID demonstrated its successful application in S. macrospora. The technique will provide a powerful proteomics tool for fungal biologists.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates of each applied strain were grown in liquid Sordaria Westergard’s (SWG) medium (supplemented with 50 nM biotin and 40 mg/L arginine) for 4 days at 27 °C under constant illumination. The expression of the SCI1-TurboID construct in the Δsci1::SCI1-TurboIDect strain was driven by the native sci1 promoter. The wt::TurboIDect control strain expressed an unfused TurboID ligase driven by the constitutive ccg1 promoter from the clock controlled gene 1 from Neurospora crassa. Shortly before harvest, liquid SWG supplemented with biotin was added to the cultures for 30 min at room temperature (10 µM biotin, final concentration). The harvested mycelium was dried through compression. Cell opening and lysis was performed through grinding of the dried mycelium in liquid nitrogen, before adding 500 µL lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, 2x c0mplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1tbl/12.5 mL, Roche, 04 693 132 001), 1x PhosSTOP™ (1tbl/10 mL, Roche, 04906837001)) /g. The protein extract was denatured in 4% SDS at 65 °C for 5 min. 1 mL of the denatured crude extract was used for biotin affinity purification with Step-Tactin® Sepharose® resin (50 µL bed volume, IBA Lifesciences GmbH, 2-1201-002) similar as described in Schmitt and Valerius (2019). The eluates were dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in TE-Buffer and mixed with 2x SDS loading dye. Proteins were shortly separated by SDS-PAGE and the proteins inside were digested with trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. (1996). The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 20 µl LC-MS sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 2 µl of each sample were subjected to reverse phase liquid chromatography for peptide separation using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific): Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 min. Analytical separation of peptides was done on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent composition was gradually changed within 94 min from 96 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and 4 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 10 % solvent B within 2 minutes, to 30 % solvent B within the next 58 min, to 45% solvent B within the following 22 min, and to 90 % solvent B within the last 12 min of the gradient. All solvents and acids had Optima grade for LC-MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluting peptides were on-line ionized by nano-electrospray (nESI) using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans in a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data-dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Schmitt, K., & Valerius, O. (2019). Yrack1/asc1 proxiOMICs-Towards Illuminating Ships Passing in the Night. Cells, 8(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8111384 Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., & Mann, M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Analytical Chemistry, 68(5), 850–858. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac950914h Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., & Mann, M. (2003). Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Analytical Chemistry, 75(3), 663–670. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac026117i

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant v1.6.10.43 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used for protein identification and label free relative quantification using the MaxLFQ algorithm. The S. macrospora-specific peptide database Smacrospora_v03 (Blank-Landeshammer et al., 2019) was used for the database search. Biotinylation of lysine, phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine), oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The decoy mode was revert with a false discovery rate of 0.01. The number of max. missed cleavage sites was set to 3 and Trypsin/P was used for digestion. The proteinGroups.txt output file from MaxQuant was analyzed in Perseus v1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). Maxquant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.P.B.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–1372. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 Blank-Landeshammer, B., Teichert, I., Märker, R., Nowrousian, M., Kück, U., & Sickmann, A. (2019). Combination of Proteogenomics with Peptide De Novo Sequencing Identifies New Genes and Hidden Posttranscriptional Modifications. MBio, 10(5). https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02367-19 Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M. Y., Geiger, T., Mann, M., & Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods, 13(9), 731–740. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901

### Publication Abstract
Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) has emerged as a powerful methodology to identify proteins co-localizing with a given bait protein in vivo. The approach has been established in animal cells, plants and yeast but not yet in filamentous fungi. BioID relies on promiscuous biotin ligases fused to bait proteins to covalently label neighboring proteins with biotin. Biotinylated proteins are specifically enriched through biotin affinity capture from denatured cell lysates and subsequently identified and quantified with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). In contrast to many other affinity capture approaches for studying protein-protein interactions, BioID does not rely on physical protein-protein binding within native cell lysates. This feature allows the identification of protein proximities of weak or transient and dynamic nature. Here, we demonstrate the application of BioID for the fungal model organism Sordaria macrospora (Sm) using the example of the STRIPAK complex interactor 1 (SCI1) of the well-characterized striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (SmSTRIPAK) complex as proof of concept. For the establishment of BioID in S. macrospora, a codon-optimized TurboID biotin ligase was fused to SCI1. Biotin capture of the known SmSTRIPAK components PRO11, SmMOB3, PRO22 and SmPP2Ac1 demonstrates the successful BioID application in S. macrospora. BioID proximity labeling approaches will provide a powerful proteomics tool for fungal biologists.

### Keywords
Bioid, Sordaria macrospora, Stripak, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
Georg-August University, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Genetics of Eukaryotic Microorganisms

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Pöggeler
Georg-August University, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Genetics of Eukaryotic Microorganisms


