### Accession
PXD022758

### Title
A proteomic approach to understand the clinical significance of acute myeloid leukemia-derived extracellular vesicles reflecting essential characteristics of leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common form of acute leukemia in adults and its overall incidence has been increasing gradually over the years. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are known to express the properties of their parental cells, including proteins, RNAs, and DNAs. As EVs are representative of their parental tissues, they are excellent tools for understanding how cancer cells adapt to their environment. Proteomic analysis is a useful technique in cancer research that can be both quantitative and qualitative when determining the interrelationships between proteins in cells. It is clinically important to identify novel differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) from EVs in AML that could be used as biomarkers

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines The following cell lines were used in the study: HL-60, KG-1, THP-1, human dermal fibroblasts (HDFa), and human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). We selected HL-60, KG-1, and THP-1 as AML cell lines, and HDFa and hMSCs acted as the controls. All cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA), with the exception of hMSCs, which were obtained from the primary culture of human BM. Both HL-60 and KG-1 were cultured in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA), THP-1 was cultured in RPMI-1640 media (Gibco), HDFa was cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM; Gibco), and hMSCs were cultured in Mesenchymal Stem Cell Growth Medium (Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA). All media were supplemented with 10 % exosome-depleted fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). Exosome-depleted FBS was prepared by collecting the supernatant following ultracentrifugation of normal FBS at 100,000 ×g. EV isolation The isolation of EVs was performed using size-exclusion chromatography, and different columns were used for the cell culture supernatants and human samples. The column used for the cell culture supernatants was packed with 10 mL Sepharose CL-2B (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) with a molecular weight separation range of 70 × 103–40 × 106.(23) The eluted fractions (6, 7, 8, 9, and 10; 0.5 mL each) were used in the subsequent steps of this experiment. The loaded samples were prepared by sequential centrifugation. In brief, the cell culture media was collected after 48–72 h of cell growth (10 × 106 cells in 50 ml culture media) and sequentially centrifuged at 500 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C, then at 5,000 ×g for 30 min at 4 °C, and finally at 10,000 ×g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then concentrated using an Amicon® Ultra 100 kDa filter (MWCO 100 kDa) (Merck Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the human samples, EVs were isolated using a chromatography-based method developed by our group. Tryptic digestion using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method In total, 30 μg of protein from either the AML cell line- or control cell line-derived EVs was converted to peptides using the FASP method. Extracted EV proteins were resolved by reduction in 0.1 M DTT and 4 % SDS reconstituted in 0.1 M Tris-HCL (pH 7.6). Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 45 min and then boiled for 7 min. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 ×g at 16 °C for 40 min using a 30 kDa Microcon Ultracel filter (Millipore, Massachusetts, USA), washed with 200 μL of urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), and then centrifuged another three times. The proteins were then alkylated in urea buffer with 100 μL of 55 mM Idoleacetic aicd (IAA), incubated at room temperature for 20 min, and then centrifuged for 40 min. Samples were then washed three times. Filters were placed in a 1.5-mL tube for collection; digestion was performed using trypsin in 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and the sample was incubated for 12 hours at 37 °C. Peptides were harvested by centrifugation at 14,000 ×g for 20 min at 16 °C and then a further 75 μL of 100 mM TEAB was added for two additional harvests. Harvested peptides were dried and resolved in 180 μL of 5 % acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were desalted using a C-18 Spin Column (Thermo Scientific, USA) and dried in a SpeedVac. TMT labeling Up to 0.8 mg of the Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents TMT-126, TMT-127, TMT-128, TMT-129, and TMT-130 were resolved using 41 μL of anhydrous ACN. Each peptide sample was labeled by mixing it with 41 μL of the corresponding TMT Reagent. The reaction was then incubated for 1 h; subsequently, 8 μL of 5 % hydroxylamine was added to each sample, which was then incubated for 15 min to allow quenching. Each sample was labeled by TMT 5plex according to the manufacturer instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany): HDFa (126), hMSCs (127), HL-60 (128), KG-1 (129), THP-1 (130). High pH fractionation To increase the number of peptides identified in each sample, we applied a high pH fractionation method to separate peptides by hydrophobicity. Samples were separated into 48 fractions using an XBridge BEH C18 column, 130 Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) on an Agilent 1100 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The column was equilibrated in buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0) before sample injection. The samples were then fractionated under a linear gradient of 0–70 % buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90 % ACN, pH 10) at 500 μL/min for 115 min. The gradient conditions were as follows: 0–10 min, 5 % B; 10–20 min, 5 % B; 20–80 min, 35 % B; 80–95 min, 70 % B; 95–105 min, 70 % B; and 105–115 min, 0 % B. The fractions were then dried in the SpeedVac. Fractionated samples were desalted using a C18 spin column as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by mass spectrometry Fractionated peptide samples were resolved in 0.1 % formic acid and analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to the Q-Exactive Orbitrap Hybrid Mass Spectrometer. For the proteome profiling analysis, the sample was analyzed using a linear gradient of buffer A (solvent A: 0.1 % formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). The gradient applied was as follows: 0–5 min, 5 % B, 5–105 min, 40 % B, 105–110 min, 80 % B, 110–115 min, 80 % B, 115–116 min, 5 % B, and 116–120 min, 5 % B. The peptides eluted through the trap were ionized on an EASY-spray column (50 cm × 75 μm i.d.) (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) packed with 2 μm C-18 particles at an electrospray voltage of 1.8 kV. Full MS data were acquired using positive polarity, in a scan range of 400–2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, with an automated gain control target value of 1.0×106 and a maximum ion injection of 100 ms. The maximal ion injection time for MS/MS was set to 150 ms at a resolution of 17,500. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. The MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the SEQUEST algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Germany) to search the UniprotKB human protein database (UniprotKB/SwissProt reviewed 2020_6 with 26,566 entries) which generates decoy spectrum library of all human database. PD 2.4 parameters set up cleavage at arginine and lysine residues using trypsin enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. For each sample search, we set the carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT tag on lysine, and the N-terminus as a static modification, and N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. We applied the 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) threshold to the target peptide spectrum match and protein level analyses. The tolerance was set to 30 ppm for the precursor masses and 0.02 Da for the fragment masses. The Threshold score for peptide identification was equivalent to 1 % FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Q-exactive, Evs, Proteomics, Cell

### Affiliations
Kyunghee university
Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Kyung Hee Medical Science Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, South Korea

### Submitter
Hyoseon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Kyung Hee Medical Science Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, South Korea


