### Accession
PXD018152

### Title
proteiNorm – A user-friendly tool for normalization and analysis of TMT and label-free protein quantification

### Description
The technological advances in mass spectrometry allow us to collect more comprehensive data with higher quality and increasing speed. With the rapidly increasing amount of data generated, the need for streamlining analyses becomes more apparent. Proteomic data is known to be often affected by systemic bias from unknown sources, and failing to adequately normalize the data can lead to erroneous conclusions. To allow researchers to easily evaluate and compare different normalization methods via a user-friendly interface, we have developed “proteiNorm”.  The current implementation of proteiNorm accommodates preliminary filter on peptide and sample level, followed by an evaluation of several popular normalization methods and visualization of missing value. The user then selects an adequate normalization method and one of several imputation methods used for the subsequent comparison of different differential abundance/expression methods and estimation of statistical power. The application of proteiNorm and interpretation of its results is demonstrated on a Tandem Mass Tag mass spectrometry example data set, where the proteome of three different breast cancer cell lines was profiled with and without hydroxyurea treatment.  With proteiNorm, we provide a user-friendly tool to identify an adequate normalization method and to select an appropriate method for a differential abundance/expression analysis.

### Sample Protocol
An example data set consists of three different breast cancer cell lines (MCF10A, MCF7, HCC1954) with and without 5 mM hydroxyurea (HU) treatment for 4 hours. Three replicates for each cell-line-treatment combination were analyzed. The 18 samples were multiplexed using two Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) TMT-10plex isobaric tag batches such that untreated and treated cell lines assembled one batch each. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were labeled using tandem mass tag isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions and combined into one 6-plex sample group. The labeled peptide multiplex was separated into 36 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 40 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio.  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and TMT MS3 reporter ions intensities obtained using a MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) search against the UniProtKB database restricted to Homo sapiens with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, and a reporter ion tolerance of 0.003 Da. Scaffold Q+S (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications (protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides; protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [Anal. Chem. 75: 4646-58 (2003)]). The MaxQuant output files “ProteinGroups.txt” and “peptides.txt” were used as input files for ProteiNorm.

### Publication Abstract
The technological advances in mass spectrometry allow us to collect more comprehensive data with higher quality and increasing speed. With the rapidly increasing amount of data generated, the need for streamlining analyses becomes more apparent. Proteomics data is known to be often affected by systemic bias from unknown sources, and failing to adequately normalize the data can lead to erroneous conclusions. To allow researchers to easily evaluate and compare different normalization methods via a user-friendly interface, we have developed "proteiNorm". The current implementation of proteiNorm accommodates preliminary filters on peptide and sample levels followed by an evaluation of several popular normalization methods and visualization of the missing value. The user then selects an adequate normalization method and one of the several imputation methods used for the subsequent comparison of different differential expression methods and estimation of statistical power. The application of proteiNorm and interpretation of its results are demonstrated on two tandem mass tag multiplex (TMT6plex and TMT10plex) and one label-free spike-in mass spectrometry example data set. The three data sets reveal how the normalization methods perform differently on different experimental designs and the need for evaluation of normalization methods for each mass spectrometry experiment. With proteiNorm, we provide a user-friendly tool to identify an adequate normalization method and to select an appropriate method for differential expression analysis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Differential analysis, Normalization

### Affiliations
1. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 2. Arkansas Children's Research Institute
UAMS

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Diane Byrum
1. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 2. Arkansas Children's Research Institute


