### Accession
PXD040479

### Title
Development of a 3D fatty infiltration platform to model, at higher scale, the impact of LY2090314 compound on fibro/adipogenic progenitor adipogenic drift

### Description
In human dystrophies, the progressive muscle wasting is exacerbated by ectopic deposition of fat and fibrous tissue originating from fibro/adipogenic progenitors (FAPs). In degenerating muscles, the ability of these cells to adjuvate a successful healing is attenuated and FAPs aberrantly expand and differentiate into adipocytes and fibroblasts. Thus, arresting the fibroadipogenic fate of FAPs, without affecting their physiological role, represents a valuable therapeutic strategy for patients affected by muscle diseases. Here, using a panel of adipose progenitor cells including human-derived FAPs coupled with pharmacological perturbations and proteome profiling, we report that LY2090314 interferes with a genuine adipogenic program acting as WNT surrogate for the stabilization of a competent -catenin transcriptional complex. To predict the beneficial impact of LY2090314 in limiting ectopic deposition of fat in human muscles, we combined the Poly-Ethylene-Glycol-Fibrinogen biomimetic matrix with these progenitor cells to create a miniaturized 3D model of adipogenesis. Using this scalable system, we demonstrated that a two-digit nanomolar dose of this compound is effective to repress adipogenesis in a higher 3D scale, thus offering a concrete proof for the use of LY2090314 to limit FAP-derived fat infiltrates in dystrophic muscles.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested as indicated in the text and directly lysed in ice cold RIPA buffer. Proteome preparation was done using the in StageTip (iST) method. Samples were separated by HPLC in a single run (without pre-fractionations) and analyzed by MS. Instruments for LC-MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a PicoFrit column, 75 um ID, 8 Um tip, 250 mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9 um particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size (New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Total flow rate: 300nl/min. LC linear gradient: after sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5 min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90 min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20 ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z.  The mass spectrometer operated in a data dependent Top20 mode with subsequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 15,000 at 200 m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20 ms and the isolation window to 1.6 Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 second.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the Human (v. 2021) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. The other parameters were set as follow: fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation, acetyl (N-term); digestion: tripsin, Lys-C; min. peptide length = 7; max. peptide mass = 470Da; false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum = 1%. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide [First filter]. The LFQ Ratios were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min.valid number (min. 3 in at least one group) [Second filter]. Missing values have been replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Two - sample t-test analysis was performed and using FDR = 0.05

### Publication Abstract
In human dystrophies, progressive muscle wasting is exacerbated by ectopic deposition of fat and fibrous tissue originating from fibro/adipogenic progenitors (FAPs). In degenerating muscles, the ability of these cells to promote successful healing is attenuated, and FAPs aberrantly expand and differentiate into adipocytes and fibroblasts. Thus, arresting the fibro/adipogenic fate of FAPs, without affecting their physiological role, represents a valuable therapeutic strategy for patients affected by muscle diseases. Here, using a panel of adipose progenitor cells, including human-derived FAPs, coupled with pharmacological perturbations and proteome profiling, we report that LY2090314 interferes with a genuine adipogenic program acting as WNT surrogate for the stabilization of a competent &#x3b2;-catenin transcriptional complex. To predict the beneficial impact of LY2090314 in limiting ectopic deposition of fat in human muscles, we combined a poly-ethylene-glycol-fibrinogen biomimetic matrix with these progenitor cells to create a miniaturized 3D model of adipogenesis. Using this scalable system, we demonstrated that a two-digit nanomolar dose of this compound effectively represses adipogenesis at higher 3D scale, thus indicating the potential for LY2090314 to limit FAP-derived fat infiltrates in dystrophic muscles.

### Keywords
B-catenin, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Ly2090314, Faps, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, 00133, Italy
University of Rome Tor Vergata

### Submitter
Alessio Reggio

### Lab Head
Dr Cesare Gargioli
University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, 00133, Italy


