### Accession
PXD005932

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of intestinal mucosa from male mice lacking intestinal epithelial insulin receptors

### Description
The goal of the present study was to determine whether loss of the insulin receptor alters the molecular landscape of the intestinal mucosa, using intestinal-epithelial insulin receptor knockout (IE-irKO) mice and both genetic (IRfl/fl and Villin-cre) controls. Quantitative proteomic analysis by Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) was deployed on jejunal and colonic mucosa from mice fed a chow- or Western diet (WD). Jejunal mucosa from IE-irKO mice demonstrated alterations in all intestinal cell linages, Paneth, goblet, absorptive and enteroendocrine cells, whereas only goblet and absorptive cells were affected in the colon. There was also a significant effect of the WD on the gut proteome. A significant reduction was detected in Paneth cell proteins with anti-microbial activity, including lysozyme C-1, angiogenin-4, cryptdin-related sequence1C-3 and -2, a-defensin 17 and intelectin-1a. The key protein expressed by goblet cells, mucin-2, was also reduced in the IE-irKO mice. Proteins involved in lipid metabolism, including aldose reductase-related protein 1, 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase [NAD(+)], apolipoprotein A-II and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isozyme 4, were increased in the mucosa of WD-fed IE-irKO mice as compared to controls. In contrast, expression of the nutrient-responsive gut hormones, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and neurotensin, was reduced in the jejunal mucosa of IE-irKO mice, and there was a reduction in proteins of the P-type ATPases and the solute carrier-transporter family in the colon of WD-fed IE-irKO mice. In conclusion, IE-irKO mice display a distinct molecular phenotype, suggesting a biological role of insulin and its receptor in determining differentiated cell-specificity in the intestinal epithelium.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue was semi-thawed on ice before collection of the mucosa by scraping into lysis buffer (6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 50mM HEPES pH=8.5) followed by homogenization with 5 mm stainless steel beads (Qiagen Inc) in the TissueLyser II (Qiagen) and boiling in a BioRuptor (Diagenode). Protein was quantified using the BCA Protein Assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 100 µg protein was used as input for the LC-MS analyses. The protein lysate was reduced (10mM Tris-(2-Carboxyethyl)phosphine) and alkylated (40mM 2-Chloroacetamide) for 30 min, and subsequently digested to peptides in a two-step reaction using Lysyl Endopeptidase C and trypsin. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. The peptide samples were desalted using Sep-Pak columns (Waters). The eluted peptides were frozen on dry ice and concentrated to dryness by vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Fisher SC250EXP). For Tandem Mass Tag labelling, each sample was reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES, and 20 µg of peptide was taken forward for individual sample labeling according to manufacturer instructions in a 6-plex manner (Fig. 1B). After peptide labeling, samples were combined, and 30 µg total peptide for each pooled sample was subjected to strong-cation-exchange (SCX) fractionation to maximize proteome coverage. The six eluted fractions for each sample were frozen on dry ice and concentrated by vacuum centrifuge, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The generated mass spectrometry raw files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with TMT MS2 quantitation enabled in the 6-plex format. Variable modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu and Glu->pyro-Glu. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and the false discovery rate was set to 1%. The resulting protein groups file was subsequently analyzed for statistical significance using the Limma package in the R Statistical Framework (3.1.3).

### Publication Abstract
The goal of the present study was to determine whether loss of the insulin receptor alters the molecular landscape of the intestinal mucosa, using intestinal-epithelial insulin receptor knockout (IE-irKO) mice and both genetic (IRfl/fl and Villin-cre) controls. Quantitative proteomic analysis by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was applied to jejunal and colonic mucosa from mice fed a normal chow diet and mice fed a Western diet (WD). Jejunal mucosa from IE-irKO mice demonstrated alterations in all intestinal cell lineages: Paneth, goblet, absorptive, and enteroendocrine cells. Only goblet and absorptive cells were affected in the colon. Also, a marked effect of WD consumption was found on the gut proteome. A substantial reduction was detected in Paneth cell proteins with antimicrobial activity, including lysozyme C-1, angiogenin-4, cryptdin-related sequence 1C-3 and -2, &#x3b1;-defensin 17, and intelectin-1a. The key protein expressed by goblet cells, mucin-2, was also reduced in the IE-irKO mice. Proteins involved in lipid metabolism, including aldose reductase-related protein 1, 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase, apolipoprotein A-II, and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isozyme 4, were increased in the mucosa of WD-fed IE-irKO mice compared with controls. In contrast, expression of the nutrient-responsive gut hormones, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and neurotensin, was reduced in the jejunal mucosa of IE-irKO mice, and the expression of proteins of the P-type adenosine triphosphatases and the solute carrier-transporter family was reduced in the colon of WD-fed IE-irKO mice. In conclusion, IE-irKO mice display a distinct molecular phenotype, suggesting a biological role of insulin and its receptor in determining differentiated cell specificity in the intestinal epithelium.

### Keywords
In vivo, Lc-msms, Insr, Tmt, Intestinal mucosa

### Affiliations
Dept. of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Dept. of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
University Health Network

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia L. Brubaker
Dept. of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Dept. of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada


