### Accession
PXD026795

### Title
Targeted Detection of SARS-CoV-2 Protein Variants by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
COVID-19 vaccines are continuing to become more widely available, but accurate and rapid testing remains a crucial tool for slowing the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Although quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) remains the most prevalent testing methodology, numerous tests have been developed that are predicated on detection of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein, including liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and immunoassay based approaches. The continuing emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants has complicated these approaches, as both qRT-PCR and antigen detection methods can be prone to missing viral variants. In this study, we describe a number of cases with COVID-19 where we were unable to detect the expected peptide targets from clinical nasopharyngeal swab samples that are typically identifiable in a targeted mass spectrometric assay. Whole genome sequencing revealed that single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene encoding the viral nucleocapsid protein led to sequence variants that were not monitored in the targeted assay. Small modifications to the LC-MS/MS method ensured detection of the variants of the target peptide. Additional nucleocapsid variants were detected by performing bottom-up proteomic analysis of whole viral genome sequenced samples. This study demonstrates the importance of considering variants of SARS-CoV-2 in the assay design and highlights the flexibility of mass spectrometry-based approaches to detect variants as they evolve.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of nasopharyngeal swab samples and in-solution trypsin digestion:  All clinical samples were de-identified prior to analysis. Nasopharyngeal (NP) swab samples were collected in PBS and 750 μL of the sample was transferred to a 96 well plate. The virus was inactivated by adding 15 μL of Z3-16 and incubating at 70°C for 30 minutes. Following a 10 min cooling period at 4°C, antibody-based purification was performed using the anti-nucleocapsid protein monoclonal antibody coupled to MSIA D.A.R.T.’S. The purification procedure was conducted using the automated Versette liquid handling system. The tips were first washed with 1X PBS and then nucleocapsid protein was captured over a period of 1.75 hours. Following capture, the tips with were washed twice with 300 μL of 1X PBS and then 300 μL of water. The nucleocapsid protein was eluted with 100 μL of 0.2% TFA and 0.002% Z3-16 in water. The purified sample was immediately trypsin digested (rapid digest kit, Catalog#VA1060, Promega, Madison, WI). Sample eluent was mixed with 300 μl of digest buffer followed by the addition of 1 μg of trypsin and incubation at 70°C for 1 hour. The digestion was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1% and isotopically labeled internal standards were added. The digests were then loaded onto EvoTips (EvoSep Inc., Odense, Denmark) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the C18 EvoTips were activated using 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile followed by equilibration with 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid in water. Activation and equilibration were carried out at 700 x g for 1 minute using benchtop centrifuge. The sample was loaded at 500 x g for 5 minute followed by washing using 0.1% formic acid once. Last, the tips were loaded with 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid and processed for targeted mass spectrometry analysis.  Targeted Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) analysis  Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis was performed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and interfaced with a preformed gradient LC system (EvoSep One, EvoSep Inc.). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 2 µL/minute and peptide separation was carried out using a 4 cm analytical column (Dr. Maisch C18AQ, 1.9 µm, 150 µm x 4 cm) with a 5.6 min gradient. Data acquisition parameters included MS1 scan from m/z 560-1000 at a resolution of 60,000 followed by retention time scheduled PRM analysis of AYNVTQAFGR and QQTVTLLPAADLDDFSK peptides and corresponding IS peptides. The PRM parameters included: Orbitrap resolution of 60,000, AGC target value of 5 x 104, injection time of 118 ms, isolation window of m/z 1 and HCD normalized collision energy of 27. After initial screening for peptide variants, the precursor m/z corresponding to the variants LQTVTLLPAADLDDFSK (m/z 923.9935) and QQIVTLLPAADLDDFSK (m/z 937.4989) were added to the PRM analysis.     LC-MS/MS analysis for targeted and untargeted discovery proteomics experiments was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer Single-shot PRM and DDA analyses were carried out for the detection of variant peptides from SARS-CoV-2. Sample specific mutant peptide targeted list was created including maximum of three missed cleavages and were analyzed on Exploris 480 mass spectrometer using PRM method. Samples were also analyzed using an untargeted single-shot DDA method. The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18 2 cm × 100 µm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min using 0.1% formic acid and separated on an analytical column (EasySpray 50 cm × 75 µm, C18 1.9 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a linear gradient of 5 to 40% solvent B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over a 70 min. Both precursor and fragment ions were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Precursor ions were acquired in m/z range of 350–1800 with a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). Precursor fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. The fragment ions were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200). The scans were arranged in top-speed method with 3 seconds cycle time between MS and MS/MS. Ion transfer capillary voltage was maintained at 1.9 kV. For internal mass calibration, lock mass option was enabled with polysiloxane ion (m/z 445.120025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Targeted Mass Spectrometry Data Processing  The PRM spectra were used for subsequent data analysis. First, data were imported into Skyline19 and fragment ion chromatograms were manually integrated. Next, the fragment ion intensities were exported from skyline and (natural) log transformed. A supervised machine learning method was used to select the optimal fragments and determine their weights to maximize the detection performance of the targeted mass spectrometry assay. All computations were performed in R (version 4.0.1). For this, we utilized an ensemble-based machine learning approach encoded in the Super Learner as described previously.20 This method was configured to use a generalized linear model via penalized maximum likelihood (glmNET), generalized linear model (glm) and random forest model; all configured to use binomial distributions. This machine learning method was used to determine whether samples were positive or negative by mass spectrometry testing. Calibration curves were generated to determine protein concentrations for each target peptide in the samples analyzed. Quantitation was performed by summing the b2, y4, y5, y6, y7, and y8 fragments of AYNVTQAFGR and the y5, y6, y7, y8, y10, y11, y12, and y13 fragments of QQTVTLLPAADLDDFSK (and variants). A custom R script was used to correct the summed intensity of the analyte fragments with the equivalent fragments of the isotopically labeled internal standards and generate calibration curves for AYNVTQAFGR and QQTVTLLPAADLDDFSK from the calibrators using 1/x weighting. The resulting linear regression equation was used to determine protein concentrations from each peptide in QC and patient samples. Additional analysis and plot generation was done using Microsoft Excel.   Mass spectrometry data analysis of untargeted LC-MS/MS data The raw mass spectrometry data were searched using Andromeda22 in the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.7.0) against combined protein database containing UniProt human protein database and observed mutant SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences based on the genome sequencing data for each sample including common MS contaminants. The raw data was searched against sample specific variant SARS-CoV-2 protein database. The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification for samples that were reduced and alkylated; N-terminal acetylation and oxidation at methionine as variable modifications. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to ±0.02 Da. False discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 vaccines are becoming more widely available, but accurate and rapid testing remains a crucial tool for slowing the spread of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus. Although the quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) remains the most prevalent testing methodology, numerous tests have been developed that are predicated on detection of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein, including liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and immunoassay-based approaches. The continuing emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants has complicated these approaches, as both qRT-PCR and antigen detection methods can be prone to missing viral variants. In this study, we describe several COVID-19 cases where we were unable to detect the expected peptide targets from clinical nasopharyngeal swabs. Whole genome sequencing revealed that single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene encoding the viral nucleocapsid protein led to sequence variants that were not monitored in the targeted assay. Minor modifications to the LC-MS/MS method ensured detection of the variants of the target peptide. Additional nucleocapsid variants could be detected by performing the bottom-up proteomic analysis of whole viral genome-sequenced samples. This study demonstrates the importance of considering variants of SARS-CoV-2 in the assay design and highlights the flexibility of mass spectrometry-based approaches to detect variants as they evolve.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Tandem mass spectrometry, Nucleocapsid, Single amino acid protein variants

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


