### Accession
PXD003542

### Title
Proteomic and cellular responses against mutagenesis

### Description
Endogenous stress represents a major source of genome instability, but is in essence difficult to apprehend. Incorporation of labeled radionuclides into DNA constitutes a tractable model to analyze cellular responses to endogenous attacks. Here we show that incorporation of [3H]thymidine into CHO hamster cells generates oxidative-induced mutagenesis, but, with a peak at low doses. Proteomic analysis showed that the cellular global response differs between low and high levels of endogenous stress. In particular, these results confirmed the involvement of proteins implicated in redox homeostasis and DNA damage signaling pathways. Induced-mutagenesis was abolished by the anti-oxidant N-acetyl cysteine and plateaued, at high doses, upon exposure to L-buthionine sulfoximine, which represses cellular detoxification. The [3H]thymidine-induced mutation spectrum revealed mostly base substitutions, exhibiting a signature specific for low doses (GC>CG and AT>CG). Consistently, the enzymatic activity of the base excision repair protein APE-1 is induced at only medium or high doses. Collectively, the data reveal that a threshold of endogenous stress must be reached to trigger cellular detoxification and DNA repair programs; below this threshold, the consequences of endogenous stress escape cellular surveillance, leading to high levels of mutagenesis. Therefore, low doses of endogenous local stress can jeopardize genome integrity more efficiently than higher doses.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines: We used two Chinese hamster cell lines (CHO): CHO-DRA10 and CHO-AT3-2 for mutagenesis analysis of Na+/K+ pump ATPase and adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) loci. Cells were maintained at 37°C with 95% air/5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.  Radioactive labeling of cells: [Methyl-3H]TdR (cat # TRK 637; 45,0 Ci/mmol) purchased from Amersham (GE Healthcare Europe, Orsay, France) was diluted in regular medium. Cells were treated in exponential and asynchronous growth at the same concentration (0.1 mM) but at various specific activities (0.05 to 5 µCi/ml). Cells were incubated for 20 h at 37°C with 5% CO2; at this time, incorporation plateaued, and greater than 95% of cells contained labeled nucleotides. The radioactive medium was subsequently discarded, and cells were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) before processing (1). Experiments were repeated at least thrice.  External radiation exposure: Cells were irradiated in exponential and asynchronous growth with a medical 60Co γ-rays external source. Each dose was delivered either on 2 minutes (high rate) or 20 hours (Low rate) in an specific incubator (37°C with 5% CO2). Dosimetry was evaluated inside the incubator.  Protein extraction: Cells (10 to 20.106 cells) were washed in PBS, and the cell pellet was re-suspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% NP40, a protease inhibitor cocktail (complete mini, Roche), and a phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)). Following 20 min at 4°C, the suspension was centrifuged at 10000 × g for 10 min. The pellet containing cell nuclei was homogenized in solubilization buffer (9 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% Triton X100, 65 mM DTT and protease inhibitor cocktail). Proteins were then solubilized and quantified as previously described (4).   Two-dimensional electrophoresis: Two-dimensional electrophoresis was performed with independent biological experiments and at least three replicates using precast 18-cm strips at pH range 6 to 11 (GE Healthcare) for the first dimension and 12% acrylamide SDS-polyacrylamide gel for the second dimension (5, 6). Analytical gels were performed with 100 µg of protein and stained with Lava-purple (Serva) as recommended by the manufacturer and scanned to images with a Typhoon 9400 (GE). A preparative gel was performed for each condition with 250 µg of protein and stained using a MS compatible silver staining protocol (7).  Image analysis Images from analytical gels were analyzed using the Samespots software v4.0 (Non-linear Dynamics, UK). Gel replicates were grouped to create a global analysis with all conditions. Spots of each samples were compared between control and irradiated conditions. A multivariate statistical analysis was performed using the statistic mode of the Samespots software (Non-linear Dynamics, UK). Spots with significant differences (ANOVA t-test p<0.05) were first chosen. Then, only spots with a q-value < 0.05 and a power > 0.8 were finally selected. Spots of interest were selected for subsequent protein identification by mass spectrometry analysis and were picked up using the corresponding preparative silver stained gels. LC MS/MS analysis: Spots were washed with 300 µL of water and then 300 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Destaining was performed twice in the presence of 300 µL of 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Gel pieces were then dehydrated twice by 300 µL of 100% CH3CN and finally dried at 37°C for 1 h. Eight microliters of a trypsin solution (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, Madison, USA) at a concentration of 0.0125 µg/µL in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to every spot. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C and was stopped by addition of 2 µL of 2 % formic acid. Digests were sonicated in an ultrasonic bath for 10 minutes and supernatants were transferred into HPLC polypropylene tubes. The protein digests were analysed using a Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Maxis ; Bruker Daltonik ), coupled to a nano-chromatography system (HPLC 1200, Agilent Technologies, ) interfaced with an HPLC-Chip system (Chip Cube, Agilent Technologies). Samples were concentrated onto the online pre-column (Agilent Technologies, part G4240-62006, Zorbax 300SB-C18, 40 nL, 5 μm particle size) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min using 0.1% formic acid. After pre-concentration, peptides were separated with a reversed-phase capillary column (Agilent, Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.075x150mm) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using a 2 steps gradient (3 % to 27 % acetonitrile in 14 min then 27 % to 72 % in 5 min), and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. The instrument was operated in the positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1.8-2.1kV, and a dry gas flow rate of 4 L/min at 140°C. After an initial MS scan at 2 Hz, an IDA mode was employed over the mass range of 300-1400 Th, for the five most intense precursors with an active exclusion of 0.15 min after 2 spectra.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data were analysed using Compass DataAnalysis software v.4.0.275.0 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) to generate the peak lists. The Swissprot database (release 2015_03, 547 964 sequences) was queried locally using the Mascot search engine v.2.4.0 (Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com) and with the following parameters : Rodentia for the taxonomy, trypsin as enzyme, 1 missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of Cystein as fixed modification, oxidation of Methionine as variable modification. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on full scans and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. Proteins were validated once they contained at least two peptide with a p value <0.05. When identified, contaminants proteins (such as keratine) were removed from the identification list and only the two top hit remaining proteins with similar scores and emPAI were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Endogenous stress represents a major source of genome instability, but is in essence difficult to apprehend. Incorporation of labeled radionuclides into DNA constitutes a tractable model to analyze cellular responses to endogenous attacks. Here we show that incorporation of [(3)H]thymidine into CHO cells generates oxidative-induced mutagenesis, but, with a peak at low doses. Proteomic analysis showed that the cellular response differs between low and high levels of endogenous stress. In particular, these results confirmed the involvement of proteins implicated in redox homeostasis and DNA damage signaling pathways. Induced-mutagenesis was abolished by the anti-oxidant N-acetyl cysteine and plateaued, at high doses, upon exposure to L-buthionine sulfoximine, which represses cellular detoxification. The [(3)H]thymidine-induced mutation spectrum revealed mostly base substitutions, exhibiting a signature specific for low doses (GC&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;CG and AT&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;CG). Consistently, the enzymatic activity of the base excision repair protein APE-1 is induced at only medium or high doses. Collectively, the data reveal that a threshold of endogenous stress must be reached to trigger cellular detoxification and DNA repair programs; below this threshold, the consequences of endogenous stress escape cellular surveillance, leading to high levels of mutagenesis. Therefore, low doses of endogenous local stress can jeopardize genome integrity more efficiently than higher doses.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Low doses, Mutagenesis, Proteomic, Endogenous stress, Tritium

### Affiliations
UMR CNRS 8200, Institut Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France
INRA

### Submitter
sonia hem

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard S. Lopez
UMR CNRS 8200, Institut Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France


