### Accession
PXD022032

### Title
A novel structure of GPI anchored proteins

### Description
GPI anchors many proteins to the cell surface. GPI precursor has three mannoses, all of which are modified by ethanolamine-phosphate (EthN-P). It has been believed that EthN-P on the third mannose is always used as a bridge to the protein and EthN-P on the second mannose is removed after GPI is attached to the protein. In fact, several GPI-anchored proteins are not appreciably reduced on cells defective in PIGG, which transfers EthN-P to the second mannose. Nevertheless, mutations in PIGG cause neuronal abnormalities. Here, we show that EthN-P on the second mannose is used as a preferential bridge for several GPI-anchored proteins. Our data modifies the current view of GPI anchors and provides mechanistic basis of PIGG deficiencies.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and two PIGG-KO clones (#10, #4) of HEK293 cells (5x106 each) were lysed in 500 l of a buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor cocktail) containing 2% TritonX-114 (Nakalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan) for 30 min on ice. After centrifugation at 15,000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min, the supernatant was incubated for 10 min at 37°C and phase separation was performed. Samples were separated into aqueous and detergent phases by centrifugation at 5600 × g at 37°C for 7 min. After separation, aqueous phase was removed and 350 µl of buffer was added to the detergent phase and further incubated with PIPLC (1unit/ml) at 16 °C for 2h, followed by phase separation again. Four volumes of acetone were added to the combined aqueous phase and the detergent phase and acetone precipitation was performed at -80 °C for 1h. Proteins were precipitated by centrifugation at 13,400 x g for 30 min at 4 °C and pellets were air dried. The samples were dissolved in 20 µl of 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) and reduced with 10 mM DTT, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and digested by treatment with trypsin and purified with C18 tip (AMR, Tokyo, Japan). The resultant peptides were subjected to nanocapillary reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analysis using a C18 column (10 cm x 75 um, 1.9 µm, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) on a nanoLC system (Bruker Daltonics) connected to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) and a modified nano-ESI source (CaptiveSpray; Bruker Daltonics). The mobile phase consisted of water containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). Linear gradient elution was carried out from 5% to 30% solvent B for 18 min at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The ion spray voltage was set at 1.6 kV in the positive ion mode. Ions were collected in the trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) device over 100 ms and MS and MS/MS data were acquired over an m/z range of 100–1,700. During the collection of MS/MS data, the TIMS cycle was adjusted to 0.53 s and included 1 MS plus 4 parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF)-MS/MS scans, each containing on average 12 MS/MS spectra (>100 Hz), and nitrogen gas was used as collision gas.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data was processed using DataAnalysis version 5.2 (Bruker Daltonics), and proteins were identified using MASCOT version 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the SwissProt database. Quantitative value and fold exchange were calculated by Scaffold4 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) for MS/MS-based proteomic studies

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) are glycolipids that anchor many proteins (GPI-APs) on the cell surface. The core glycan of GPI precursor has three mannoses, which in mammals, are all modified by ethanolamine-phosphate (EthN-P). It is postulated that EthN-P on the third mannose (EthN-P-Man3) is the bridge between GPI and the protein and the second (EthN-P-Man2) is removed after GPI-protein attachment. However, EthN-P-Man2 may not be always transient, as mutations of PIGG, the enzyme that transfers EthN-P to Man2, result in inherited GPI deficiencies (IGDs), characterized by neuronal dysfunctions. Here, we show that EthN-P on Man2 is the preferential bridge in some GPI-APs, among them, the Ect-5'-nucleotidase and Netrin G2. We find that CD59, a GPI-AP, is attached via EthN-P-Man2 both in PIGB-knockout cells, in which GPI lacks Man3, and with a small fraction in wild-type cells. Our findings modify the current view of GPI anchoring and provide a mechanistic basis for IGDs caused by PIGG mutations.

### Keywords
Human, Gpi anchor, Lc-esi- ms, Pigg

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases
Osaka University
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,Japan

### Submitter
Yoshiko Murakami

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,Japan


