### Accession
PXD041694

### Title
Prenatal Exposure to Metals Alters the Placental Inflammatory Proteome in a Sex-Dependent Manner in Extremely Low Gestational Age Newborns

### Description
Prenatal exposure to toxic metals is associated with altered placental function and adverse health outcomes. The underlying mechanisms linking in utero toxic metal exposures with later-in-life health remain unclear, though placental inflammation is posited as a potential driver. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether in utero metals presence is associated with sex-specific changes in placental protein expression. We hypothesized that sex-specific patterns of metal-associated placental protein expression would be observed, and metals presence would be positively associated with the altered expression of inflammation-associated pathways Using samples banked from the Extremely Low Gestational Age Newborn Study (ELGAN), umbilical cord tissue samples were analyzed via ICP-MS/MS for trace elements, and placental samples underwent a global untargeted proteomics analysis via LC-MS/MS. This work highlights the linkage between prenatal metals exposure and an altered placental proteome, revealing that metals in cord tissue were associated with largely distinct differences in placental protein expression, in a sexually-dimorphic manner.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, batch and sample numbers were randomly assigned. Approximately 50µg of sample were reduced with 20mM DTT for 10 minutes at 56°C, and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were then loaded onto S-trap (Protifi) columns according to manufacturer recommended protocol. Samples were subjected to on-column digestion using trypsin (Promega) for 1h at 47°C at a 1:10 enzyme:protein ratio. Eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation and peptide concentration was quantified using Thermo fluorometric peptide assay. Samples were normalized to 0.3 µg/µl and a pooled sample was created and analyzed alongside each batch. All samples were spiked with iRT standard peptides (Biognosys) prior to LC-MS/MS. Samples were then analyzed via LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 2 hr method. The gradient consisted of 5-37% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The Lumos was operated in Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. A full MS scan (m/z 35-1200 m/z) was collected; resolution set to 120,000 with a default charge state of 2, max injection time of 45 ms and AGC target of 250%. Following full MS scan, product ion scan was collected at a resolution of 30,000, with higher collision dissociation (HCD) set to 30, AGC target set to 2000%, maximum injection time to set to 54 ms, 31m/z precursor isolation windows. Raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut v15 (Biognosys) against the reviewed human proteome database from Uniprot (UP000005640, downloaded October 2020 containing 20,381 sequences). The following settings were used: enzyme specificity set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. Precision iRT calibration was enabled and profiling strategy was set to iRT profiling. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used to filter all data. Normalization and imputation were disabled in Spectronaut.

### Data Protocol
Downstream processing, including normalization, random forest-based imputation, and batch correction, were performed using vsn R package (v3.62.0), the MissForest R package (v1.5), and the ComBat function from the sva package (v3.42.0), respectively, in R. Over 84,000 peptides were identified from roughly 5,000 proteins, pre-filter. Downstream data filtering removed proteins with no quantification, over 50% missing values, and <33% q-values <0.1, yielding 3454 proteins passing cutoffs.  To assess expression changes of individual proteins in relation to metals, robust linear regression models were fit between the protein expression values as the dependent variable, to the metals concentrations as the independent variable, using Limma (v3.50.3). Models were adjusted for covariates as previously described. Moderated test statistics were calculated using the ebayes function within the Limma R package. This procedure shrinks the estimated sample variances toward a global trend, resulting in more stable inferences. Each of the five metals were separately analyzed against 3,454 proteins from the proteomics assessment (post-filtering). The estimate from these regressions represents the expression changes in the protein per unit increase in the metal’s concentration. To address multiple testing, p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg (BH) procedure. All statistical analyses were conducted in R (v4.1.2).

### Publication Abstract
Prenatal exposure to toxic metals is associated with altered placental function and adverse infant and child health outcomes. Adverse outcomes include those that are observed at the time of birth, such as low birthweight, as well as those that arise later in life, such as neurological impairment. It is often the case that these adverse outcomes show sex-specific responses in relation to toxicant exposures. While the precise molecular mechanisms linking in utero toxic metal exposures with later-in-life health are unknown, placental inflammation is posited to play a critical role. Here, we sought to understand whether in utero metal exposure is associated with alterations in the expression of the placental proteome by identifying metal associated proteins (MAPs). Within the Extremely Low Gestational Age Newborns (ELGAN) cohort (<i>n</i> = 230), placental and umbilical cord tissue samples were collected at birth. Arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb), selenium (Se), and manganese (Mn) concentrations were measured in umbilical cord tissue samples via ICP-MS/MS. Protein expression was examined in placental samples using an LC-MS/MS-based, global, untargeted proteomics analysis measuring more than 3400 proteins. MAPs were then evaluated for associations with pregnancy and neonatal outcomes, including placental weight and gestational age. We hypothesized that metal levels would be positively associated with the altered expression of inflammation/immune-associated pathways and that sex-specific patterns of metal-associated placental protein expression would be observed. Sex-specific analyses identified 89 unique MAPs expressed in female placentas and 41 unique MAPs expressed in male placentas. Notably, many of the female-associated MAPs are known to be involved in immune-related processes, while the male-associated MAPs are associated with intracellular transport and cell localization. Further, several MAPs were significantly associated with gestational age in males and females and placental weight in males. These data highlight the linkage between prenatal metal exposure and an altered placental proteome, with implications for altering the trajectory of fetal development.

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker, Placenta, Metal exposure

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gilling's School of Global Public Health, Univeristy of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Anastasia Freedman

### Lab Head
Dr Rebecca Fry
Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Gilling's School of Global Public Health, Univeristy of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


