### Accession
PXD036200

### Title
Identification of LC3-binding proteins on lipid droplets

### Description
In the search for LD-localized proteins that may mediate lipophagy, we purified LDs from HeLa cells treated with oleic acid (OA), which stimulates LD biogenesis and lipophagy, together with chloroquine (CQ), which inhibits lysosomal degradation. We incubated the LD lysates with purified GST-LC3B, and then pulled down GST-LC3B for mass spectrometry analysis

### Sample Protocol
LDs were purified from HeLa cells treated with 200 μM OA and 10 μM CQ overnight and lysed with 5% NP40 lysis buffer. The diluted lysates (containing 0.5% NP40) were then incubated with purified GST or GST-LC3B immobilized on GSH beads. Proteins associated with the beads were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed against a UniProtKB human or E.coli containing target proteins using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 or PEAKS studio X. Precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to ±0.2 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of Serine\threonine\tyrosine was set as variable modifications. All identified proteins had a FDR of ≤1%, which was calculated at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Lipophagy, the selective engulfment of lipid droplets (LDs) by autophagosomes for lysosomal degradation, is critical to lipid and energy homeostasis. Here we show that the lipid transfer protein ORP8 is located on LDs and mediates the encapsulation of LDs by autophagosomal membranes. This function of ORP8 is independent of its lipid transporter activity and is achieved through direct interaction with phagophore-anchored LC3/GABARAPs. Upon lipophagy induction, ORP8 has increased localization on LDs and is phosphorylated by AMPK, thereby enhancing its affinity for LC3/GABARAPs. Deletion of ORP8 or interruption of ORP8-LC3/GABARAP interaction results in accumulation of LDs and increased intracellular triglyceride. Overexpression of ORP8 alleviates LD and triglyceride deposition in the liver of ob/ob mice, and Osbpl8-/- mice exhibit liver lipid clearance defects. Our results suggest that ORP8 is a lipophagy receptor that plays a key role in cellular lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Lc3

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Metabolic Medicine of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
maomao pu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Liu
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Metabolic Medicine of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China


