### Accession
PXD041747

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics of eggplant root treated with waterlogging stress

### Description
Cultivated eggplant XN, a waterlogging-tolerant variety, were treated with waterlogging stress, and the root of XN eggplant were harvested at the time point of 0, 6, 12, and 24 h post treatment ,relatively. iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics was performed to analyze protein dynamics in eggplant root.

### Sample Protocol
The roots of 4-5 leaf-stage eggplant were sock ddH2O , and the roots were harvested at the time point of 0, 6, 12, and 24 h post treatment ,relatively.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data files produced through the capillary LC-MS/MS method were processed and examined using the advanced Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo) software tools. To identify proteins, the acquired MS/MS spectra were sub-jected to a search against the comprehensive Eggplant Genome Database (http://eggplant-hq.cn/Eggplant/home/index), with parameters set as biological modifi-cations as ID focus, trypsin digestion, the Quantitate. Bias and background correction were checked for protein quantification and normalization. Generation of peak lists was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 Software. Protein quantification and identification were carried out utilizing the Mascot software (vs. 2.2, Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA). For the iTRAQ labeling quantification analysis, only unique peptides exhibiting a confidence level higher than 95% were included, ensuring the reliability of the results. Proteins with an unused value surpassing 1.2 were considered worthy of further investigation. To accurately evaluate the differences between the samples being compared, the fold change was calculated by considering the median abundance of replicate samples. Additionally, the p-values were determined using a rigorous Student's t-test, which helped minimize false positives in the analysis. Proteins that exhibited a fold change greater than 1.2 (T: CK ratio 1.2 or T: CK ratio 0.83) and a p-value of less than 0.05 wereconsidered to be significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Waterlogging poses significant abiotic stress that endangers the survival of plants, including crops. In response, plants dramatically change their physiology to enhance their tolerance to waterlogging, such as proteome reconfiguration. Here, we utilized isobaric tags for the relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based protein labeling technique to examine the proteomic changes induced by waterlogging in the roots of <i>Solanum melongena</i> L., a solanaceous plant. The plants were subjected to 6, 12, and 24 h of waterlogging stress at the flowering stage. Of the 4074 identified proteins, compared to the control, the abundance of the proteins increased and decreased in 165 and 78 proteins, respectively, in 6 h of treatments; 219 and 89 proteins, respectively, in 12 h of treatments; and 126 and 127 proteins, respectively, in 24 h of treatments. The majority of these differentially regulated proteins participated in processes such as energy metabolism, amino acid biosynthesis, signal transduction, and nitrogen metabolism. Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase and three alcohol dehydrogenase genes, in particular, were up- or down-regulated in waterlogging-treated <i>Solanum melongena</i> roots, suggesting that some proteins related to anaerobic metabolism (glycolysis and fermentation) may play vital roles in protecting its roots from waterlogging stress to enable long-term survival. Overall, this research not only offers a comprehensive dataset of protein alterations in waterlogged <i>Solanum melongena</i> roots but also insights into the mechanisms by which solanaceous plants adapt to waterlogging stress.

### Keywords
['Solanum melongena', 'Eggplant', 'Proteomics', 'Itraq', 'Waterlogging stress']

### Affiliations
['College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou', 'shanghai hoogen biotech company']

### Submitter
['anguo sun']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou', 'email': 'shenlei07@yzu.edu.cn', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Lei Shen', 'id': '2565149'}]

