### Accession
PXD031069

### Title
Discovery of Novel Circulating Immune Complexes in Lupus Nephritis Using Immunoproteomics

### Description
The goal is to discover novel circulating immune complexes (ICx) in the serum of Lupus Nephritis (LN) as potential biomarkers. Protein A/G magnetic beads or C1q-coated plates were used to capture ICx in the serum of LN, followed by the identification of immunoglobulin-binding proteins using liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Six related genomic-level databases were used for selecting potential biomarkers, following ELISA validation with independent samples.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatants from the Protein A/G or C1q captured immune complex samples were purified by a brief running of SDS-PAGE. The gel band containing samples were subjected to in-gel digestion. An aliquot of the tryptic digest was fractionated through liquid chromatography and then analyzed by an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo ScientificTM) interfaced with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Binary RSLCnano System. Peptides were separated onto an AcclaimTM PepMapTM C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Gradient conditions were: 3%-22% B for 40 min; 22%-35% B for 10min; 35%-90% B for 10 min; 90% B held for 10 min. The peptides were analyzed using a data-dependent acquisition method, Orbitrap Fusion was operated with the measurement of FTMS1 at resolutions of 120,000 FWHM, scan range of 350-1500 m/z, AGC target 2E5, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. During a maximum 3 second cycle time, the ITMS2 spectra were collected at rapid scan rate mode, with HCD NCE 35, 1.6 m/z isolation window, AGC target 1E4, maximum injection time of 35 ms, and dynamic exclusion was employed for 35 seconds. The raw data files were processed using Thermo ScientificTM Proteome DiscovererTM software version 1.4 and spectra were searched against the Uniprot-Homo sapiens database using the Sequest search engine v2.3.02 (Matrix Science) run on an in-house server.

### Data Protocol
Search results were trimmed to a 1% FDR for stringency and 5% for relaxed condition using Percolator. For the trypsin digestion, up to two missed cleavages were allowed. MS tolerance was set at 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was set as variable modifications. The sum of scores of individual peptides for identified protein was used to identify proteins from the immune complex.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Serum, Lupus nephritis, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
university of Houston
Tianfu Wu/Lab Dept. of Biomedical Engineering University of Houston

### Submitter
chenling tang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfu Wu
Tianfu Wu/Lab Dept. of Biomedical Engineering University of Houston


