### Accession
PXD032264

### Title
Research of neopeptides/neoproteins in prostate cancer cell lines

### Description
Validation, by mass spectrometry (MS), of predicted neoantigens in urinary extracellular vesicles coming from cancer prostate patients. We performed MS on PC3, LNCaP and HCT116 cells and compared MS-detected peptides with established PC3 lncRNA peptides, peptides from lncRNAs upregulated in uEVs and Swiss prot databanks.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome cell samples were lysed in a buffer containing 8 M urea (Euromedex), 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, FisherScientific) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Lysates were sonicated to decrease viscosity and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 minutes. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Pierce). 60 µg of total protein were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) for 30 minutes at 55°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma) for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then diluted 10-fold with 200 mM ABC to obtain a final concentration of urea of 1 M before overnight digestion with Trypsin-LysC (Promega) at a 1:50 ratio at 37°C. Digested samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo) for 15 minutes on ice and centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 15 minutes and purified using 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters).  Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and 1/6 of the starting material was vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in 10µl injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens (UP000005640_9606) UniProt database, our predict database of PC3 LncRNA smORF encoded peptides and uEV-lncRNA smORF encoded peptides using Sequest HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.3 (PMID: 17610305). FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Observed retention times from non-modified peptide (excepted for Carbamidomethylation of cysteins) were averaged across all samples and plotted against the predicted hydrophobicity index calculated with an SSRCalc-based algorithm (PMID: 15238601) using the R package ggplot2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neopeptides, Extracellular vesicles, Lncrnas, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Victor Laigle

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


