### Accession
PXD013161

### Title
DUB Profiling of 20 different breast cancer cell lines.

### Description
De-ubiquitinating enzymess from 20 Different breast cancer cell lines were purified using an Affinity Binding Probe.

### Sample Protocol
For Biotin ABP profiling, cells were lysed in Biotin ABP buffer (50 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 5 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT) supplemented with protease inhibitors. Lysates were sonicated at 4 °C, 2% final concentration Triton X-100 were added, sonicated, added equal volume of 50 mM Tris, then sonicated.  After 1 hour 16 x 103 g centrifugation of lysate at 4 °C, supernatants protein concentration was measured by DC kit. 1 mg total protein was added with 1 uM Biotin-Ub-VME probe (UbiQ-054; UbiQ) for 3 hours while rotating at 4°C, and then 50 ul NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (29200; Thermo scientific) was added to each sample for overnight incubation at 4 °C. The beads were sequentially washed 2 times with wash buffer 1 (2% SDS), 1 time wash buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 50 mM Hepes), 1 time wash buffer 3 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA and 10 mM Tris), 3 times wash buffer 4 (50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl) and 3 times wash buffer 5 (50 mM Ammonium bi-carbonate) continuously, 10 min room temperature for each wash.  beads were collected in 250 ul 50 mM Ammonium bi-carbonate. samples were digested with 0.5 ul trypsin (0.5 ug/ul) 37 °C overnight. Subsequently, digested samples were desalted and concentrated with STAGE-tips (WAT094225; Waters) and eluted with 60 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Eluted fractions were dried by SpeedVac RC10.10 and dissolved in 10 ul 0.1% formic acid before online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS). Biological triplicate preparation was performed on all the samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in MaxQuant 1.5.3.30, the output is included in this dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Tgfb, De-ubiquitinase, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Centre Leiden, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Centre Leiden, The Netherlands.


