### Accession
PXD017417

### Title
Mapping physiological ADP-ribosylation using Activated Ion Electron Transfer Dissociation (AI-ETD)

### Description
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a post-translational modification that plays pivotal roles in a wide range of cellular processes. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis of ADPr under physiological conditions, without relying on genetic or chemical perturbation, has been hindered by technical limitations. Here, we describe the applicability of activated ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD) for MS-based proteomics analysis of physiological ADPr using our unbiased Af1521 enrichment strategy. To benchmark AI-ETD, we profile 9,000 ADPr peptides mapping to >5,000 unique ADPr sites from a limited number of cells exposed to oxidative stress and identify 120% and 28% more ADPr peptides compared to contemporary strategies using ETD and electron-transfer higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD), respectively. Under physiological conditions, AI-ETD identifies 450 ADPr sites on low-abundant proteins, including in vivo cysteine modifications on poly(ADP-ribosyl)polymerase (PARP) 8 and tyrosine modifications on PARP14, hinting at specialist enzymatic functions for these enzymes. Collectively, our data provide insights into the physiological regulation of ADPr.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and a penicillin/streptomycin mixture (100 U/mL). For evaluation and benchmarking experiments, ADP-ribosylation was induced in HeLa by treatment of the cells with 1 mM H2O2 (Sigma Aldrich) for 10 min in PBS at 37°C. Five cell culture replicates were prepared, each corresponding to approximately 100 million HeLa cells, of which one was used for evaluation (where it was measured as four technical replicates), and four for benchmarking. For physiological experiments, cells were left untreated, and four cell culture replicates were prepared, each corresponding to approximately 100 million HeLa cells. For all experiments, cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS, lysed in 6 M guanidine buffer, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin. ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched using the Af1521 macrodomain. For evaluation and physiological experiments, samples were purified and eluted as single-shot using low-pH StageTips. For benchmarking experiments, samples were high-pH fractionated on StageTip.  All MS samples were analyzed using a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) modified for AI-ETD, coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). For AI-ETD implementation, a Firestar T-100 Synrad 60 Watt (W) CO2 continuous wave laser (Mukilteo, WA, USA) was mounted at the back of the instrument. The IR photon beam was guided into the traps using focusing lenses and a multi-mode hollow-core fiber (Opto-Knowledge Systems, Torrance, CA, USA) prior to a zinc selenide window that was placed in the vacuum manifold. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a 30-cm long analytical column, with an internal diameter of 1.7 μm, packed in-house as described previously 49 using 130 Å pore size Bridged Ethylene Hybrid C18 particles (Waters, Milford, USA). The analytical column was heated to 50 °C using an in-house made column oven. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The primary gradient ranged from 3% buffer B to 24% buffer B over 50 minutes, preceded by sample loading time (5 minutes for evaluation experiments, 20 minutes for benchmarking and physiological experiments), and followed by a 20 minute washing block. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2.25 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C, and RF level to 30%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using either electron transfer dissociation (ETD), electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD) at an NCE of 20, or activated-ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD); all using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters 50. The laser powers were the percentage of power (W) from the Firestar T-100 Synrad 60-W CO2, continuous wave laser. For AI-ETD evaluation, laser power settings of 10% (6 W), 15% (9 W), 20% (12 W), 25% (15 W), and 30% (18 W) were used, and for benchmarking and physiological experiments a laser power setting of 20% was used. Precursors with charge state 2-5 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, and prioritized from charge 3 (highest), to 4, to 5, to 2 (lowest), using the decision tree algorithm. For benchmarking and physiological experiments, only precursors with charge state 3-5 were isolated. Precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion time of 75 seconds for evaluation experiments, and 90 seconds for benchmarking and physiological experiments, with an exclusion mass tolerance of 10 ppm. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with 5 data-dependent MS/MS scans per full MS scan, a maximum precursor injection time of 120 ms, and a scan resolution of 60,000. First mass for MS/MS scans was set to 100 for ETD and EThcD measurements, and variable for AI-ETD measurements, with the first mass defining the laser power applied. MS/MS first masses for AI-ETD were 141, 131, 142, 132, and 143, corresponding to application of laser powers 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 30%, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the mass spectrometry raw data was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). MaxQuant default settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. Two separate computational searches were performed, one for evaluation and physiological data (“eval_phys”), and the other for benchmarking data (“benchmarking”). For generation of the theoretical spectral library, a HUMAN.fasta database was extracted from UniProt on the 24th of May, 2019. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on all amino acid residues known to potentially be modified (C, D, E, H, K, R, S, T, and Y), were included as variable modifications. For analysis of trypsin samples, up to 6 missed cleavages were allowed. For analysis of Lys-C samples, up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed. A maximum allowance of 4 variable modifications per peptide was used. Second peptide search was enabled (default), and matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 42 seconds and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Mass tolerance for precursors was set to 20 ppm in the first MS/MS search and 4.5 ppm in the main MS/MS search after mass recalibration. For fragment ion masses, a tolerance of 20 ppm was used. Modified peptides were filtered to have an Andromeda score of >40 (default), and a delta score of >20. Data was automatically filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match, the protein assignment, and the site-specific levels.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a post-translational modification that plays pivotal roles in a wide range of cellular processes. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis of ADPr under physiological conditions, without relying on genetic or chemical perturbation, has been hindered by technical limitations. Here, we describe the applicability of activated ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD) for MS-based proteomics analysis of physiological ADPr using our unbiased Af1521 enrichment strategy. To benchmark AI-ETD, we profile 9,000 ADPr peptides mapping to &gt;5,000 unique ADPr sites from a limited number of cells exposed to oxidative stress and identify 120% and 28% more ADPr peptides compared to contemporary strategies using ETD and electron-transfer higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD), respectively. Under physiological conditions, AI-ETD identifies 450 ADPr sites on low-abundant proteins, including in&#xa0;vivo cysteine modifications on poly(ADP-ribosyl)polymerase (PARP) 8 and tyrosine modifications on PARP14, hinting at specialist enzymatic functions for these enzymes. Collectively, our data provide insights into the physiological regulation of ADPr.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Adp-ribosylation, Ptm, Ai-etd, Adpr, Parp, Activated ion electron transfer dissociation

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Sara Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


