### Accession
PXD046012

### Title
SSSMuG: Same Sample Sequential Multi-Glycomics

### Description
The mammalian glycome is structurally complex and diverse, composed of many glycan classes such as N- and O-linked glycans, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), glycosphingolipids (GSLs) and other distinct glycan features such as polysialic acids (PolySia), sulfation and proteoglycan attachment stubs. Various methods are used to analyse these different components of the glycome, but they require pre-fractionated/partitioned samples to target each glycan class individually. To address this need for a knowledge of the relationship between the different glycan components of a biological system, we have developed a sequential release workflow for analysis of multiple conjugated glycan classes (PolySia, GAGs, GSL glycans, N-glycans O-glycans) from the same tissue lysate, termed SSSMuG: Same Sample Sequential Multi-Glycomics. With this sequential glycan release approach, five glycan classes were characterized (or four glycan classes plus proteomics) from a single sample using enzymatic or chemical release from the same spot immobilized on a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. The various released glycan classes were then analysed by HPLC and/or MS techniques. Compared to single glycan class release approaches, SSSMuG is able to identify more glycans and more proteins with higher intensity analytical peaks and provides a better comparative normalisation of the different glycan classes of the complex glycome.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse brain lysates were reduced, alkylated and immobilised on PVDF membrane. Multiple glycoconjugates were sequentially released using various types of enzymatic treatment. After N-glycan release, peptides were then released by trypsin, extracted and cleaned for LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched against the UniProt mouse proteome (containing 17, 167 reviewed proteins, downloaded July 2023) and a reverse decoy database using the MaxQuant 14 (ver 2.0.3.0) Andromeda 15 peptide search engine. Up to two trypsin missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids.  The following were included in the search criteria: oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation (N) were considered variable modifications, while carbamidomethyl (C) was a fixed modification. A peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected, and label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using a minimum ratio count of 2. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian glycome is structurally complex and diverse, composed of many glycan classes such as N- and O-linked glycans, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), glycosphingolipids (GSLs), and other distinct glycan features such as polysialic acids (PolySia), sulfation, and proteoglycan attachment stubs. Various methods are used to analyze these different components of the glycome, but they require prefractionated/partitioned samples to target each glycan class individually. To address this need for a knowledge of the relationship between the different glycan components of a biological system, we developed a sequential release workflow for analysis of multiple conjugated glycan classes (PolySia, GAGs, GSL glycans, N-glycans, and O-glycans) from the same tissue lysate, termed SSSMuG&#x2500;Same Sample Sequential Multi-Glycomics. With this sequential glycan release approach, five glycan classes were characterized (or four glycan classes plus proteomics) using enzymatic or chemical release from a single sample immobilized on a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. The various released glycan classes were then analyzed by HPLC and MS techniques using commonly available analytical setups. Compared to single glycan class release approaches, SSSMuG was able to identify more glycans and more proteins with higher-intensity analytical peaks and provide a better comparative normalization of the different glycan classes of the complex glycome. To this end, the SSSMuG technology workflow will be a foundation for a paradigm shift in the field, transforming glycoanalytics and facilitating the push toward multiglycomics and systems glycobiology.

### Keywords
Brain, Glycome, Proteomics, Multi-glycomics, Glycoconjugate, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, School of Natural Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.

### Submitter
Edward Moh

### Lab Head
Dr Nicki Packer
ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, School of Natural Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, North Ryde, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.


