### Accession
PXD028986

### Title
Proteomic analysis of oil palm's response to red palm weevil infestation

### Description
Oil palm leaves were analysed via proteomics approach to identify the differentially-expressed proteins under Red Palm Weevil infestation on the first, third and sixth week post-infestation. The comparison was made among three groups; the control (C), physical wounding by drilling (wounded,W) and the red palm weevil larva infestation (Infested, I)

### Sample Protocol
Leaves proteins were extracted via TCA/acetone with Tris extraction buffer according to Hassan et al. (2014) (refer: Palm research 26 (1) (march 2014) Journal of Oil Palm Research Vol. 26 (1) March 2014 p. 54- 61)

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.6). The parameters were kept according to the MaxQuant documentation for label-free quantification (Refer http://coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:manual:beginner)

### Publication Abstract
The red palm weevil (RPW; <i>Rhynchophorus ferrugineus</i> Olivier (Coleoptera Curculionidae)) is an invasive insect pest that is difficult to manage due to its nature of infesting the host palm trees from within. A holistic, molecular-based approach to identify proteins that correlate with RPW infestation could give useful insights into the vital processes that are prevalent to the host's infestation response and identify the potential biomarkers for an early detection technique. Here, a shotgun proteomic analysis was performed on oil palm (<i>Elaeis guineensis</i>; OP) under untreated (control), wounding by drilling (wounded), and artificial larval infestation (infested) conditions at three different time points to characterise the RPW infestation response at three different stages. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis revealed many overlapping pathways between the control, wounded, and infested groups. Further analysis via literature searches narrowed down biologically relevant proteins into categories, which were photosynthesis, growth, and stress response. Overall, the patterns of protein expression suggested abscisic acid (ABA) hormone signalling to be the primary driver of insect herbivory response. Interspecies molecular docking analysis between RPW ligands and OP receptor proteins provided putative interactions that result in ABA signalling activation. Seven proteins were selected as candidate biomarkers for early infestation detection based on their relevance and association with ABA signalling. The MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028986. This study provided a deeper insight into the mechanism of stress response in OP in order to develop a novel detection method or improve crop management.

### Keywords
Elaeis guineensis; rhynchophorus ferrugineus; plant-insect interactions; insect herbivory response

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)

### Submitter
Nazmi Harith Fadzilah

### Lab Head
Dr Maizom Hassan
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)


