### Accession
PXD036341

### Title
Trib3 modulates PPAR-mediated growth inhibition by interfering with the MLL complex in breast cancer cells

### Description
Dysregulation of pathways due to mutations on oncogenes or tumor suppressors that leads to aberrant expression or activity of proteins is the most well understood mechanism that drives cancer initiation and progression. TRIB3, a member of the Tribbles family of pseudokinases, is often found dysregulated in cancer and has been associated with breast cancer initiation and metastasis formation. However, the underlying mechanisms by which TRIB3 contributes to these events are far from being understood. In contrast PPAR, a well-known transcription factor that belongs to the superfamily of nuclear receptors, has gained attention in recent years as drug target in breast cancer. PPAR possess anti-proliferative abilities and inducing its expression has been shown beneficial in different cancer models. In this study, we demonstrated that TRIB3 regulates PPAR expression in breast cancer cells and that TRIB3 interacts with the WRAD complex in these cells. We showed that TRIB3 expression influence H3K4me3 levels genome wide and specifically at the PPARG locus. All in all, our study situates TRIB3 as a new epigenetic regulator and represents a new line of research for the Tribbles scientific community, opening the door for future targeted therapeutic interventions for breast cancer patients

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, MCF7 Trib3-KD cells or scramble control cells were cultured in high-glucose (10% dialyzed FBS (BioWest)) DMEM (Thermo) lacking lysine and arginine supplemented with Lys-0/Arg-0 or Lys-8/Arg-10 (Silantes). Cells were lysed in 8 M Urea, 1M Ammonium-BiCarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 40mM 2-chloro-acetamide supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche, complete EDTA-free) and 1% (v/v) phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma, Cat. No. P5726 and Cat. No. P0044). After ultra-sonication, Heavy and light cell lysates were mixed 1:1 and proteins (20mg total) were over-night in solution digested with trypsin (1:50) (Worthington). Peptides were desalted using SepPack columns (Waters) and eluted in 80% acetonitrile (ACN). To enrich for phospho-peptides, 200 mg Calcium Titanium Oxide (CaTiO3) powder (Alfa Aesar, 325 mesh) was equilibrated 3 times with binding solution (6% Acetic acid in 50% ACN pH=1 with HCl) after which the phospho-peptides were allowed to bind at 40 ˚C for 10 minutes on a shaker. After 6 times centrifugation and washing, phospho-peptides were eluted twice with 200µl 5% NH3. The peptides were dried using a SpeedVac and the dissolved in buffer A (0.1% FA) before loading on in-house made C18 stage-tips and divided with high PH elution into three fractions (100mM NH3/FA PH=10 in 5%, 10% or 50% ACN).  LC-MS/MS analysis After elution from the stage tips, acetonitrile was removed using a SpeedVac and the remaining peptide solution was diluted with buffer A (0.1% FA) before loading. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using a 140  minute gradient (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1400 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240K. The most intense ions (intensity threshold of 10000 ions, charge state 2-7) were isolated by the quadrupole with a 0.4 Da window and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 35 milliseconds. Dynamic exclusion of 10 ppm was set on 30 seconds, including isotopes.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with phosphorylation of serine threonine and tyrosine as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. The Human protein database of Uniprot (Jan. 2019) was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The SILAC quantification algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes). Peptides were filtered for reverse hits and standard contaminants. Forward and Reverse ratios were plotted in R (www.r-project.org).

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant expression or activity of proteins are amongst the best understood mechanisms that can drive cancer initiation and progression, as well as therapy resistance. TRIB3, a member of the Tribbles family of pseudokinases, is often dysregulated in cancer and has been associated with breast cancer initiation and metastasis formation. However, the underlying mechanisms by which TRIB3 contributes to these events are unclear. In this study, we demonstrate that TRIB3 regulates the expression of PPAR&#x3b3;, a transcription factor that has gained attention as a potential drug target in breast cancer for its antiproliferative actions. Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses together with classical biochemical assays indicate that TRIB3 interferes with the MLL complex and reduces MLL-mediated H3K4 trimethylation of the <i>PPARG</i> locus, thereby reducing PPAR&#x3b3; mRNA expression. Consequently, the overexpression of TRIB3 blunts the antiproliferative effect of PPAR&#x3b3; ligands in breast cancer cells, while reduced TRIB3 expression gives the opposite effect. In conclusion, our data implicate TRIB3 in epigenetic gene regulation and suggest that expression levels of this pseudokinase may serve as a predictor of successful experimental treatments with PPAR&#x3b3; ligands in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Trib3, Ppar, Mll complex, Breast cancer cells

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Kalkhoven
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.


