### Accession
PXD024640

### Title
BS3 intermolecular crosslinking map of SAGA and SLIK (SAGA-like) transcription coactivators

### Description
The SAGA-like complex SLIK is a modified version of the Spt-Ada-Gcn5-Acetyltransferase (SAGA) complex. SLIK is formed through C-terminal truncation of the Spt7 SAGA subunit, causing loss of Spt8 that interacts with the TATA-binding protein. SLIK and SAGA are both coactivators of RNA polymerase II transcription in yeast. In addition, both SAGA and SLIK perform chromatin modifications and the two complexes have been speculated to uniquely contribute to transcription regulation. To test the respective contribution of SAGA vs. SLIK in transcription regulation, we assayed the chromatin modifying functions of SAGA vs. SLIK, revealing identical kinetics on minimal substrates in vitro. Furthermore, we determined a low-resolution cryo-EM structure of SLIK, revealing a modular architecture identical to SAGA. Finally, we performed a comprehensive study of DNA-binding properties of both coactivators. Purified SAGA and SLIK both associate with ssDNA and dsDNA with high affinity (KD = 10-17 nM) and the binding is sequence-independent. In conclusion, our study shows that the cleavage of Spt7 and the absence of Spt8 subunit in SLIK neither drive any major conformational differences in its structure compared to SAGA, nor significantly affect HAT, DUB or DNA binding activities in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
150 μg of freshly purified SAGA/SLIK complex was buffer exchanged into assay buffer (200 mM K2SO4, 50 mM HEPES pH 6.8/7.6, 2 mM MgSO4, 10 μM ZnSO4, 3 mM DTT), on a PD MiniTrap G-25 column (GE Healthcare) as per standard manufacturer’s protocol and split into two 1.5 mL LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) with a total volume of 100 μL each. 2 mg of bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) crosslinker (Thermo Scientific) was dissolved in the assay buffer to a final concentration of 100 mM. 20,000x molar excess of BS3 was added and the samples were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Controls were prepared with the assay buffer in place of the crosslinker. The reaction was quenched with 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. 0.8 M Urea was added to promote protein unfolding. Protein samples were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific) for 45 min at 55oC and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were digested with trypsin (1:10 (w/w) ratio) (Promega) at 37oC, 600x rpm overnight. Digestion was stopped with 1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich) and purified by zip tipping using OMIX C18 100 μL pipette tips (Agilent). The tip was rehydrated with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (Buffer B) and equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A). The samples were bound to the resin bed of the tip by repeated pipetting up and down 10-15x in the sample vial. The tip was washed three times with Buffer A. Purified peptides were eluted with Buffer B into a new 1.5 mL LoBind tube (Eppendorf). Samples were vacuum concentrated to ~ 5 μL in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), and reconstituted in 20 μL of Buffer A.

### Data Protocol
Both crosslinked and control samples were analysed on a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). In detail, peptides were immobilised on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) trap column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) analytical column by increasing concentrations of 80% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 250 nl/min for 90 min. All samples were analysed with pLink2 (v2.3.9) using a custom database containing the protein sequences of SAGA or SLIK components in addition to common contaminant sequences (312 database entries). Trypsin/P was selected as protease, up to three missed cleavages were permitted and precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues has been selected as fixed modification, whilst oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini have been selected as variable modifications. Only speptides falling below an e-value cut-off of 0.01 were considered for further analysis, and cross-linked peptides were plotted using xVis.

### Publication Abstract
The SAGA-like complex SLIK is a modified version of the Spt-Ada-Gcn5-Acetyltransferase (SAGA) complex. SLIK is formed through C-terminal truncation of the Spt7 SAGA subunit, causing loss of Spt8, one of the subunits that interacts with the TATA-binding protein (TBP). SLIK and SAGA are both coactivators of RNA polymerase II transcription in yeast, and both SAGA and SLIK perform chromatin modifications. The two complexes have been speculated to uniquely contribute to transcriptional regulation, but their respective contributions are not clear. To investigate, we assayed the chromatin modifying functions of SAGA and SLIK, revealing identical kinetics on minimal substrates in&#xa0;vitro. We also examined the binding of SAGA and SLIK to TBP and concluded that interestingly, both protein complexes have similar affinity for TBP. Additionally, despite the loss of Spt8 and C-terminus of Spt7 in SLIK, TBP prebound to SLIK is not released in the presence of TATA-box DNA, just like TBP prebound to SAGA. Furthermore, we determined a low-resolution cryo-EM structure of SLIK, revealing a modular architecture identical to SAGA. Finally, we performed a comprehensive study of DNA-binding properties of both coactivators. Purified SAGA and SLIK both associate with ssDNA and dsDNA with high affinity (K<sub>D</sub>&#xa0;= 10-17&#xa0;nM), and the binding is sequence-independent. In conclusion, our study shows that the cleavage of Spt7 and the absence of the Spt8 subunit in SLIK neither drive any major conformational differences in its structure compared with SAGA, nor significantly affect HAT, DUB, or DNA-binding activities in&#xa0;vitro.

### Keywords
Histone deubiquitination, Histone acetylation, Transcriptional coactivator, Cryo-electron microscopy, Dna-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800, Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Marion Boudes
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800, Australia


