### Accession
PXD035072

### Title
Human spinal cord injury plasma LC-MSMS

### Description
The primary aim of this work was to investigage the proteomic differences across spinal cord injury (SCI) patients who experience significant functional recovery relative to those who do not, to both better understand the pathophysiology and to identify potentially useful biomarkers of recovery. Blood samples were taken, following informed consent, from ASIA impairment scale (AIS) grade C "Improvers" (AIS grade improvement) (n=10 & n=9) and "Non-Improvers" (No AIS change) (n=7 & n=6), and AIS grade A (n=11 & n= 9) and D (n=11 & n=10) at <2 weeks ("Acute") and approx. 3 months ("Sub-acute") post-injury for a total of 73 samples.  The samples were treated with ProteoMiner™ beads. Data dependent label-free LC-MSMS was used to characterise the proteome of the samples.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC-MC/MC via a 2-h gradient on a NanoAcquity™ ultraperformance LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) connected to a Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo-Fisher Scientific Hemel Hempstead, UK).  The Q-Exactive was operated in a data dependent positive electrospray ionisation mode, automatically switching between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (*m/z* 300--2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (*m/z* 200) following accumulation of ions to 1 x 10^6 target value based on the predictive automatic gain control values from the previous full scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s, the 10 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD), with a fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. The following mass spectrometric conditions were used: spray voltage, 1.9kV, no sheath or axillary gas flow; normalised HCD collision energy 30%; heated capillary temperature, 250°C. MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 10^4 count and 2Da isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
For quantification, the raw spectra files were analysed via OpenMS (version 2.6.0). The files were first converted from the proprietary .Raw format to the open .mzML standard with the `FileConverter` tool via the open-source `ThermoRawFileParser`. Unless otherwise stated, default arguments were used throughout.  The decoy database generated in the prior section (iTRAQ OpenMS analysis) was also re-used. The `CometAdapter` was used to run the search. Fixed modifications were set to "Carbamidomethyl (C)" and "Oxidation (M)" was set as a variable modification. To reflect the instrument the following flags were also set: `-precursor_mass_tolerance 20 -isotope_error 0/1`.  To annotate the identified peptides with proteins the `PeptideIndexer` tool was used. `PeptideIndexer` and `PSMFeatureExtractor` were used for annotation. For peptide level score estimation and filtering `PercolatorAdapter` was used with the following flags: `-score_type q-value -enzyme trypsin`. `IDFilter` was used to filter to a peptide score of 0.01 with `-score:pep 0.01` followed by `IDScoreSwitcher` with the following flags: `-new_score "MS:1001493" -new_score_orientation lower_better -new_score_type "pep" -old_score "q-value"`. The `ProteomicsLFQ` was used for subsequent processing with the flags: `-proteinFDR 0.05 -targeted_only true`. The `-out_msstats` flag was also used to produce quantitative data for downstream statistical analysis with the R package `MSstats`.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-msms, Spinal cord injury

### Affiliations
Keele University
Cardiff University

### Submitter
Mateus Harrington

### Lab Head
Dr Karina Wright
Keele University


