### Accession
PXD047027

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of Toxoplasma gondii succinate dehydrogenase complex

### Description
The apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii has a divergent mitochondrial electron transport chain (mETC). Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), the second complex in the mETC and an enzyme in the TCA cycle, has 4 subunits in common model organisms, but Toxoplasma has a 9 subunit SDH complex. We performed immunoprecipitation of SDH, via an HA epitope tagged SDHB subunit, and the unrelated Complex III and analysed the elution via LFQ mass spectrometry, to confirm the composition of the divergent Toxoplasma gondii SDH complex.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing: Immunoprecipitation samples were resolved for 2 cm via SDS-PAGE using a 4-12% gel. After staining with Quick Coomassie Stain (Generon) the 2 cm lanes were excised and diced. The gel pieces were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) before being subjected to in-gel digestion using 1 mg/ml Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) at a final concentration of 12.5 µg/ml. Digested peptides were then dried down using vacuum centrifugation and resuspended to 50 µl with 1% formic acid (Fisher Chemical). LC-MS analysis: LC-MS analysis was performed by the FingerPrints Proteomics Facility (University of Dundee). Analysis of peptide readout was performed on a Q Exactive plus, Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used are the following:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Reconstituted samples, in formic acid, were loaded in aliquots of 15 µl at 10µL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) which was equilibrated with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid. The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å) which was equilibrated in 2% buffer B for 17 min. The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 2% buffer B to 5% buffer B in 3min, 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 64 min, and then from 35% buffer B to 98% buffer B in 2 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50oC. Q-exactive plus was operated in data dependent positive ionization mode. The source voltage was set to 3.0 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 350-1600, ion injection time of 20 ms, resolution 70 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) 1x106) acquired in profile mode, followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (resolution 17500) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC 2 x 103, maximum ion injection time 100 ms, isolation window of 1.4 m/z, fixed first mass of 100 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 2 x 104, exclusion of unassigned, singly and >5 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 45s). The HCD collision energy was set to 27% of the normalized collision energy.  Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free analysis was performed in MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 using the RAW files generated with data manipulation in Microsoft Excel Office 365 to provide comparisons between control and treated samples. Peptides were searched against the Toxoplasma gondii GT1 proteome and mitochondrial proteins CYTB COXI COXIII.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial electron transport chain (mETC) is a series of membrane embedded enzymatic complexes critical for energy conversion and mitochondrial metabolism. In commonly studied eukaryotes, including humans and animals, complex II, also known as succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), is an essential four-subunit enzyme that acts as an entry point to the mETC, by harvesting electrons from the TCA cycle. Apicomplexa are pathogenic parasites with significant impact on human and animal health. The phylum includes Toxoplasma gondii which can cause fatal infections in immunocompromised people. Most apicomplexans, including Toxoplasma, rely on their mETC for survival, yet SDH remains largely understudied. Previous studies pointed to a divergent apicomplexan SDH with nine subunits proposed for the Toxoplasma complex, compared to four in humans. While two of the nine are homologs of the well-studied SDHA and B, the other seven have no homologs in SDHs of other systems. Moreover, SDHC and D, that anchor SDH to the membrane and participate in substrate bindings, have no homologs in Apicomplexa. Here, we validated five of the seven proposed subunits as bona fide SDH components and demonstrated their importance for SDH assembly and activity. We further find that all five subunits are important for parasite growth, and that disruption of SDH impairs mitochondrial respiration and results in spontaneous initiation of differentiation into bradyzoites. Finally, we provide evidence that the five subunits are membrane bound, consistent with their potential role in membrane anchoring, and we demonstrate that a DY motif in one of them, SDH10, is essential for complex formation and function. Our study confirms the divergent composition of Toxoplasma SDH compared to human, and starts exploring the role of the lineage-specific subunits in SDH function, paving the way for future mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Succinate dehydrogenase, Immunoprecipitation, Toxoplasma gondii

### Affiliations
School of Infection and Immunity,MVLS, University of Glasgow
University of Glasgow

### Submitter
Andree Maclean

### Lab Head
Dr Lilach Sheiner
School of Infection and Immunity,MVLS, University of Glasgow


