### Accession
PXD027102

### Title
Insight into fermented and non-fermented Spirulina water and ethanol extract antioxidant activity at a proteome level on a yeast cell model

### Description
The aim of this study was to explore the antioxidative activity of fermented and non-fermented Spirulina extracts at the proteome level using yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of yeast cell lysates The treated yeast culture broths were centrifuged (4000 rpm, 3 min). The super-natant was removed, and the residual pellet washed twice with 50 mM PBS and then frozen at –80 °C until extraction. ABC/urea buffer (300 μL) was added to the thawed yeast cell pellets. Extraction was performed using three successive freeze-thaw cycles followed by two cycles of homogenization using zirconia/silica beads. The supernatant was then obtained by centrifugation (15 000 g, 4 °C, 30 min).  Protein concentration in extracts was determined according to the method of Bradford.  Protein digestion to peptides for LC-MS Dithiothreitol was used for reducing protein samples (20 mM, 45 min) and iodoacetamide for alkylation (40 mM, 45 min). Alkylation was performed in the darkness and terminated by DDT (20 mM, 45 min). Protein digestion in thermoshaker followed (2 h, 37 °C, 750 rpm) with a freshly prepared enzyme mixture of Trypsin/Lys-C. The enzyme mixture was added to the protein solution in a ratio of 1:25. After, the lysate was diluted with ABC buffer (50 mM) to reach a Urea concentration of 1 M and further digested (overnight, 37°C, 750 rpm). Formic acid was added at a final concentration of 1% to terminate the digestion.  LC-MS analysis Peptide separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation UHPLC system. The analytical column was a PepSep C18 (1.9 μm, 120 Å, ID 75 μm * 150 mm). Samples were desalted using an online C18 trap-ping column. Elution was carried out using a linear gradient from 5 % to 35 % ACN with 0.1 FA in 90 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. The UHPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer from Thermo Scientific was used for analysis. Data dependent acquisition was as follows: full MS scan from 250 to 1250 m/z at a resolution of 120000. MS/MS scans of the top 15 most intense ions were followed at a resolution of 15000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data analysis Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.2 was used for protein identification and quantification through analysis of the data dependent acquisition spectra. The search engine Sequest was used in the PD software with the SwissProt database (SwissProt TaxID: 4932, Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)). The following settings were used for the database search: trypsin as the enzyme, a maximum of 2 cleavages missed, 6 was the minimum peptide length, 10 ppm was the precursor mass tolerance, 0,02 Da was the fragment mass tolerance, modifications of methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were dynamic, and modification of cysteine carbamidometh-ylation was static.  Default Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) settings in PD were used for protein quan-titation. Briefly, peptide precursor intensities were used for peptide abundances, whereas the total peptide amount was used for normalization. For hypothesis testing, we used background based ANOVA. The calculations of protein ratios were based on pairwise peptide ratios, and the protein differential abundancy is expressed in log2 fold change.  Bioinformatic analysis of data Principal component analysis (PCA) and Volcano plot were prepared in Proteome Discoverer software using proteins (abundance) identified by PD with high confidence (FDR < 5 %). The UniProtKB database (https://www.uniprot.org/) was used to investigate the role of the proteins. Functional annotation analysis was performed using DA-VID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and QuickGO (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/) soft-ware and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) to integrate the GO categories (Biological Process, Molecular Function, Cellular Component).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Spirulina</i> is rich in various antioxidants and nutraceuticals and it has proven to be effective in the treatment of various pathological conditions. This study explores the antioxidant effect of fermented and non-fermented <i>Spirulina</i> extracts on the proteome level using the yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> as a model organism. Yeast cells were treated with fermented <i>Spirulina</i> water extract (SV), non-fermented <i>Spirulina</i> water extract (NFV), fermented <i>Spirulina</i> ethanol extract (SE), and non-fermented <i>Spirulina</i> ethanol extract (NFE). Cell lysates were prepared, and label-free quantitative proteome analysis was performed. In SV, when compared to NFV samples, the levels of most differentially expressed proteins were upregulated. Alternatively, SE compared to NFE samples showed a significant downregulation for the majority of the analyzed proteins involved in different cellular processes. Additionally, a higher downregulation of stress response related proteins was observed in SE compared to NFE samples, while their abundance in SV samples increased compared to NFV. This study provided a global view, on a proteome level, of how cells cope with exogenous antioxidants and remodel their cellular processes to maintain metabolic and redox balance. Furthermore, it combined for the first time the analysis of different extract effect, including the contribution of lactic acid fermentation to the cell activity.

### Keywords
Spirulina; lactic acid fermentation; saccharomyces cerevisiae; ethanol; proteome; antioxidant; stress response

### Affiliations
Maastricht University
Maastricht University Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging Institute devision of Imaging Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Ronny Mohren

### Lab Head
Dr Ron Heeren
Maastricht University Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging Institute devision of Imaging Mass Spectrometry


