### Accession
PXD025111

### Title
B cell receptor-induced protein dynamics and the emerging role of SUMOylation revealed by proximity proteomics

### Description
In this study, we used proximity labelling technique (APEX2) to study early protein dynamics in the vicinity of B cell receptor upon antigen engagement.

### Sample Protocol
A20 B cells stably expressing raft-APEX2 were activated with potent surrogate antigen, F(ab’)2 fragments of anti-IgM antibodies for 0, 5, 10 or 15 min. Cells were supplemented with biotin-phenol and biotinylation was then triggered by addition of 1 mM H2O2. Biotinylation was then quenched with addition of Trolox after 1 min. Cells were lysed and subjected to streptavidin affinity purification to pull down the biotinylated proteins for LC-MS/MS analysis. To control for both baseline activity of the APEX2 and endogenous biotinylation, samples without H2O2 or without biotin-phenol were prepared, respectively. All conditions were performed in triplicates. Trypsin-digested samples were analyzed with a high resolution LC-MS/MS (Lumos, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Trypsin-digested samples subjected to LC-MS/MS using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific).Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Successful B cell activation, which is critical for high-affinity antibody production, is controlled by the B cell antigen receptor (BCR). However, we still lack a comprehensive protein-level view of the very dynamic multi-branched cellular events triggered by antigen binding. Here, we employed APEX2 proximity biotinylation to study antigen-induced changes, 5-15&#x2005;min after receptor activation, at the vicinity of the plasma membrane lipid rafts, wherein BCR enriches upon activation. The data reveals dynamics of signaling proteins, as well as various players linked to the subsequent processes, such as actin cytoskeleton remodeling and endocytosis. Interestingly, our differential expression analysis identified dynamic responses in various proteins previously not linked to early B cell activation. We demonstrate active SUMOylation at the sites of BCR activation in various conditions and report its functional role in BCR signaling through the AKT and ERK1/2 axes.

### Keywords
Bcr, Immunology, Golga3, Antigen receptor, Apex2, Lipid rafts, B cells, Receptor signalling, Vti1b, Proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Institute of Biomedicine and MediCity Research Laboratories, University of Turku, Turku, Finland  Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Luqman Awoniyi

### Lab Head
Dr Pieta K. Mattila
Institute of Biomedicine and MediCity Research Laboratories, University of Turku, Turku, Finland  Turku Bioscience, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


