### Accession
PXD028252

### Title
Global phosphoproteomics elicited by the SCF/KIT axis in human skin mast cells unveil capicua as a potent KIT repressor

### Description
Global phosphoproteomics can reveal signaling cascades in unprecedented detail. The SCF/KIT axis represents a vital hematopoietic receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) system with gain-of-function mutations prompting the development of mastocytosis and leukemia. Here, we employed a label-free phosphoproteomics profiling strategy to provide the first comprehensive portrayal of SCF-triggered phosphosignaling. Employing untransformed skin-derived mast cells expressing vast amounts of KIT, we uncover around 10,500 class-I-phosphosites following ligand-induced KIT dimerization. Apart from STAT5, the MEK/ERK cascade (including upstream and downstream events) stood out as highly stimulatable by SCF compared to less impacted PI3K/Akt>p38>JNK, a pattern validated by time-resolved immunoblotting. Direct comparison between MEK/ERKÕs and PI3KÕs support of basic programs (anti-apoptosis, cell cycle progression) revealed equipotency with substantial redundancy between the modules. In functional outputs, ERK showed dominance over PI3K regarding cytokine stimulation (TNF-a, IL-8, LIF, OSM) and was the only contributor in the induction of immediate early genes (Fos, JunB, Egr1). Our proteome-wide screen also found Å1,000 phosphosites currently undescribed in databases, pertaining to multiple protein classes. Among candidates, capicua (and components of its network) experienced massive phosphorylation by SCF. Perturbation with capicua by RNA interference unveiled its function as a potent KIT repressor, whose deregulation may contribute to the development of mastocytosis. We demonstrate the utility of an unbiased approach to uncover single protein entities and entire networks activated by RTKs, that can be surveyed experimentally. This rich resource enhances our understanding of RTK-elicited signaling networks and can serve as a benchmark to identify pathological processes, e.g. under circumstances of KIT deregulation.

### Sample Protocol
Human mast cells were isolated from human foreskin tissue. Total rotein was extracted and digested with LysC and Trypsin. Phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC protocol  Peptide separation was done on a 20 cm reversed-phase column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ; 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a 200 min gradient with a 250 nL/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Berlin, Germany). Peptides were measured on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode with a 60K resolution, 3 x 106 ion count target and maximum injection time of 10 ms for the full scan, followed by TOP 20 MS2 scans with 15K resolution and 1 x 105 ion count target. Maximum injection time for phosphopeptide samples was 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (v1.6.2.6).7 The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2019-07, with isoform annotations) containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q), phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide, protein and site identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the “Match between runs” option. The integrated LFQ quantitation algorithm was applied. ProteinGroups and Phospho(STY)Site text files were used for further analyses. Entries were filtered to exclude reverse database hits, and potential contaminants. Statistical data analysis was performed using Perseus software (v1.6.2.1). Technical replicates for each condition were defined as groups. For phosphosite quantitation intensity values from Phospho(STY)Site output file were used, filtered for a minimum of 2 values in at least one group. After log2 transformation missing values were imputed with random noise simulating the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. Differences in phosphosite abundance between groups were calculated using two-sample Student´s t test and significance was defined by a permutation-based FDR cut-off of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
A 13-year biomonitoring survey was carried out on the European eel, Anguilla anguilla for the first time in North Africa (Algeria) where there is a serious lack of information on the species. The study targeted specimens populating the only four sites where the species is both potentially present and legally exploited (Lake Oubeira, Lake Tonga, Mellah lagoon and Mafragh estuary). A total of 1370 individuals were sampled ranging from 17 to 113&#x2009;cm in length, 19 to 2642&#x2009;g in weight and 0.7&#x2009;months to 6.6&#x2009;years old, age being estimated from otolith growth marks. Otolith interpretation and age estimation were generally unambiguous at all four sites. According to the EELREP silvering index, the highest proportion of silver females was captured in fresh water (46% in Lake Oubeira and 25% in Lake Tonga), whereas a third were present in brackish water (Mafragh and Mellah). The sex ratio was in favour of females, and silver males were found to mature early (mean length 40&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1&#x2009;cm, mean weight 123&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;28&#x2009;g and mean age 2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.6&#x2009;years). Growth differed at the four sites, and the growth rate was highest in Lake Oubeira and asymptotic length highest in Mellah lagoon. Metamorphosis from the yellow resident stage to the silver migrating stage occurred very early in the eels' continental life (between 3 and 4&#x2009;years of age). Results highlight rapid growth in these Algerian sites, and earlier silvering than in eels living in European waters, suggesting different life-history traits of A. anguilla in North African waters, influenced by environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Human, Scf, Phosphoproteome, Mast cells

### Affiliations
Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, BIH at Charite, Proteomics Core Facility, Robert-Roessle-Str. 10, 13125 Berlin
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, BIH at Charite, Proteomics Core Facility, Robert-Roessle-Str. 10, 13125 Berlin


