### Accession
PXD038397

### Title
Shotgun analysis of proteins in NDUFA11 KO and WT HEK 293T cells.

### Description
The effect of the depletion of an ETC complex I protein component - NDUFA11 on the proteome in HEK 293T cells was studied. TMT-based relative quantification of protein levels were performed in NDUFA11 KO vs WT cells and in NDUFA11 KO vs WT cells that expressed an EGFP-MAPT (Tau protein) construct. In this dataset relative levels of proteins in total cell extracts and in the soluble fraction (post centrifugation at 125,000 g, at which speed protein aggregates were isolated as pellets) were measured. This dataset is directly related to the dataset PXD031374 (protein aggregates isolated as pellets post centrifugation at 125,000 g).

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples. Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 20 mM KCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1%  Triton X-100 and 2 mM PMSF). After incubation on ice for 30 min (with vortexing every 10 min for 10 sec), samples were shortly centrifuged at a low speed (4°C, 1000 x g, 1 min) to remove cellular debris. The supernatants was collected and the protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay and 100 µg protein per sample processed further. Alternatively, the supernatants collected after the low speed centrifugation was subjected to another, high-speed centrifugation (4°C, 125,000 x g, 1 h), the protein concentration in soluble fractions was determined by Bradford assay and 100 µg protein per sample processed further. Proteins were precipitated with chloroform/methanol, resuspended in 100mM HEPES pH 8.0 containing 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM chloroacetamide, and subjected to overnight digestion at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (1 µg). Next, the samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to the final concentration of 1 % and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 3 min at RT. Tryptic peptides (10 µg per sample) were then desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Disks Bio C18 (Affinisep), TMT-labeled on the solid support, compiled into a single TMT sample (four groups of samples were compiled: NDUFA11 KO – total cell extract in triplicate, WT – total cell extract in triplicate, NDUFA11 KO – soluble fraction after the high speed spin in triplicate,  WT – soluble fraction after the high speed spin in triplicate) and concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator. Peptides in the compiled sample were fractionated (8 fractions) using the bRP fractionation. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the peptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55 °C by applying a 120 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in TMT mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 96 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot Human Reference Proteome (UP000005640) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files corresponding to the measurements of bRP peptide fractions from NDUFA11 KO and WT HEK 293T cells were processed together with raw files corresponding to the measurements of bRP peptide fractions obtained by analogous sample preparation and originated from the same cell lines (NDUFA11 KO and WT HEK 293T) that were additionally transfected with EGFP-tagged MAPT (Tau) expression plasmid (RRID:Addgene_46904) for 72 h in the presence of GeneJuice Transfection Reagent. Quantification in these two datasets was performed independently but peptide identifications were transferred between them due to match between runs function being enabled. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was applied with reporter mass tolerance = 0.003 Da and min. reporter PIF = 0.75. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamination, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
Perturbed cellular protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and mitochondrial dysfunction play an important role in neurodegenerative diseases, however, the interplay between these two phenomena remains unclear. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to a delay in mitochondrial protein import, causing accumulation of non-imported mitochondrial proteins in the cytosol and challenging proteostasis. Cells respond by increasing proteasome activity and molecular chaperones in yeast and C. elegans. Here, we demonstrate that in human cells mitochondrial dysfunction leads to the upregulation of a chaperone HSPB1 and, interestingly, an immunoproteasome-specific subunit PSMB9. Moreover, PSMB9 expression is dependent on the translation elongation factor EEF1A2. These mechanisms constitute a defense response to preserve cellular proteostasis under mitochondrial stress. Our findings define a mode of proteasomal activation through the change in proteasome composition driven by EEF1A2 and its spatial regulation, and are useful to formulate therapies to prevent neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Hek 293t, Etc complex i, Egfp-mapt expression, Ndufa11 ko

### Affiliations
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Agnieszka Chacinska
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


