### Accession
PXD027027

### Title
A prion-like protein from a red-type pyrenoid forms heterotypic Rubisco condensates via sticker tetrads

### Description
The slow kinetics and poor substrate specificity of the key photosynthetic CO2-fixing enzyme Rubisco have prompted the repeated evolution of Rubisco containing compartments known as pyrenoids in diverse algal lineages and carboxysomes in prokaryotes. Inside these compartments actively transported bicarbonate is converted into CO2 gas, which saturates the carboxylase with its substrate. Using co-immunoprecipitation experiments in Phaeodactylum tricornutum we have identified the Rubisco linker protein PYCO1. Similar to the green algal Rubisco linker protein EPYC1, PYCO1 is intrinsically disordered, possesses repeats and is positively charged at physiological pH. However, it possesses no sequence similarity to EPYC1, as expected for convergent evolution of a red Rubisco containing pyrenoid. Fluorescent PYCO1 fusion proteins localize as a rod shaped structure in the diatom chloroplast, consistent with the shape of the pyrenoid defined by transmission electron microscopy. To test the hypothesis that PYCO1 is the diatom pyrenoid scaffold we produced pure protein in Escherichia coli. Recombinant PYCO1 protein undergoes homotypic liquid liquid phase separation in a salt dependent manner. Diatom Rubisco specifically partitions into PYCO1 condensates. Heterotypic PYCO1-Rubisco condensates can bind up to three Rubisco hexadecamers per PYCO1 protein. Rubisco carboxylase function is unaffected in the condensates. PYCO1 is highly mobile in homotypic condensates. In contrast PYCO1 condensates saturated with diatom Rubisco have greatly reduced dynamics, with both PYCO1 and Rubisco becoming immobile. Consistently, FRAP experiments indicate that PYCO1 is not mobile in vivo. A combination of Cryo-electron microscopy and site-directed mutagenesis data show that the KWSP motif found in PYCO1 repeats binds to small subunits at the entrance of the Rubisco hexadecamer’s solvent channel. Analysis of mutant PYCO1 proteins show that both the “KWSP” tryptophan and another repeating tyrosine are essential for homotypic phase separation. We speculate that the unusual material properties of the PYCO1-Rubisco condensate are necessary to support the unusual non-spherical shape of the Phaeodactylum pyrenoid. Careful characterization of multiple diverse Rubisco condensates will strengthen translational approaches aiming to introduce pyrenoids and other metabolic condensates into new host organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of Rubisco: For immunoprecipitation experiments, an affinity purified anti-Pt-Rubisco was raised against the peptide of PtRubisco large subunit, RYESGVIPYAKMC (Singapore Advanced Biologics). Protein A resin (Invitrogen™ Protein A - Sepharose™ 4B) was aliquoted into 1.5 mL eppendorf tubes, and washed twice with Co-IP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 12.5% glycerol) by centrifugation (8,200 x g/1 min/4°C). Next, the resin was incubated with 9.2 µg/mL anti-PtRubisco on a rotator (2 hr/4°C) and washed twice with Co-IP buffer. A blocking step was performed by incubating the resin with 2 mg/mL BSA on the rotator (1 hr/4°C) and washed twice with Co-IP buffer. 50 mL cultures of mid-logarithmic P. tricornutum were lysed with glass beads, 150-212 μm (G1145) in 167 µL Co-IP buffer supplemented with 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM DTT and recovered with 1.5 mL lysis buffer containing 8.3 µM DTT. Recovered lysate was clarified by centrifugation (14,800 rpm/20 min/4°C), to obtain the soluble fraction. Soluble fraction was added to anti-PtN Rubisco bound resin and incubated on a rotator (3 hr/4°C) and washed twice with Co-IP buffer. Protein elution was carried out by adding 2.5x SDS loading buffer and the sample was boiled (95°C/5 min) and centrifuged (17,600 x g/1 min) for analysis by 12.5% SDS-PAGE. To increase the chances of capturing transient interactions, 4 mM of Lomant’s reagent, dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate), DSP (Thermo Scientific™) in Dimethyl Sulfoxide was used(Olson et al., 2010). 50 mL cultures of P. tricornutum was resuspended in 167 µL Co-IP XL buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 12.5% glycerol) and incubated with DSP (30 min/room temperature). Tris-HCl pH 8.0 was added to a final concentration of 50 mM to quench the crosslinking reaction. Cells were harvested and subjected to glass bead lysis to derive the soluble fraction for Co-IP experiments as described above. Prior to the elution step, a DSP cleavage step was included by incubating the samples with 2.5x SDS loading buffer, containing 50 mM DTT (37°C/45 min). Protein elution was performed as described above and samples were analyzed with 12.5% SDS-PAGE. SDS samples were prepared for mass spectrometry by concentrating samples on a 12% separating layer through a homemade blocking SDS gel: consisting of 4% stacking gel, 12% separating gel and 25% blocking gel. After gel electrophoresis, the blocking SDS gel was stained, and the separating layer was cleaved. Proteomic analysis of samples was performed by the NTU-SBS Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Service using LC-MS/MS. In gel digestion: Digestion of the separating layer was performed as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006)with some modifications. Briefly, after in-gel digestion with trypsin, 50 µL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/5% formic acid (FA) was added to the gel pieces and sonicated (Ultrasonic Cleaner DC300; DELTA Taiwan) for 30 min. This extraction procedure was repeated three times, and ∼150 µL of extract was collected. Extracts were pooled and concentrated to dry using an SPD 2010 SpeedVac system (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA). 0.1% FA in HPLC water was added to a final volume of 30 µL for direct LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry: The peptides were separated and analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Separation was performed on a Dionex EASY-Spray 75 μm × 10 cm column packed with PepMap C18 3 μm, 100 Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) at flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 60 min gradient. Peptides were then analyzed on a Q Exactive apparatus with an EASY nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. Raw data files were processed and searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Mascot algorithm was then used for data searching to identify proteins referenced to both P. tricornutum nuclear genome sequence database (Bowler et al., 2008)and SwissProt.Peptide identities matching to other diatom species such as T.pseudonana, Cylindrotheca,O.sinensis were also verifed to be present in P.tricornutum and reassigned to respective P.tricornutum proteins.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data sorting Mass spectrometry data was sorted accordingly to the predicted localization of nuclear encoded P. tricornutum proteins with Signal P4.1 (Petersen et al., 2011)and ASAFind(Gruber et al., 2015). Swissprot database contains a mixture of nuclear and chloroplast encoded proteins from P. tricornutum. To clarify gene locus, Swissprot hits were further referenced by blast to the P. tricornutum EnsemblProtist database(Rastogi et al., 2018). If the protein was nuclear encoded or ambiguous, chloroplast localization was determined as described above.

### Publication Abstract
The slow kinetics and poor substrate specificity of the key photosynthetic CO<sub>2</sub>-fixing enzyme Rubisco have prompted the repeated evolution of Rubisco-containing biomolecular condensates known as pyrenoids in the majority of eukaryotic microalgae. Diatoms dominate marine photosynthesis, but the interactions underlying their pyrenoids are unknown. Here, we identify and characterize the Rubisco linker protein PYCO1 from <i>Phaeodactylum tricornutum</i>. PYCO1 is a tandem repeat protein containing prion-like domains that localizes to the pyrenoid. It undergoes homotypic liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) to form condensates that specifically partition diatom Rubisco. Saturation of PYCO1 condensates with Rubisco greatly reduces the mobility of droplet components. Cryo-electron microscopy and mutagenesis data revealed the sticker motifs required for homotypic and heterotypic phase separation. Our data indicate that the PYCO1-Rubisco network is cross-linked by PYCO1 stickers that oligomerize to bind to the small subunits lining the central solvent channel of the Rubisco holoenzyme. A second sticker motif binds to the large subunit. Pyrenoidal Rubisco condensates are highly diverse and tractable models of functional LLPS.

### Keywords
Pyrenoid, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Rubisco

### Affiliations
Currently: School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University
Previously: School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore, 637551, Singapore
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 637551, Singapore

### Submitter
Zhen Guo Oh

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Martin Mueller-Cajar
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 637551, Singapore


