### Accession
PXD041042

### Title
Protein Kinase D drives the secretion of invasion mediators in triple negative breast cancer cell lines

### Description
Protein kinase D (PKD) regulates protein secretion at the Golgi complex and has been found to have a pro-oncogenic role in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). PKD was previously reported to regulate the secretion of tumor-promoting factors in prostate and pancreatic cancer. Whether PKD plays a similar role in TNBC remains unknown. Here, we used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to characterize the secreted proteome collected from the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 following pharmacological PKD2 and PKD3 inhibition. Analysis of secretome signatures of response revealed several extracellular matrix related proteins decreased upon PKD inhibition. Amongst the downregulated proteins were previously described TNBC invasion mediators, such as TNC, STC-1, LIF, MMP-1 and M-CSF. The secretion of these proteins, as well as of MMP-13, IL-11 and GM-CSF, was further validated by multiplex assays to be regulated by PKD. Secretion regulation of this protein set by PKD was more evident in TNBC metastatic cell lines than in primary tumor-derived. Individual knockdown of PKD2 and PKD3 revealed that secretion of this protein set is predominantly PKD2-driven in MDA-MB-231 cells. This study improves the current understanding of PKD’s contribution to TNBC secretion and uncovers a novel function of PKD2 in the release of a pro-invasive secretome. / This study improves the current understanding of PKD’s contribution to TNBC secretion and uncovers the distinct pro-invasive substrates of PKD2 and PKD3.

### Sample Protocol
One million MDA-MB-231 or MDA-MB-468 cells were seeded in 60 mm dishes in serum-complete medium without the presence of antibiotics and were allowed to reach ~ 90 % confluency over 24 hours. Cells were subsequently washed three times with PBS and treated with 2 ml of (a) serum free medium for 24 hours (b) 2.5 μM CRT0066101 (referred here as CRT(2.5uM)) in serum free medium for 2 hours and replacement with serum free medium for 22 hours (c) 1 μM CRT0066101 (referred here as CRT(1uM)) in serum free medium for 8 hours and replacement with serum free medium for 16 hours. Conditioned medium (secretome) was collected and centrifuged (15 min at 500 x g at 4oC followed by 20 min at 2000 x g at 4 ˚C) for the removal of cell debris. The supernatant was concentrated to ~ 30 μl by passing over an Amicon 3 kDa filter (Merck Millipore, #UFC500324). For the collection of cell lysates, cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and scraped following the addition of LDS-sample buffer/b-mercaptethanol. Lysed cells were centrifuged at 14000 x g for 15 min at 4 ˚C and kept at - 80 oC until further analysis.   Gel electrophoresis and in-gel digestion of proteins  Cell lysates (10 μl) and secretomes (30 μl) were separated on precast 4–12 % gradient gels using the NuPAGE SDS-PAGE system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Following electrophoresis, gels were fixed in 50% ethanol/3% phosphoric acid solution and stained with Coomassie R250. Subsequently, the gels were washed once in 50 mM ABC and twice in 50 mM ABC/50 % ACN, followed by reduction in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC for 1 hour at 56 °C and alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. After washing once in 50 mM ABC and twice in 50 mM ABC/50 % ACN, gel lanes were cut into 3 bands (for both cell line secretome and cell lysate samples) and each band was cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. Gel cubes were first washed in 50 mM ABC/50 % ACN and then dried in vacuum centrifuge for 10 min at 50 °C. Following gel cube rehydration by trypsin solution (Promega, 6.25 ng/mL in 50 mM ABC), the gel cubes were covered with 50 mM ABC and incubated overnight at 25 °C. Peptides were isolated from the gel cubes with 5% FA/50 % ACN (twice) and 1% formic acid (FA) (once). In a vacuum centrifuge at 60 °C the extracts were concentrated before LC–MS/MS after which volumes were adjusted to 50 μl with 0.05 % FA into LC autosampler vials after filtering through a spin filter of 0.45 μm.  LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 10 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in buffer A (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in MQ; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.1% formic acid in MQ) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (130 min inject-to-inject) at 35 °C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of + 2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact peptide masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS In the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 m/z isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy) using an AGC target value of 1 × 106 charges an underfill ratio of 0.5% and a maxIT of 60 ms at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
The FASTA protein sequence file of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (released in January 2021 with 42,383 entries) was used to match theoretical fragmented ions to the measured spectra using the MaxQuant search engine (version 1.6.10.43). Two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were added as variable modifications in the search parameters. The maximally allowed mass error for the precursor mass (MS) was 4.5 ppm and for and fragment mass (MS/MS) was 20 ppm, respectively. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a false discover rate (FDR) 0.01 using the target-decoy strategy (default in MaxQuant). Quantification of proteins was done using spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
The protein kinase D (PKD) family members regulate the fission of cargo vesicles at the Golgi complex and play a pro-oncogenic role in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Whether PKD facilitates the secretion of tumor-promoting factors in TNBC, however, is still unknown. Using the pharmacological inhibition of PKD activity and siRNA-mediated depletion of PKD2 and PKD3, we identified the PKD-dependent secretome of the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics and antibody-based assays revealed a significant downregulation of extracellular matrix related proteins and pro-invasive factors such as LIF, MMP-1, MMP-13, IL-11, M-CSF and GM-CSF in PKD-perturbed cells. Notably, secretion of these proteins in MDA-MB-231 cells was predominantly controlled by PKD2 and enhanced spheroid invasion. Consistently, PKD-dependent secretion of pro-invasive factors was more pronounced in metastatic TNBC cell lines. Our study thus uncovers a novel role of PKD2 in releasing a pro-invasive secretome.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Secretion, Protein kinase d, Proteomics, Cytokine, Extracellular matrix, Metastasis, Tnbc, Invasion

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Thang Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


