### Accession
PXD041684

### Title
Identification of the bacteriophage nucleus protein interaction network

### Description
Here, we use proximity labeling and localization mapping to systematically identify proteins associated with the major nuclear shell protein chimallin (ChmA) and other distinctive structures assembled by these phages. We identify six uncharacterized nuclear shell-associated proteins, one of which directly interacts with self-assembled ChmA. The structure and protein-protein interaction network of this protein, which we term ChmB, suggests that it forms pores in the ChmA lattice that serve as docking sites for pro-capsid genome packaging, and may also participate in mRNA and/or protein transport.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization. The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a Orbitrap fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System) using a 25 cm, 75-micron ID glass capillary packed with 1.7-µm C18 (130) BEH beads (Waters corporation).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–80%) of ACN (Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 375 μl/min for 3 hours. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometer parameters are as follows;  an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector (mass range (m/z): 400-1500  (using quadrupole isolation), 120000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2200 V, Ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms) was followed by data dependent scans (top speed for most intense ions, with charge state set to only include +2-5 ions, and 5 second exclusion time, while selecting ions with minimal intensities of 50000 at in which the collision event was carried out in the high energy collision cell (HCD Collision Energy of 30%), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (With ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms). Protein identification and label free quantification was carried out using Peaks Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics solutions Inc.) Variable modification at lysine residues of +226.08 amu was used in the peptide sequencing parameters.

### Data Protocol
For each sample, peptides identified by mass spectrometry were divided into host (P. aeruingosa) and phage (ΦPA3) peptides. Host peptides that were identified in all samples were used to normalize phage peptide signals across the dataset. Biotinylated phage protein peak areas were calculated by summing the peak areas of each peptide assigned to a given protein. The fold changes of proteins from ChmA (gp53)-miniTurboID and RecA (gp175)-miniTurboID were calculated by comparing to protein peak areas from GFP-miniTurboID samples. The proteins were sorted according to their average normalized fold changes.

### Publication Abstract
In the arms race between bacteria and bacteriophages (phages), some large-genome jumbo phages have evolved a protein shell that encloses their replicating genome to protect it against host immune factors. By segregating the genome from the host cytoplasm, however, the 'phage nucleus' introduces the need to specifically translocate messenger RNA and proteins through the nuclear shell and to dock capsids on the shell for genome packaging. Here, we use proximity labeling and localization mapping to systematically identify proteins associated with the major nuclear shell protein chimallin (ChmA) and other distinctive structures assembled by these phages. We identify six uncharacterized nuclear-shell-associated proteins, one of which directly interacts with self-assembled ChmA. The structure and protein-protein interaction network of this protein, which we term ChmB, suggest that it forms pores in the ChmA lattice that serve as docking sites for capsid genome packaging and may also participate in messenger RNA and/or protein translocation.

### Keywords
Miniturboid, Phage nucleus, Phage

### Affiliations
UCSD
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Eray Enustun

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Corbett
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA


