### Accession
PXD045900

### Title
Structural Insights into the Interaction Between Adenovirus 5C Hexon and Human Lactoferrin

### Description
Adenovirus (AdV) infection of the respiratory epithelium is common but poorly understood. Human infective species C AdVs, such as HAdV-C5, utilise the Coxsackie-Adenovirus receptor (CAR) for attachment and subsequently integrins for entry. CAR and integrins are however located deep within the tight junctions in the mucosa where they would not be easily accessible. Recently, a model for CAR-independent AdV entry was proposed. In this model, Lactoferrin (LF), an innate immune protein, aids the viral uptake into epithelial cells by mediating interactions between the major capsid protein, hexon, and yet unknown host cellular receptor(s). Yet, a detailed understanding of the molecular interactions driving this mechanism is lacking. Here, we present a novel cryo-EM structure of HAd-5C hexon at high resolution alongside a hybrid structure of human lactoferrin (hLF) complexed with HAdV-5C hexon. These structures reveal the molecular determinants of the interaction between hLF and HAdV-C5 hexon. hLF engages hexon primarily via its N-terminal Lactoferricin (Lfcin) region, interacting with hexon's hypervariable region 1 (HVR-1). Mutational analyses pinpoint critical Lfcin contacts but also identify additional regions within hLF that critically contribute to hexon binding.  Our study sheds more light on the intricate mechanism by which HAdV-C5 utilises soluble hLF/Lfcin for cellular entry. These findings hold promise for advancing gene therapy applications and inform vaccine development.

### Sample Protocol
Hexon:hLF complex was cross-linked using the homobifunctional cross-linker disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU; CF Plus Chemicals). The complex was mixed with excess of DSBU at 1:500 molar ratio. The reaction mixture was then incubated at room temperature for 1h and quenched with Tris at 30x higher concentration than DSBU.  Samples were diluted with 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced by 10 mM TCEP and alkylated by 30 mM iodoacetamide. For deglycosylation of LF, PNGase F (New England Biolabs) was added to the sample in 1:20 (w/w) ratio and incubated for 4h at 37°C. Proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega) over night at 37°C. After the digestion, samples were off line desalted using Microtrap C18 cartridge (Optimize Technologies) and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator. Samples were re-suspended in 40 µl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA and analysed using the Vanquish liquid chromatography system (ThermoScientific), connected to the timsToF SCP mass spectrometer equipped with Captive spray (Bruker Daltonics). The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive data-dependent mode. 1 µl of the peptide mixture was injected by autosampler on the C18 trap column (PepMap Neo C18 5µm, 300 µm x 5 mm, Thermo Scientific). After 3 min of trapping, peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on a C18 column (DNV PepMap Neo 75 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific) by a linear 35 min water-acetonitrile gradient from 5 % (v/v) to 35 % (v/v) acetonitrile at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The trap and analytical columns were both heated to 50 °C. The TIMS scan range was set between 0.6 and 1.6 V s/ cm2 with a ramp time of 100 ms. The number of PASEF MS/MS ramps was 4. Precursor ions in the m/z range between 100 and 1700 with charge states ≥1+ and ≤8+ were selected for fragmentation. The active exclusion was enabled for 0.4 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by Data Analysis 5.3 (Bruker Daltonics). The mgf files were uploaded to MeroX 2.0.1.4 software (PMID: 30382245). The search parameters were set as follows: enzyme – trypsin (specific), carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor precision was set at 5.0 ppm and fragment ion precision was set at 10.0 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Adenovirus (AdV) infection of the respiratory epithelium is common but poorly understood. Human AdV species C types, such as HAdV-C5, utilize the Coxsackie-adenovirus receptor (CAR) for attachment and subsequently integrins for entry. CAR and integrins are however located deep within the tight junctions in the mucosa where they would not be easily accessible. Recently, a model for CAR-independent AdV entry was proposed. In this model, human lactoferrin (hLF), an innate immune protein, aids the viral uptake into epithelial cells by mediating interactions between the major capsid protein, hexon, and yet unknown host cellular receptor(s). However, a detailed understanding of the molecular interactions driving this mechanism is lacking. Here, we present a new cryo-EM structure of HAdV-5C hexon at high resolution alongside a hybrid structure of HAdV-5C hexon complexed with human lactoferrin (hLF). These structures reveal the molecular determinants of the interaction between hLF and HAdV-C5 hexon. hLF engages hexon primarily <i>via</i> its N-terminal lactoferricin (Lfcin) region, interacting with hexon's hypervariable region 1 (HVR-1). Mutational analyses pinpoint critical Lfcin contacts and also identify additional regions within hLF that critically contribute to hexon binding. Our study sheds more light on the intricate mechanism by which HAdV-C5 utilizes soluble hLF/Lfcin for cellular entry. These findings hold promise for advancing gene therapy applications and inform vaccine development.IMPORTANCEOur study delves into the structural aspects of adenovirus (AdV) infections, specifically HAdV-C5 in the respiratory epithelium. It uncovers the molecular details of a novel pathway where human lactoferrin (hLF) interacts with the major capsid protein, hexon, facilitating viral entry, and bypassing traditional receptors such as CAR and integrins. The study's cryo-EM structures reveal how hLF engages hexon, primarily through its N-terminal lactoferricin (Lfcin) region and hexon's hypervariable region 1 (HVR-1). Mutational analyses identify critical Lfcin contacts and other regions within hLF vital for hexon binding. This structural insight sheds light on HAdV-C5's mechanism of utilizing soluble hLF/Lfcin for cellular entry, holding promise for gene therapy and vaccine development advancements in adenovirus research.

### Keywords
Lactoferrin, Viral-entry, Adenovirus, Cryo-em, Immune-evasion

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Flemingovo namesti 542/2, 16000, Prague, Czech Republic
Intitute of Biotechnology

### Submitter
Petr Pompach

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Zoll
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Flemingovo namesti 542/2, 16000, Prague, Czech Republic


