### Accession
PXD026851

### Title
Identification of PRMT1 interaction proteins in cancer and neural stem cells

### Description
We have showed that cancer cells (or tumorigenic cells) resemble neural stem/progenitor cells in regulatory network, tumorigenicity and differentiation potential. We have shown PRMT1 is a protein that is upreguated in and promotes vaious cancers. The expression of its gene is localized to embryonic neural cells during vertebrate embryogenesis. The project is to identify the interaction partners of PRMT1, by which PRMT1 regulates neural stemness in both cancer cells and neural stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with an anti-PRMT1 antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, #2449) from HepG2 or NE-4C cells. Meanwhile, Co-IP was performed using IgG as a negative control. Immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE (stacking 4% and separating 10% acrylamide) followed by Coomassie blue staining, and gel bands containing protein of interest were cut. For in gel digestion, cysteine residues were reduced by addition of 25 mM final of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at 70°C, and alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) at a final concentration of 90 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C with 0.2 μg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by incubation in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate: acetonitrile (1:1) for three times of 15 min at 37°C. The resulting peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 10 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 2% FA before being subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For database searching, the original ‘.wiff’ and ‘.wiff.scan’ files obtained by the AB SCIEX Triple TOF 5600 were submitted to ProteinPilot Software (version 4.5, AB Sciex) for data analysis. LC-MS/MS data were searched against Homo sapiens in UniProt database (April 9, 2016, containing 160,566 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640), and against Mus musculus in UniProt database (April 9, 2016, containing 50,943 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589). The search parameters were listed as follow: TripleTOF 5600, trypsin digestion, thorough ID. All other parameters were set as default in ProteinPilot Software. An automatic decoy database search treatment was employed to estimate FDR (false discovery rate) by the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Previous studies suggested that cancer cells resemble neural stem/progenitor cells in regulatory network, tumorigenicity, and differentiation potential, and that neural stemness might represent the ground or basal state of differentiation and tumorigenicity. The neural ground state is reflected in the upregulation and enrichment of basic cell machineries and developmental programs, such as cell cycle, ribosomes, proteasomes, and epigenetic factors, in cancers and in embryonic neural or neural stem cells. However, how these machineries are concertedly regulated is unclear. Here, we show that loss of neural stemness in cancer or neural stem cells via muscle-like differentiation or neuronal differentiation, respectively, caused downregulation of ribosome and proteasome components and major epigenetic factors, including PRMT1, EZH2, and LSD1. Furthermore, inhibition of PRMT1, an oncoprotein that is enriched in neural cells during embryogenesis, caused neuronal-like differentiation, downregulation of a similar set of proteins downregulated by differentiation, and alteration of subcellular distribution of ribosome and proteasome components. By contrast, PRMT1 overexpression led to an upregulation of these proteins. PRMT1 interacted with these components and protected them from degradation via recruitment of the deubiquitinase USP7, also known to promote cancer and enriched in embryonic neural cells, thereby maintaining a high level of epigenetic factors that maintain neural stemness, such as EZH2 and LSD1. Taken together, our data indicate that PRMT1 inhibition resulted in repression of cell tumorigenicity. We conclude that PRMT1 coordinates ribosome and proteasome activity to match the needs for high production and homeostasis of proteins that maintain stemness in cancer and neural stem cells.

### Keywords
Prmt1, Hepg2, Lc-ms/ms, Ne-4c

### Affiliations
Model Animal Research Center, Medical School, Nanjing University
Nanjing University

### Submitter
Ying Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Cao
Model Animal Research Center, Medical School, Nanjing University


