### Accession
PXD005603

### Title
Protease activities induced in the apoplast of the resistant tomato cultivar Hawaii 7996 in response to Ralstonia solanacearum infection

### Description
In the work presented here we aimed to identify the active proteases secreted in the apoplast of the resistant tomato Hawaii 7996 when challenged with R. solanacearum and compared it with that of the susceptible cultivar Marmande. Using ABPP we characterized a variety-specific induction of papain-like cysteine proteases and serine hydrolases.. Altogether this work denotes the importance of novel proteomic approaches –such as ABPP– to provide new insights on old yet elusive questions regarding the molecular basis of resistance to R. solanacearum.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity protein purification and on-bead or  in-solution protein digestion. Large-scale labelling was performed using biotinylated versions of the PLCP and SH activity probes, namely DCG-04 (Greenbaum et al., 2000; van der Hoorn et al., 2004) and FP-biotin (Liu et al., 1999; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Both probes were mixed together in a 4 ml labelling reaction mixture (50 mM NaAc pH 5, 5 mM DTT, 4 µM of each probe) and incubated for 4h. Proteins were then precipitated using the methanol-chloroform method. The protein pellets were dissolved completely in 2 ml of 1.2% SDS-PBS and denatured by incubating the samples at 90ºC for 5 min. Subsequently the denatured protein solution was diluted to with 12 mL 1x PBS to lower the SDS concentration to less than 0.2%. Next, the solution was incubated with avidin beads (Sigma Aldrich) for 1h. The beads were then collected by spinning down at 400 g for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed three times with 1.2%, SDS-PBS, 1%SDS-PBS, 1x PBS, and MilliQ water, transferred into 1.5 ml low binding protein tubes and spinned down 400 g for 10 min to remove the remaining liquid. Finally, on-bead trypsin digestion was performed as described by Weerapana et al. (2007). Tryptic samples were stored at -20ºC. In-solution digestion of protein samples was performed following the protocol by Kessler Lab-Proteomics (http://www.tdi.ox.ac.uk/protocols-and-tools). Tryptic samples were stored at -20ºC. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, all peptide samples were purified using SEP-PAK C18 columns (Waters) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the purified peptides were dried down completely in a speed-vac and resuspended in 20 µl of 2% ACN and 0.1% FA, and stored at -20ºC. In total, three biological replicates were analysed for each experimental condition (intersection of tomato variety and treatment) in both the pulldown and in-solution approaches. LC-MS/MS. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo), that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 27 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition and in all other modi at 30 °C. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 100 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda  search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings.  Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated.  MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot Ralstonia solanacearum (UP000001436_267608.fasta; 5001 entries) and Solanum lycopersicum (UP000004994_4081.fasta; 33952 entries). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is a powerful proteomic technique to display protein activities in a proteome. It is based on the use of small molecular probes that react with the active site of proteins in an activity-dependent manner. We used ABPP to dissect the protein activity changes that occur in the intercellular spaces of tolerant (Hawaii 7996) and susceptible (Marmande) tomato plants in response to <i>R. solanacearum</i>, the causing agent of bacterial wilt, one of the most destructive bacterial diseases in plants. The intercellular space -or apoplast- is the first battlefield where the plant faces <i>R. solanacearum</i> Here, we explore the possibility that the limited <i>R. solanacearum</i> colonization reported in the apoplast of tolerant tomato is partly determined by its active proteome. Our work reveals specific activation of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) and serine hydrolases (SHs) in the leaf apoplast of the tolerant tomato Hawaii 7996 on <i>R. solanacearum</i> infection. The P69 family members P69C and P69F, and an unannotated lipase (Solyc02g077110.2.1), were found to be post-translationally activated. In addition, protein network analysis showed that deeper changes in network topology take place in the susceptible tomato variety, suggesting that the tolerant cultivar might be more prepared to face <i>R. solanacearum</i> in its basal state. Altogether this work identifies significant changes in the activity of 4 PLCPs and 27 SHs in the tomato leaf apoplast in response to <i>R. solanacearum</i>, most of which are yet to be characterized. Our findings denote the importance of novel proteomic approaches such as ABPP to provide new insights on old and elusive questions regarding the molecular basis of resistance to <i>R. solanacearum</i>.

### Keywords
Disease resistance, Papain-like cysteine protease, Quantitative proteomics, Ralstonia solanacearum, Proteases, Activity-based protein profiling, Serine hydrolase, Bacterial wilt, Tomato

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


