### Accession
PXD026675

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of the Effects of Simulated Microgravity in GES-1 Cells

### Description
Microgravity is an ecological factor that affect the environment of the body. In this study, quantitative isobaric labeling (tandem mass tag) methods were used to study the changes in human gastric mucosal cells under simulated microgravity.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were randomly divided into simulated microgravity(SMG) and  normal gravity (NG) groups.Samples were collected after 3 and 7 days of cell culture. Three biological replicates were performed for each group of samples.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the mass spectrometer was imported into the database search software, and Maxquant (v1.6.15.0) was used to search and identify proteins. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were defined after setting different fold changes >1.3 or < 1/1.33 and p values < 0.05 in one group relative to the other group as threshold. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses of DEPs were performed.

### Publication Abstract
Microgravity is an ecological factor that affects the environment of the body. In this study, quantitative isobaric labeling (tandem mass tag) method was used to study the changes in human gastric mucosal cells under simulated microgravity for the first time. Comparative proteomic analysis identified 394 (202 upregulated and 192 downregulated) and 542 (286 upregulated and 256 downregulated) proteins differentially regulated by simulated microgravity after 3 and 7 days, respectively. Then the identified proteins were subjected to Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses for further exploration. The results of the analysis showed that the ribosomes of gastric mucosal cells were significantly impacted after exposure to simulated microgravity for 3 days, and the cells appeared to be in a state of stress and inflammation. Exposure to simulated microgravity for 7 days significantly affected the mitochondria of the cells, oxidative stress became more evident, while inflammation and weakened connections were observed in the cells. The results of this study highlighted the temporal response trend of gastric mucosal cells to the stressor of microgravity at the two time points of 3 and 7 days. These findings will provide insights into the development of methods to protect the gastric mucosa during space flight.

### Keywords
Ges-1 cells lc-ms/ms simulated microgravity

### Affiliations
Department of General Surgery, The 306th Hospital of PLA-Peking University Teaching Hospital, Beijing 100101, China
1 Department of General Surgery, The 306th Hospital of PLA-Peking University Teaching Hospital, Beijing 100101, China 2 Department of General Surgery, Strategic Support Force Medical Center, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Sheng-Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Cui
1 Department of General Surgery, The 306th Hospital of PLA-Peking University Teaching Hospital, Beijing 100101, China 2 Department of General Surgery, Strategic Support Force Medical Center, Beijing 100101, China


