### Accession
PXD008456

### Title
Enhancing Membrane Protein Identification Using a Simplified, Centrifugation and Detergent-based Membrane Extraction Approach

### Description
Membrane proteins may act as transporters, receptors, enzymes and adhesion-anchors, accounting for nearly 70% of pharmaceutical drug targets. Difficulties in efficient enrichment, extraction and solubilization still exist because of their relatively low abundance and poor solubility. A simplified membrane protein extraction approach with advantages of user-friendly sample processing procedures, good repeatability and significant effectiveness was developed in the current research for enhancing enrichment and identification of membrane proteins. This approach combining centrifugation and detergent along with LC-MS/MS successfully identified higher proportion of membrane proteins, integral proteins and transmembrane proteins in membrane fraction (76.6%, 48.1%, and 40.6%) than in total cell lysate (41.6%, 16.4%, and 13.5%), respectively. Moreover, our method tended to capture membrane proteins with high degree of hydrophobicity and number of transmembrane domains as 486 out of 2106 (23.0%) had GRAVY >0 in membrane fraction, 488 out of 2106 (23.1%) had TMs ≥2. It also provided for improved identification of membrane proteins as more than 60.6% of the commonly-identified membrane proteins in two cell samples were better identified in membrane fraction with higher sequence coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and Cell Sample Preparation Mouse Neuro 2a (N2a) cells (American Type Culture Collection) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with high glucose, 200 mM glutamineand 10% FBS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and maintained in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. For membrane sample preparation, 5 of 15 cm dishes cells at 80% confluence were harvested, washed and homogenized with high salt buffer and centrifuged at 35,000×g for 20 min subsequently. The resulted pellet was washed with Na2CO3 (pH11.3) to open vesicles and centrifuged at 35,000×g again for 20 min. Pellet was afterwards washed with 6M Urea to dissociate membrane-associated proteins and centrifuged at 35,000×g for 20 min. The generated pellet was washed with Tris buffer and solubilized with SDT buffer (0.2% SDS (m/v), 100mM DTT, 100mM Tris, pH=7.6), and the ultimate supernatant was the membrane fraction. For total cell lysate preparation, a total of N2a cells were washed with ice-cold PBS buffer for three times and harvested in SDT lysis buffer. The lysate was homogenized by sonication and centrifuged at 15,000×g for 30 min and the acquired supernatant was the total cell lysate. Concentration Determination and Western Blot Analysis The protein concentrations were evaluated by tryptophan fluorescence emission assay1 and the instrument used was SpectraMax M5 (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). 295nm and 350 nm were set as the excitation wavelength and the emission wavelength respectively. Then equivalent quantity of protein was separated by 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels, and subsequent Western Blot analysis was performed with GAPDH as the loading control. The primary antibodies used were: anti-GAPDH (Sigma, G8795, 1:1000), anti-INSR (CST, 3025, 1:1000), anti-COX IV (CST, 4850S, 1:2000) and anti-Cytochrome C (BD Pharmingen, 556433, 1:1000).  Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) Digestion FASP was performed according to a previously described method with slight modifications2. Briefly, 50 μg of protein was mixed with 100 μL UA buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris, pH=8.5) and loaded on a 10k Microcon filtration device (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) for 40-min centrifugation at 12,000×g. The concentrates were diluted in the device with 100 μL UA and centrifuged again at 12,000×g. The concentrate was then mixed with 100 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA buffer and incubated for 30 min in darkness at room temperature. IAA was afterwards removed by centrifugation at 12,000×g for 40 min, and the sample was diluted with 100 μL UA buffer for two times. Subsequently, 100 μL 50 mM mammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added and the sample was centrifuged at 12,000×g for 40 min, which was repeated for two times. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at a trypsin: protein ratio (w/w) of 1:50 in 100 μL of 50 mM ABC for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 for another 4 h digestion at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation at 12,000×g and desalted via StageTipC18 purification before BCA assay. LC-MS/MS An online liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of an Easynano-LC system and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source was used for all LC-MS/MS experiments. The tryptic digested peptides were loaded on a 75 μm ×200 mm fused silica precolumn packed in-house with 3-μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A contained 100% H2O and 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was: 2-5% B, 2 min; 5%-28% B, 74 min; 28%-90% B, 4 min; 90% B, 4 min; 90%-2% B, 1min; 2% B, 5 min. The mass spectrometry instrument parameters were: The temperature of the heated capillary was set at 320 °C and the source voltage was set at 2.4 kV; MS1 full scan resolution, 70,000 @ m/z 200; automatic gain control target, 3×106; maximum injection time, 30 ms. MS2 scan resolution 17,500 @ m/z 200; automatic gain control target, 1×105; maximum injection time, 100 ms. The precursor ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The MS data was analyzed via software MaxQuant14 (http://maxquant.org/, version1.3.0.5). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M, + 15.99492 Da) and protein N-term acetylation (+42.01056 Da) as variable modifications. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse UniProt FASTA database (July 2016) containing 51418 entries, and Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was rigorously controlled <1% by Andromeda search engine15. Functional annotations were conducted whereby Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).

### Publication Abstract
Membrane proteins may act as transporters, receptors, enzymes, and adhesion-anchors, accounting for nearly 70% of pharmaceutical drug targets. Difficulties in efficient enrichment, extraction, and solubilization still exist because of their relatively low abundance and poor solubility. A simplified membrane protein extraction approach with advantages of user-friendly sample processing procedures, good repeatability and significant effectiveness was developed in the current research for enhancing enrichment and identification of membrane proteins. This approach combining centrifugation and detergent along with LC-MS/MS successfully identified higher proportion of membrane proteins, integral proteins and transmembrane proteins in membrane fraction (76.6%, 48.1%, and 40.6%) than in total cell lysate (41.6%, 16.4%, and 13.5%), respectively. Moreover, our method tended to capture membrane proteins with high degree of hydrophobicity and number of transmembrane domains as 486 out of 2106 (23.0%) had GRAVY &gt; 0 in membrane fraction, 488 out of 2106 (23.1%) had TMs &#x2265; 2. It also provided for improved identification of membrane proteins as more than 60.6% of the commonly identified membrane proteins in two cell samples were better identified in membrane fraction with higher sequence coverage. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008456.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Sequence coverage, Identification, Mass spectrometry, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Science

### Submitter
Jing Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


