### Accession
PXD007824

### Title
Apis mellifera,Hemolymph,LC-MSMS

### Description
We characterized and compared hemolymph proteome of Royal Jelly bees (RJbs), a stock selected for increasing RJ output from Italian bees (ITbs) and ITbs across the larval and adult ages. Unprecedented depth of proteome was attained by identifying 3394 hemolymph proteins in both bee lines. The proteome supports the general function of hemolymph to drive development and immunity across different phases in both bees. However, age-specific proteome settings have adapted to prime the distinct physiology for larvae and adult bees. In larvae, proteome are thought to drive the temporal immunity, rapid organogenesis, and reorganization of larval structures. In adults, proteome play key roles to prompt tissues development and immune defense in NEBs, glands maturity in NBs and carbohydrate energy production in FBs. Comparing the proteome between the same aged larval and adult samples, RJbs and ITbs have tailored distinct hemolymph proteome programs to drive their physiology. Particularly, in day 4 larvae and NBs, a large number of highly abundant proteins enriched in protein synthesis and energy metabolism in RJbs relative to ITbs imply that RJb larvae and NBs have reprogrammed their proteome to initiate different developmental trajectory and high RJ secretion in response to the enhanced RJ production by selection. Our hitherto depth of proteome coverage gains novel sight on molecular details in driving hemolymph function and high RJ production by RJbs.

### Sample Protocol
1 Hemolymph Sampling.Artificially mated RJb and ITb queens (Apis mellifera ligustica) were purchased from Pinghu honeybee breeding station, Zhejiang Province, China and Bologna, Italy, respectively, and kept for colony build-up in the apiary of Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences in Beijing. Five colonies of each bee strain with similar colony strength were selected as the experimental colonies. For larval hemolymph collection, each queen was caged in a single comb frame containing worker cells for 6 h in each colony to collect larvae of known ages. Then, the queens were unconfined from the cages and the eggs contained in the cells of the frames were kept in their respective colonies for further development. Hemolymph samples were collected from the larvae on day 2 (d2), day 4 (d4) and day 6 (d6), following our previously published protocol.10 Before hemolymph collection, all the larvae were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to eliminate the possible contamination by RJ during feeding by nurse bees (NBs) in the comb cells. For d2 larvae, hemolymph was collected by piercing their skins with great care to evade damaging their organs. For d4 and d6 larvae, hemolymph was collected by inserting a disposable glass micro-capillary pipette (5 μL) into one side (two-thirds down from head) of the larva, avoiding deep cuts and sucking hemolymph liquid by capillary action. For adult stages, the newly emerged bees (NEBs) that emerged from comb cells < 10 h were marked on their thoraxes and placed back into colonies for subsequent development, while others were directly sampled. The marked NEBs were collected on day 10 as samples of NBs. Forager bees (FBs) with pollen loads were collected at the entrances of hives (∼20 days old). After obtaining bee samples, the bees were anesthetized using CO2. Hemolymph was collected from the dorsal vessel using a glass capillary tube (40 μm outer diameter) by piercing the intersegmental membrane between the fourth and fifth tergites of the adult abdomen as described elsewhere.9 Averagely, a 100 μL of hemolymph was collected per sample of both bee stocks. All the collected hemolymph samples were stored at -80 °C until used.

### Data Protocol
1Protein Identification and Quantification of Abundance For protein identification, PEAKS software (version 7.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) was used by searching the raw MS files against the database downloading protein sequences of Apis mellifera from NCBI (Feb, 2015) and the common contaminant, with a total of 21,778 entries. The search criteria were: specificity: trypsin; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl; and oxidation as a variable modification, with two allowed missed cleavage per peptide; three maximum allowed variable PTM per peptide. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 20.0 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) was controlled using a fusion strategy of target and decoy database for both protein and peptide levels identifications applying a threshold ≤ 1.0%, an enhanced target-decoy approach that makes more conservative FDR estimations.32 A protein was only considered as identified protein when at least one unique peptide with at least two spectra was identified.  To quantify the level change of protein abundance across the 6 time-points of larvae and adult in each bee stock, label-free approach quantitation module of the PEAKS software was used. Feature detection was carried out on each sample using the expectation-maximization algorism, and a high-performance retention time alignment algorism was used to align the features of the same peptide from three replicates of each sample to an automatically selected reference by the PEAKS software.33 Normalization was done by a factor of the samples by dividing the total ion current (TIC) multiple by the TIC of the reference sample. The abundance levels of proteins were summed by the top 3 abundant peaks intensity of the tryptic peptides of a protein. The alteration levels of protein abundance were compared across 6 time-points in each bee line and at 6 time-points between the two stocks. The abundance differences of a protein between different samples were considered as statistically significant when both p-value < 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.5 were attained. Hierarchical clustering was performed to cluster expressional profile of differentially abundant protein using uncentered Pearson correlation and average linkage in PEAKS software.  2 Bioinformatics Analysis.The biological categories and KEGG pathways were enriched using ClueGO v2.1.7, a Cytoscape plug-in (http://www.ici.upmc.fr/cluego)34 to assign the identified proteins into specific gene ontology (GO) terms. The significantly enriched functional GO categories and pathways were tested using a right-sided hypergeometric test comparing proteins identified from the samples to the background set of GO annotations in the entire Apis mellifera genome. The FDR was controlled by the Bonferroni step-down test to correct the p-value and the GO terms were considered to be significantly enriched when the corrected p-value was < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Hemolymph is vital for the immunity of honeybees and offers a way to investigate their physiological status. To gain novel insight into the functionality and molecular details of the hemolymph in driving increased Royal Jelly (RJ) production, we characterized and compared hemolymph proteomes across the larval and adult ages of Italian bees (ITbs) and Royal Jelly bees (RJbs), a stock selected from ITbs for increasing RJ output. Unprecedented in-depth proteome was attained with the identification of 3394 hemolymph proteins in both bee lines. The changes in proteome support the general function of hemolymph to drive development and immunity across different ages. However, age-specific proteome settings have adapted to prime the distinct physiology for larvae and adult bees. In larvae, the proteome is thought to drive temporal immunity, rapid organogenesis, and reorganization of larval structures. In adults, the proteome plays key roles in prompting tissue development and immune defense in newly emerged bees, in gland maturity in nurse bees, and in carbohydrate energy production in forager bees. Between larval and adult samples of the same age, RJbs and ITbs have tailored distinct hemolymph proteome programs to drive their physiology. In particular, in day 4 larvae and nurse bees, a large number of highly abundant proteins are enriched in protein synthesis and energy metabolism in RJbs. This implies that they have adapted their proteome to initiate different developmental trajectories and high RJ secretion in response to selection for enhanced RJ production. Our hitherto unexplored in-depth proteome coverage provides novel insight into molecular details that drive hemolymph function and high RJ production by RJbs.

### Keywords
Hemolymph, Italian bees, Proteome, Royal jelly bees

### Affiliations
Institute of Apicultural Research,Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Zewdu hora

### Lab Head
Dr Jianke Li
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


