### Accession
PXD026671

### Title
Integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of Tritipyrum provides insights into the molecular basis of salt tolerance

### Description
Soil salinity is a major environmental stress that restricts crop growth and yield. Here, crucial proteins and biological pathways were investigated under salt-stress and recovery conditions in Tritipyrum “Y1805” to explore its salt-tolerance mechanism. In total, 44 and 102 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in “Y1805” under salt-stress and recovery conditions, respectively. A proteome-transcriptome-associated analysis revealed that the expression patterns of 13 and 25 DEPs were the same under salt-stress and recovery conditions, respectively. “Response to stimulus”, “antioxidant activity”, “carbohydrate metabolism”, “amino acid metabolism”, “signal transduction”, “transport and catabolism” and “biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites” were present under both conditions in “Y1805”. In addition, “energy metabolism” and “lipid metabolism” were recovery-specific pathways, while “antioxidant activity”, and “molecular function regulator” under salt-stress conditions, and “virion” and “virion part” during recovery, were “Y1805”-specific compared with the salt-sensitive wheat “Chinese Spring”. “Y1805” contained 83 specific DEPs related to salt-stress responses. The strong salt tolerance of “Y1805” could be attributed to the strengthened cell walls, reactive oxygen species scavenging, osmoregulation, phytohormone regulation, transient growth arrest, enhanced respiration, ammonium detoxification, transcriptional regulation and error information processing. These data will facilitate an understanding of the molecular mechanisms of salt tolerance and aid in the breeding of salt-tolerant wheat.

### Sample Protocol
The seeds of “Y1805” and CS were germinated in a growth chamber (relative humidity of 75% and a 20/15° C light/dark photocycle). The seedlings were sown on a floater board in 1/2 Hoagland”s solution with a 16-/8-h light/dark cycle, irradiance of 400 μmol m−2s−1 and the same temperature and humidity as in the germination chamber. The culture solution was refreshed every 3 days. On the 14th day (two-leaf stage), saltstress treatments (1/2 Hoagland”s solution supplemented with 250 mM NaCl) were started. The first wheat root samples of a uniform size were selected at 5 h (T1 stage) after exposure to salt stress. The materials were recovered (in 1/2 Hoagland”s solution without NaCl) after 24 h of salt stress. The second samplings were performed at 1 h (T2 stage) after recovery. These sampling stages were chosen on the basis of the phenotypic and physiological data. Normal (1/2 Hoagland”s solution without NaCl) cultured materials, CK1 and CK2, were used as parallel controls of T1 and T2, respectively. All the samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen after sampling and stored at -80C. Three biological replications were employed, and at least 10 seedlings were mixed per replicate. These samples were used in the transcriptomic analysis, proteomic analysis and confirmational qRT-PCR

### Data Protocol
The peak area of ion pair was extracted by spectronaut. Then, msstats software package was used to complete the steps of error correction and normalization. The different significance was evaluated according to the set comparison group and linear mixed effect model. Two conditions (fold change ≥2 and False Discovery Rate (FDR) <0.05) were used as the screening criteria of significant difference protein. NCBI system mainly selects reference sequence (RefSeq) protein database and non redundant (NR) protein database. By comparing with the STRING protein interaction database, the interaction of differentially expressed proteins was analyzed. Subcellular localization of proteins is an important part of protein function annotation, we use PSORTb software to predict.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tritipyrum; salt stress; recovery; proteome; transcriptome; crucial proteins and pathways

### Affiliations
no
College of Agriculture, Guizhou University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China

### Submitter
Wang yqin

### Lab Head
Dr Suqin Zhang
College of Agriculture, Guizhou University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China


