### Accession
PXD021518

### Title
Proteomics of Arabidopsis seedlings during de-etiolation

### Description
Light triggers chloroplast differentiation whereby the etioplast transforms into a photosynthesizing chloroplast and the thylakoid rapidly emerges. However, the sequence of events during chloroplast differentiation remains poorly understood. Here we used whole-seedling proteome data to quantify changes in protein abundances during the course of de-etiolation within the first four days of light exposure. This data complements quantitative lipid and (ultra)structural data described in Pipitone et al. (doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.30.274043).

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana seeds (Columbia ecotype) were surface-sterilized with 70% (v/v) ethanol with 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100, then washed with 100% ethanol. Seeds were sown in spot containing 50 seeds (to facilitate rapid harvest) on agar plates containing 0.5 × Murashige and Skoog salt mixture (Duchefa Biochemie, Haarlem, Netherlands) without sucrose. Following stratification in the dark for 3 days at 4°C, seeds were irradiated with 40 μmol m-2 s-1 for 2 h at 21°C and then transferred to the dark (plates were covered with 3 layers of aluminium foil) for 3 days growth at 21°C. For proteomics analyses, 80 etiolated seedlings per time point and replicate were collected in a dark room using a dim green LED lamp as light source (0 h of light; T0) and at selected time points (T4, T8, T12, T24, T48, T72, T96) upon continuous white light exposure (40 μmol m-2 s-1 at 21°C), transferred into 1.5ml tube, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use. Frozen material was ground with a mortar and pestle, and 40–80 mg of plant material was used for protein and peptide preparation using the iST kit for plant tissues (PreOmics, Germany). Briefly, each sample was resuspended in 100 µL of the provided ‘Lysis’ buffer and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 1 min by setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 65% to enhance solubilization. For each sample, 100 µg of protein was transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 µL of the provided ‘Digest’ solution. After 180 min of incubation at 37°C, the digestion was stopped with 100 µL of the provided ‘Stop’ solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3,800 g, whereas the peptides were retained on the iST filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted, dried, and re-solubilized in 18.7 µL of solvent (3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 2 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient of 8–27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min, and 80% B in 1 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1400 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the 20 most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100,000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 250,000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS).

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification based on precursor signal intensity was performed using ProgenesisQI for Proteomics (v4.0.6403.35451; nonlinear dynamics, Waters). Raw MS files were loaded into ProgenesisQI and converted to mzln files. To select the alignment reference, a group of samples that had been measured in the middle of the run (to account for drifts in retention times) and derived from de-etiolation time point T12 or later (to account for increasing sample complexity) was preselected, from which replicate 3 of time point T48 was then automatically chosen as best alignment reference. After automatic peak picking, precursor ions with charges other than 2+, 3+, or 4+ were discarded. The five highest-ranked MS/MS spectra, at most, for each peptide ion were exported, using the deisotoping and charge deconvolution option and limiting the fragment ion count to 200 peaks per MS/MS. The resulting Mascot generic file (.mgf) was searched with Mascot Server version 2.6.2 (www.matrixsicence.com) using the following settings: trypsin digest with up to two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine residue as variable modifications; precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment ion (MS/MS) tolerance 0.04 kDa. This search was performed against a forward and reverse (decoy) Araport11 database that included common MS contaminants and iRT peptides. The mascot result was imported into Scaffold Q+S (v4.8.9; Proteome Software Inc), where a spectrum report was created using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 10% and 0.5% at the protein and peptide level, respectively, and a minimum of one identified peptide per protein. After loading the spectrum report into ProgenesisQI, samples were normalized using the “normalize to all proteins” default settings (i.e. normalization was performed to all ions with charges 2+, 3+ or 4+). Samples were grouped according to de-etiolation time point in a between-group analysis with 4 replicates for each condition, except for time point T0 and T48, where n = 3. For these two time points, one replicate each had been discarded it appeared as an outlier in principal component analysis (PCA) of protein abundances between different runs (Figure 5 – source data 1). Quantification employed the Hi-N method, measuring the three most abundant peptides for each protein  (Grossmann et al., 2010). Associated statistics (p-values, PCA etc.) were calculated in ProgenesisQI, except for the q-values, which were calculated from the p-values using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method, with FDR-adjustment to enforce monotonicity. Quantification also used protein grouping, which assigns proteins for which only shared but no unique peptides were identified to a ‘lead’ identifier containing all these shared peptides and thus having the greatest coverage among all grouped identifiers or highest score where coverage is equal. Quantification was restricted to protein (groups) with at least two identified peptides among which at least one is unique to the protein (group). Using these requirements, 5082 Arabidopsis proteins (or groups) were identified. Since 13 additional identifications were exclusively associated with decoy proteins, the false discovery rate at the protein level is estimated to be 0.3%. References: Grossmann J, Roschitzki B, Panse C, Fortes C, Barkow-Oesterreicher S, Rutishauser D, Schlapbach R. 2010. Implementation and evaluation of relative and absolute quantification in shotgun proteomics with label-free methods. J Proteomics 73:1740–1746. doi:doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2010.05.011

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, De-etiolation, Q exactive hf-x, Chloroplasts, Progenesisqi

### Affiliations
Plant Biochemistry Group, Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Barbara Pfister

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Christian Zeeman
Plant Biochemistry Group, Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


