### Accession
PXD016781

### Title
The SAM domain-containing protein 1 (SAMD1) acts as a repressive chromatin regulator at unmethylated CpG islands

### Description
CpG-islands (CGIs) are key regulatory DNA elements at most promoters, but how they influence the chromatin status and transcription remains elusive. Here we identify and characterize SAMD1 (SAM domain-containing protein 1) as an unmethylated CGI-binding protein. SAMD1 possesses an atypical winged-helix domain that directly recognizes unmethylated CpG-containing DNA via simultaneous interactions with both the major and the minor groove. The SAM domain interacts with L3MBTL3, but it can also homopolymerize into a closed pentameric ring. At a genome-wide level, SAMD1 localizes to H3K4me3-decorated CGIs, where it acts as a repressor. SAMD1 tethers L3MBTL3 to chromatin and interacts with the KDM1A histone demethylase complex to modulate H3K4me2 and H3K4me3 levels at CGIs, thereby providing a mechanism for SAMD1-mediated transcriptional repression. Absence of SAMD1 impairs ES cell differentiation processes, leading to mis-regulation of key biological pathways. Together, our work establishes SAMD1 as a novel chromatin regulator acting at unmethylated CGIs.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-HA-tagged human SAMD1 was expressed after retroviral infection of HeLa-S. Nuclear extract was prepared from the established stable cell lines, and the complex was purified using anti-Flag (M2) conjugated agarose beads (Sigma, A2220), followed by anti-HA conjugated agarose beads (Santa Cruz, sc-7392) by incubation in TAP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 1mM DTT, and protease inhibitors) for 4h and 3 times washing with TAP buffer. Complexes were eluted with Flag or HA peptides, respectively. For mass spectrometry the sample was TCA precipitated and peptides were identified via LC-MS/MS at the Taplin Core facility/Harvard Medical School.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by Taplin Core facility/Harvard Medical School.

### Publication Abstract
CpG islands (CGIs) are key regulatory DNA elements at most promoters, but how they influence the chromatin status and transcription remains elusive. Here, we identify and characterize SAMD1 (SAM domain-containing protein 1) as an unmethylated CGI-binding protein. SAMD1 has an atypical winged-helix domain that directly recognizes unmethylated CpG-containing DNA via simultaneous interactions with both the major and the minor groove. The SAM domain interacts with L3MBTL3, but it can also homopolymerize into a closed pentameric ring. At a genome-wide level, SAMD1 localizes to H3K4me3-decorated CGIs, where it acts as a repressor. SAMD1 tethers L3MBTL3 to chromatin and interacts with the KDM1A histone demethylase complex to modulate H3K4me2 and H3K4me3 levels at CGIs, thereby providing a mechanism for SAMD1-mediated transcriptional repression. The absence of SAMD1 impairs ES cell differentiation processes, leading to misregulation of key biological pathways. Together, our work establishes SAMD1 as a newly identified chromatin regulator acting at unmethylated CGIs.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Transcription, Cpg islands

### Affiliations
Insitute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT) University Marburg, Germany
University Marburg

### Submitter
Robert Liefke

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Liefke
Insitute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT) University Marburg, Germany


