### Accession
PXD037811

### Title
Investigation of inter- and intra-day variability of tear fluid regarding flow rate, protein concentration as well as protein composition

### Description
Purpose: Determination of inter- and intra-day variations in tear flow rate, tear fluid protein concentration as well as protein composition regarding their impact for future biomarker studies.
Methods: Tear fluid was collected non-invasively from 18 healthy subjects performing Schirmer tests at four different time points repetitive in a period of two days. The tear flow rate with Schirmer test strips was measured. Proteins were extracted from strips and quantified using amino acid analysis. Protein composition was analyzed by data-independent (DIA) based mass spectrometry. To exclude any impairments to health, volunteers underwent a detailed neurological as well as an ophthalmological examination.
Results: Whether tear fluid was collected from OS or OD did not affect the tear flow rate (p ≈ 0.63) or protein concentration (p ≈ 0.97) of individual subjects. Moreover, protein concentration was independent from the tear volume, so that a change in volume would only have an effect on total protein amount. When the examination days were compared, investigation of tear flow rate (p ≈ 0.001) and protein concentration (p ≈ 0.0003) indicated significant differences. Further mass spectrometric analysis of tear fluid revealed eleven differentially regulated proteins when comparing both examination days. 
Conclusion: Our findings provide evidence of inter-day variation in tear flow rate, tear proteome concentration and composition in healthy subjects, suggesting that inter-day variation need to be taken into consideration in biomarker research of tear fluid. Identified proteins were assigned to functions in the immune response, oxidative and reducing processes, as well as mannose metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
This longitudinal study design comprises 18 subjects. Ethics approval was obtained from the ethics committee of the Ruhr University Bochum (approval number 4905-14), the study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The participants were informed about the whole procedure and gave written consent. Ocular and neurological assessments. All participants underwent a patient health (PHQ-4), and an adapted Michigan Neuropathy Screening Instrument (MNSI) evaluation. PHQ-4 scores of 6 or greater are considered “yellow flags” and PHQ-4 scores of 9 or greater as “red flags” for the presence of a depressive or an anxiety disorder. The MNSI included two assessments: a 15-item self-administered questionnaire and a lower extremity examination that includes inspection and assessment of vibratory sensation and ankle reflexes. A score of ≥ 7 is considered abnormal. Serval dry eye examinations were performed: the Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI) evaluation, corneal fluorescein staining, tear break-up-time (TBUT), and Schirmer tests (see 2.3). The 12 items of the OSDI questionnaire were graded and the OSDI score was calculated. For TBUT, 5 ml of 2 % sodium fluorescein solution was instilled and the average time until the appearance of the first break in the tear film was calculated from 3 measurements using cobalt blue illumination. Corneal staining was evaluated under cobalt blue illumination 2.5 to 3.0 minutes after fluorescein instillation, staining levels were graded according to the NEI/Industry Workshop scale. 
Assessment of tear flow rate: For the assessment of tear flow rate, a Schirmer test strip (Haag-Streit UK LtdA, United Kingdom) was placed inside the lower lid of both eyes, respectively, without anesthesia (inter-eye variability analysis). After 5 min, strips were removed, the tear flow rate measured and the stripes where transferred in a reaction tube before stored at -80 °C for later analysis. To assess the intra-eye variability during the day, the sampling process was repeated four times throughout the day (8 am, 12 am, 6 pm, and 10 pm). To evaluate the intra-individual variability between days, the collecting was repeated two days later at the same time points.
Analysis of tear protein concentration: Proteins were eluted from the Schirmer tear test strips by adding 500 µL PBS solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) containing 1 % Triton X-100 (AppliChem GmbH, Germany) as well as protease inhibitor (completeTM EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Tablets, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany). After incubation overnight at 4 °C, the strip was discarded, the resulting sample solution transferred to a new reaction tube and aliquoted prior to storing at -80 °C. 4 µL were used for performing protein concentration determination by amino acid analysis according to May et al. Sample preparation for mass spectrometric analysis. Tear samples from 10 female subjects were selected for additional mass spectrometric analysis, to reveal variations in the tear proteome.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis: The relative measure of dispersion can be expressed by the coefficient of variation (CV). This indicates the ratio between the standard deviation (SD) and the mean value (x) in percent: CV=SD/x*100. In order to draw conclusions about the degree of dispersion of tear protein concentrations within subjects, an intra-individual CV was calculated for both days (CVi). An inter-subject CV (CVs) was calculated to determine the measure of dispersion between all subjects. It was formed from the median of all CVi. Furthermore, the measure of dispersion within each time point and within a day was calculated independently of OS and OD and referred to as intra-time point CV (CVt) and intra-day CV (CVd), respectively.
Functional pathway analysis: Functional proteomic analysis was performed using Reactome, a curated database for the visualization, interpretation and analysis of pathway knowledge. The implemented pathway overview visualization ReacFoam is based on Voronoi tessellation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tear fluid, Protein concentration, Tear flow rate; tear volume, Mass spectrometry, Schirmer test

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Germany
Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline May
Functional Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Germany


