### Accession
PXD027807

### Title
The life history of Drosophila sperm depends on molecular continuity between male and female reproductive tracts

### Description
Interactions between sperm and the female reproductive tract (FRT) are critical to fertility, but knowledge of the molecular mechanisms by which the FRT interacts with sperm and influences sperm fate remains limited. Here, we used whole-cell quantitative proteomics to track the protein composition of sperm across three female reproductive tissues (bursa, seminal receptacle, and spermatheca) and three post-mating timepoints (30 minutes, 2 hours, and 4 days). In combination with an update and expansion of the seminal vesicle sperm proteome and sex-specific isotopic labeling to identify female-contributed sperm proteins, our data provide a comprehensive, quantitative analysis of the molecular life history of Drosophila sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm were purified from four distinct spatiotemporal conditions within the FRT: the bursa 30 minutes after mating, the seminal receptacle two hours after mating, the seminal receptacle four days after mating, and the spermathecae four days after mating. To collect the bursa samples, we aspirated males and females into individual food vials and flash froze the females in liquid nitrogen 30 minutes after mating. The lower reproductive tracts of approximately 180 females were dissected in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and the sperm mass in the bursa (excluding the mating plug) was isolated and pooled in PBS per replicate. To collect the seminal receptacle and spermathecae samples, we paired 20 males with 10 females in food vials for 90 minutes, transferred the females to clean food vials, and flash froze the females in liquid nitrogen two hours or four days after mating. The lower reproductive tract of approximately 480 females (2-hour samples) or 600 females (4-day samples) were dissected in PBS, and the sperm in the seminal receptacle or spermatheca were isolated and pooled in PBS per replicate. Sperm samples were washed in PBS and pelleted by centrifugation. Two replicates were collected for each spatiotemporal condition for a total of eight purified sperm samples and over 3700 dissections.  To ensure robust results, replicate sperm samples were isolated and purified in two different laboratories (one at Syracuse University and another at Cornell University). Sample preparation was standardized across the two laboratories with one exception: samples were subjected to a different number of PBS washes (three at Syracuse versus two at Cornell) to determine if additional washing minimized non-specific or weak protein interactions. The extra wash did not reduce the identification of associated (i.e., SFP or female-derived) proteins.  Washed sperm samples were solubilized in 2X Laemmli buffer with TCEP and several cycles of heating and sonication. Solubilized samples were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 rapid separation LC nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with either an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid or Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Scientific). For the samples analyzed by the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (i.e., one bursa sample, both 2-hour seminal receptacle samples, one 4-day seminal receptacle sample, and one spermathecal sample), peptides were loaded onto a PepMap C18 nano trapping column (5 µm particle, 100 µm × 20 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 20 µL/min with 0.5% formic acid and then separated on a PepMap C18 analytical column (2 µm, 75 µm × 250 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 2% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All m/z values of eluting ions (range between 375-1575 Da) were measured at a resolution of 120,000. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (Top Speed) to isolate and fragment the most abundant precursor ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (30% normalized collision energy, NCE). The resulting fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 10,000. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis, and previously interrogated precursor ions were excluded using a dynamic window of 30s.   For the samples run on the Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (i.e., one bursa sample, one 4-day seminal receptacle sample, and one spermathecal sample), peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 µL/min for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All m/z values of eluting ions (range between 375-1500 Da) were measured at a resolution of 120,000. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (3 second cycle time) to isolate and fragment the most abundant precursor ions at 35% NCE. Fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 15,000. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis, and dynamic exclusion of previously interrogated precursor ions was 70s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data were searched against the Drosophila melanogaster protein database (dmel-all-translation-r6.32, FlyBase.org), appended with the cRAP v1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org), using the standard workflow in PEAKS X+ (de novo + PEAKS DB + PEAKS PTM + SPIDER; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The search database only included the longest protein sequence for genes with multiple isoforms. Spectral data from all eight samples were run together in a combined analysis using the following search parameters: mass tolerance of 15 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), acetylation (K), phosphorylation (STY), and ubiquitination (GG and LRGG) as variable modifications, and up to three missed tryptic cleavages. Peptide identifications were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% based on the decoy-fusion approach. Protein identifications were filtered to a -10lgP score ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceIn species with internal fertilization, sperm spend an important part of their lives within the female. To examine the life history of the sperm during this time, we used semiquantitative proteomics and sex-specific isotopic labeling in fruit flies to determine the extent of molecular continuity between male and female reproductive tracts and provide a global catalog of sperm-associated proteins. Multiple seminal fluid proteins and female proteins associate with sperm immediately after mating. Few seminal fluid proteins remain after long-term sperm storage, whereas female-derived proteins constitute one-fifth of the postmating sperm proteome by then. Our data reveal a molecular "hand-off" from males to females, which we postulate to be an important component of sperm-female interactions.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Female reproductive tract, Fertility, Sperm, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University
Syracuse University

### Submitter
Erin McCullough

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University


