### Accession
PXD000671

### Title
Leishmania donovani phosphoproteome during  differentiation and as a response to environmental signals

### Description
Changes Leishmania donovani phosphoproteome during promastigote-to amastigote differentiation and as a response to environmental signals (pH and temperature) using TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and iTRAQ labeling. LC-MS/MS on QSTAR

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from leishmania donovani cultures at 7 different time points, or 2.5 hours after exposure to environmental signals (pH and/or temerature shifts) were extracted and trypsinized. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 columns. The eluent was labeled with 4-plex iTRAQ labels. iTRAQ labeled peptides were then combined and separated by strong cation exchange HPLC. SCX fractions containing peptides were then reduced in volume by speed-vac and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed by reversed phase nanoflow (300 nL/min) HPLC with nano-electrospray ionization using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (QSTAR Pulsar I, Applied Biosystems) operated in positive ion mode. All MS/MS data was analyzed using Protein Pilot  (Applied Biosystems). Raw data files were searched against the “L_infantum (ver. 3)” database.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data was analyzed using Protein Pilot  (Applied Biosystems). Raw data files were searched against the “L_infantum (ver. 3)” database. manually inspeced peptides with >95% confidence were used for further analysis and bioinformatics.

### Publication Abstract
Leishmania are obligatory intracellular parasitic protozoa that cause a wide range of diseases in humans, cycling between extracellular promastigotes in the mid-gut of sand flies and intracellular amastigotes in the phagolysosomes of mammalian macrophages. Although many of the molecular mechanisms of development inside macrophages remain a mystery, the development of a host-free system that simulates phagolysosome conditions (37 &#xb0;C and pH 5.5) has provided new insights into these processes. The time course of promastigote-to-amastigote differentiation can be divided into four morphologically distinct phases: I, signal perception (0-5 h after exposure); II, movement cessation and aggregation (5-10 h); III, amastigote morphogenesis (10-24 h); and IV, maturation (24-120 h). Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses have indicated that differentiation is a coordinated process that results in adaptation to life inside phagolysosomes. Recent phosphoproteomic analysis revealed extensive differences in phosphorylation between promastigotes and amastigotes and identified stage-specific phosphorylation motifs. We hypothesized that the differentiation signal activates a phosphorylation pathway that initiates Leishmania transformation, and here we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation to interrogate the dynamics of changes in the phosphorylation profile during Leishmania donovani promastigote-to-amastigote differentiation. Analysis of 163 phosphopeptides (from 106 proteins) revealed six distinct kinetic profiles; with increases in phosphorylation predominated during phases I and III, whereas phases II and IV were characterized by greater dephosphorylation. Several proteins (including a protein kinase) were phosphorylated in phase I after exposure to the complete differentiation signal (i.e. signal-specific; 37 &#xb0;C and pH 5.5), but not after either of the physical parameters separately. Several other protein kinases (including regulatory subunits) and phosphatases also showed changes in phosphorylation during differentiation. This work constitutes the first genome-scale interrogation of phosphorylation dynamics in a parasitic protozoa, revealing the outline of a signaling pathway during Leishmania differentiation. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (identifier PXD000671). Data can be viewed using ProteinPilot&#x2122; software.

### Keywords
Leishmania donovani, Qstar, Itraq

### Affiliations
Biology
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Polina Tsigankov

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Zilberstein
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel


