### Accession
PXD003115

### Title
PGRC Cancer Proteome Study of Gastric Tissue

### Description
The goal of the project is to analyze different layers of proteome information including protein abundance and post-translational modifications of PGRC gastric tissue samples. Three pairs of human gastric cancer and adjacent normal tissues were extensively characterized by serial enrichments of phosphorylation and N-glycosylation (SEPG) coupled to LC-MS/MS method.

### Sample Protocol
Analytical Sample Protocol - Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Fractionation: mid-pH RPLC with non-contiguous pooling, Fractions: 24 (global proteome), 12 (phosphoproteome), 12(N-glycoproteome), Proteolysis: Trypsin, Starting amount: 1.6 mg (normal peptides) and 1.6 mg (tumor peptides), Labeling: 4-plex iTRAQ, phosphospeptide enrichment: IMAC, N-glycopeptide enrichment: FACE; Chromatography Protocol – Column length: 100 cm, Column inner diameter: 75 m, Particle size: 3 m;  Gradient length: 180 min (global proteome, N-glycoproteome) and 240 min (phoshoproteome), Injected: 10 g per fraction (global proteome), all enriched peptides per fraction (phosphoproteome, N-glycoproteome); Mass Spectrometry Protocol – Dissociation: HCD, Instrument: Thermo Q Exactive, MS1 resolution: 70000, MS2 resolution: 17500, Precursors: Top 10.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using PE-MMR to assign accurate precursor mass to tandem MS data. The resultant MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of uniprot-human-reference (May, 2013; 90,191 entries) and 179 common contaminants in the target-decoy setting using MS-GF+ (v9387) search engine under the following condition: Semi tryptic, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ labeling of lysine and peptide n-termini as static modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. For the analysis of phosphopeptides, the variable modifications of phosphorylation to serine/threonine/tyrosine were additionally used. For N-glycopeptide analysis, a variable modification of deamidation to asparagines was additionally used. Filtered at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Multi-dimensional proteomic analyses provide different layers of protein information, including protein abundance and post-translational modifications. Here, we report an integrated analysis of protein expression, phosphorylation, and N-glycosylation by serial enrichments of phosphorylation and N-glycosylation (SEPG) from the same tissue samples. On average, the SEPG identified 142,106 unmodified peptides of 8,625 protein groups, 18,846 phosphopeptides (15,647 phosphosites), and 4,019 N-glycopeptides (2,634 N-glycosites) in tumor and adjacent normal tissues from three gastric cancer patients. The combined analysis of these data showed that the integrated analysis additively improved the coverages of gastric cancer-related protein networks; phosphoproteome and N-glycoproteome captured predominantly low abundant signal proteins, and membranous or secreted proteins, respectively, while global proteome provided abundances for general population of the proteome. Therefore, our results demonstrate that the SEPG can serve as an effective approach for multi-dimensional proteome analyses, and the holistic profiles of protein expression and PTMs enabled improved interpretation of disease-related networks by providing complementary information.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Multi-dimenstional proteome analysis, Early onset gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Korea University
Department of Chemistry, Korea University

### Submitter
Dong-Gi Mun

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Won Lee
Department of Chemistry, Korea University


