### Accession
PXD018267

### Title
Schwann cell plasticity regulates neuroblastic tumor cell differentiation

### Description
The remarkable plasticity of Schwann cells (SCs) is essential for nerve regeneration but also contributes to neuropathies and cancer progression. It has not yet been investigated whether the adaptive potential of SCs is manifested in stromal, tumor associated SCs characteristically found within a benign subtype of neuroblastic tumors (NBTs). We here performed transcriptome profiling of human NBTs, rich and poor in SC stroma, as well as human injured nerves, rich in repair SCs, revealing that stromal SCs exhibit a repair SC characteristic gene expression signature. In turn, primary repair SCs had a pro-differentiating and anti-proliferative effect on NBT cell lines after direct and trans-well co-culture. Within the pool of secreted stromal/repair SC factors, we identified EGFL8, a matricellular protein with so far undescribed function, to induce neuronal differentiation of aggressive NBT cells. EGFL8 expression further correlated with favorable tumor stage and increased patient survival. Our findings suggest that stromal SCs exert nerve repair associated functions in the tumor-environment and underline the therapeutic value of SC-derived factors for aggressive, SC stroma-poor NBTs.

### Sample Protocol
Neuroblastoma/ganglioneuroma tissue and neuroblastoma cell lines  Tumor specimen from diagnostic neuroblastomas (n=18) and ganglioneuromas (n=6) have been collected during surgery or biopsy for diagnostic purposes and left-overs were cryopreserved until analysis. Cryosections of ganglioneuroma tissue were analyzed for SC stroma rich areas identified by H+E-staining, immmunofluorescence staining for SC marker S100B, and confirmed by a pathologist. The corresponding tumor region was excised using a scalpel blade and cryopreserved until RNA and protein extraction. The used cell lines are derived from biopsies or surgical resection of aggressively behaving tumors of patients suffering from high-risk, metastatic neuroblastomas. In-house established, low passage neuroblastoma cell lines STA-NB-6, -7 -10 and -15 as well as the cell lines SK-N-SH, SH-SY5Y, IMR5 and CLB-Ma were cultured in MEMα complete (MEMα GlutaMAXTM, 1% Pen/Strep, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 25 mM HEPES and 10% FCS).  Protein isolation, high-resolution mass spectrometry and expression analysis Fresh frozen diagnostic ganglioneuroma derived SC stroma rich areas (SC-GN, n=6), diagnostic high-risk neuroblastomas (NB-TU, n=3) as well as low-passage neuroblastoma cell lines STA-NB-7, STA-NB-2 and STA-NB-10 (NB-CL, n=3) were used for proteomic analysis (see supplementary table 1 & 2 for tumor and cell line characteristics). Protein isolation from cells and tissue, mass spectrometry sample preparation and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) has been carried out as described previously [11, 37], all samples were measured in two technical replicates. The data were analysed together with previously generated proteomic data set of human primary SCs (SC, n=4) and human injured fascicle explants [NF_act (SC-IN), n=3) [11]. Lysis of Tissue Samples and Subcellular Fractionation of Cultured Cells Frozen human tissue samples were thawed and incubated with 100 µl sample buffer for 10 min. Subsequently, the tissue was lysed using an ultrasonic stick. In case of cultured cells, washed cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X‐100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (pepstatin, leupeptin and aprotinin, each at 1 μg/ml; 1 mM PMSF) followed by applying mechanical shear stress. The cytoplasmic proteins were separated from the nuclei by centrifugation at 2,300g at 4°C and precipitated overnight with ice‐cold ethanol at −20°C. Afterwards, samples were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM DDT). Protein concentrations were determined using Bradford assays. Mass Spectrometry (MS) Sample Preparation An adaptation of the Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol was used for protein digestion of all samples as described previously [11, 37]. Briefly, 20 µg of each protein sample were concentrated onto a 3kD MWCO filter by centrifugation at 15,000g for 15 min. Protein reduction using dithiothreitol and alkylation using iodoacetamide was performed before 0.1 µg/µl trypsin was added and incubated at 37°C for 18 h. Clean-up of peptide samples was done with C‐18 spin columns (Pierce). Afterwards, peptide samples were dried and stored at −20°C until analysis. LC‐MS Analysis Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol of 4 synthetic standard peptides each and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). LC‐MS/MS analyses were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC‐system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 µl of the peptide solution were loaded on a 2 cm x 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre‐column (Thermo) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the pre‐column to a 50 cm x 75 µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separation was achieved using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 235 min. For mass spectrometric analyses, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400–1,400 at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z =200). Subsequently, MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions were achieved using higher‐energy C‐trap dissociation fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schwann cell, Plasticity, Stroma, Neuroblastoma, Egfl8, Ganglioneuroma

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


