### Accession
PXD040718

### Title
N-linked glycosylation of the M-protein variable region: Glycoproteogenomics reveals a new layer of personalized complexity in multiple myeloma.

### Description
Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy characterized by a monoclonal expansion of plasma cells that secrete a characteristic M-protein. This M-protein is crucial for diagnosis and monitoring of MM in the blood of patients. Recent evidence has emerged that N-glycosylation of the M-protein variable (Fab) region contributes to M-protein pathogenicity, and that it is a risk factor for disease progression of plasma cell disorders. Current methodologies lack the specificity for a site specific glycoprofile of the Fab regions of M-proteins. Here, we introduce a novel glycoproteogenomics method that allows detailed M-protein glycoprofiling by integrating patient specific Fab region sequences (genomics) with glycoprofiling by glycoproteomics. Genomic analysis uncovered a more than two-fold increase in the Fab Light Chain N-glycosylation of M-proteins of patients with Multiple Myeloma compared to healthy individuals, pointing towards an association. Subsequent glycoproteogenomics analysis of 41 patients enrolled in the IFM 2009 clinical trial revealed that the majority of the sites were fully occupied with complex type glycans, distinguishable from Fc region glycans due to high levels of sialylation, fucosylation and bisecting structures. Together, glycoproteogenomics is a powerful tool to study de novo  Fab N-glycosylation in plasma cell dyscrasias and possibly other fields.

### Sample Protocol
The purification of the M-proteins from serum was performed based on the LC type of the M-proteins. For M-proteins containing a Kappa LC, Capture Select Kappa XP affinity matrix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) were used, and for M-proteins containing a Lambda LC, Capture Select Lambda Hu affinity matrix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. 50 µl of the affinity matrix was transferred to a 0.45 µm 96-wells filter plate (AcroPrep Advance 1 mL, PALL, New York, New York, USA). The affinity matrix was washed three times with 400 µl PBS (Gibco, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). 200 µg M-protein was used for the purification for most patients, while for patient 7 100 µg was used due to the low M-protein concentration, as determined by serum protein electrophoresis. The corresponding amount of serum was diluted 6- fold in PBS. The diluted serum was incubated with the affinity matrix for 1 hour at room temperature with agitating on a thermomixer at 1000 rpm. The depleted serum was removed by spinning the plate at 1000 g for 1 min at room temperature. The affinity matrix was washed twice with 400 µl PBS supplemented with 0.5 M NaCl (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA). To elute the M-proteins, the affinity matrix was incubated with 50 µl Glycine (pH=3, Sigma Aldrich) for 5 minutes at room temperature. The eluted M-protein fractions were collected in Eppendorf tubes prefilled with 5 µl 2 M TRIS.HCl (pH=7, Sigma Aldrich), to neutralize the solution. The samples were stored at -80 0C until further processing. For digestion, 25 µg purified M-protein was used. The M-protein solutions were diluted 1:1 with 8 M Urea (Sigma Aldrich) in Tris.HCl (pH=7) to unfold the proteins. Next, the samples were reduced by addition of 1 µl 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich) and incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were alkylated by addition of 1 µl 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) and incubation for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The alkylated samples were diluted 1:4 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) before addition of a mixture of Trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) and LysC (FUJiFILM Wako, Akasaka, Minato, Tokyo, Japan). Both proteases were added in a 1:50 ratio. The samples were incubated overnight at 37 0C.

### Data Protocol
In short, LC-MS/MS datasets were analyzed to identify glycopeptide fragmentation spectra, of which the glycan moiety and peptide were identified based on database searches. For the peptide database search, a custom database was created containing the M-protein Fab region sequences.LC-MS/MS datasets were converted to mascot generic files (MGF) with custom made scripts in DataAnalysis (Bruker Daltonics, v 5.0). The processing of MGF’s was performed in BioPharma Commpass (Bruker Daltonics, version 3.0.0.19). Datafiles were uploaded and classification of glycopeptides fragmentation spectra was performed. The spectra were classified as glycopeptide spectra if at least 2 consecutive m/z distances (tolerance of 0.05 Da) consistent with the tetrasaccharide core of an N-glycan were observed (Peptide-HexNAc-HexNAc-Hex-Hex). For each glycopeptide spectrum the peptide and glycan mass were calculated, for subsequent identification of each respective moiety by protein- and glycan-database search engines. To identify the peptide sequences, a database search of the peptide and glycopeptide classified spectra was performed. Spectra were submitted from BPC3 to an in-house mascot server (v2.5, Matrix Science.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Multiple myeloma, M-protein, Glycoproteogenomics

### Affiliations
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Wessels
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


