### Accession
PXD025385

### Title
DIAmeter: Matching peptides to data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry data

### Description
This dataset consists of three mass spectrometry experiments where different isolation window sizes were explored in combination with gas phase fractionation, using a yeast lysate with selective oxidation of methionine. The resulting DIA data, as .raw files, include (1) one run covering the 400--1200 m/z mass range acquired using 20 m/z isolation windows; (2) two runs acquired using 10 m/z isolation windows to cover 400--800 and 800--1200 m/z mass ranges; (3) four runs acquired using 5 m/z isolation windows covering 400--600, 600--800, 800--1000, and 1000--1200 m/z ranges, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare the yeast sample, 25 \mug of tryptic yeast peptides, prepared as described by Studer~\etal~\cite{studer:evolution}, were resuspended in 30 \mul of oxidizing solution containing 100 mM DMSO, 5\% acetonitrile and 1 M HCl, and reacted at room temperature for 20 minutes. Peptides were then diluted two-fold with 0.1\% TFA and desalted over a 2-layer C18 Stage tip (Empore, 3M)~\cite{rappsilber:protocol}, that had been previously conditioned with 20 \mul methanol, followed by 20 \mul 50\% acetonitrile 0.5\% acetic acid, and 20 \mul 0.1\% TFA. Peptides on the Stage tip were washed 3 times with 20 \mul of 0.1\% TFA and eluted with 50\% acetonitrile 0.5\% acetic acid. Eluted peptides were then lyophilized.  Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 50 \mul of 5\% ACN, 5\% formic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS. A total of 1.5 \mul of sample was loaded onto a 100 \mum \times  35 cm fused silica capillary tubing packed with 1.9 \mum ReproSil-Pur C18 (Dr.\ Maisch) reversed-phase material and separated using a gradient of 5\% to 36\% acetonitrile in 0.125\% formic acid delivered at 300 nl/min over 73 minutes on an EASY-nLC 1200 nano-flow UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were online analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid MS (Thermo Scientific) with a total 90-minute acquisition time. All methods consisted of an MS1 scan at 60K resolution every 3 seconds with 100\% normalized AGC target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms followed by DIA MS2 scans events acquired at 30K resolution with a maximum injection time of 54 ms and 4e5 target AGC.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data were converted to .mzXML by proteowizard

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Yang Lu

### Lab Head
Dr William Stafford Noble
University of Washington


