### Accession
PXD017147

### Title
IL7R mutational activation can initiate Ph-like and PAX5 P80R precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Description
Interleukin-7 receptor α (encoded by IL7R) is essential for lymphoid development. Whether acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-related IL7R gain-of-function mutations can trigger leukemogenesis remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that lymphoid-restricted mutant IL7R, expressed at physiological levels in conditional knock-in mice, establishes a pre-leukemia stage in which B-cell precursors display self-renewal ability, initiating precursor B-ALL that resembles PAX5 P80R or Ph-like human leukemia. Full transformation associates with transcriptional upregulation of oncogenes such as Myc or Bcl2, downregulation of tumor suppressors such as Ikzf1 or Arid2, and major IL-7R signaling upregulation (involving both JAK/STAT5 and PI3K/mTOR), required for leukemia cell viability. Accordingly, maximal signaling drives full penetrance and early leukemia onset in homozygous IL7R mutant animals. Notably, we identify 2 transcriptional subgroups in mouse and human Ph-like ALL, and show that dactolisib and sphingosine-kinase inhibitors are novel treatment avenues for IL-7R-related cases. Our model, a unique resource to explore the pathophysiology and therapeutic vulnerabilities of B-ALL, demonstrates that IL7R can initiate this malignancy.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse model: Il7rflCPT conditional knock-in animals in C57Bl/6 background were generated by Cyagen Biosciences (Santa Clara, CA). The exon 6 of the Il7r gene was targeted by a homologous recombination vector carrying the wild-type exon 6 and a reversely positioned mutant exon 6 in conjunction with a Neomycin (Neo) selection cassette and flanking 5’ and 3’ homology arms. The mutant exon 6 consisted in an in-frame insertion of TGTCCCACC, coding for cysteine (C), proline (P) and threonine (T), at the coding sequence nucleotide position 733. Upon Neo excision, The LoxP and the variant Lox511 sites were arranged in such a configuration (place, distances and orientation) that, upon Cre recombinase activity, the mutant and wild-type exons 6 are inverted, positioning the mutant exon 6 in the sense orientation, following by deletion of the wild-type exon 6. The conditional animals are referred to as Il7rflCPT (fl=floxed). hCD2-iCre (de Boer et al, 2003), were used in crossings to result in Cre-expressing progeny animals expressing heterozygous mutant IL7R, some of which developed leukemia. When not developing leukemia, viable hCD2-iCreposIl7rflCPT males were crossed with Il7rflCPT females to give rise to homozygous mutant Il7r progeny, all of which developed leukemia. In all experiments, animals were closely monitored and sacrificed when reaching humane endpoints: loss of 20% of body weight, hind leg paralysis, breathing impairment or poor reaction to external stimuli. All animal experiments were performed under licence, according the IMM-JLA’s institutional and Portuguese (DGV) regulations. A full description of the model is present in the published article.  FACS cell sorting: Bone Marrow (BM) suspensions were stained for sorting with anti- CD19, B220, IgM, IgD, CD45 and TCRb and sorted on a FACSAriaIII (Becton Dickinson San Jose, CA, USA). Leukemic cells were sorted as CD45pos or negCD19posIgMnegIgDneg; Pre+ProB precursors were sorted from the BM as CD45intB220intIgMneg. Samples 1-3 are sorted control Pre+ProB cells (B cell precursors, not leukemic). Samples 4-6 are sorted leukemic cells with the IL7R mutation heterozygous and samples 7-9 are leukemic cells with mutant IL7R homozygous. Leukemias are arrested at stages within the Pre+ProB stage.  FASP processing of samples for proteomics: Cell pellets were solubilized in Tris HCl (100mM, pH 8) containing 4% SDS and 100mM DTT. Cell lysates were heated at 95oC, and DNA was shredded by sonication. Samples were processed using FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al, 2009) with some modifications. After, lysates were passed through filters (Nanosep, 10k, PALL Life Sciences), proteins were alkylated in 100μl iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 50mM for 15min, filters were washed three times with 200μl 8M urea in Tris-HCl (100mM, pH 8) then twice with 200μl 40mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins on the filters were then digested twice at 30oC with trypsin (3.3μg x2), first overnight and then for another 6h in 200μl, ammonium bicarbonate at 40mM. Resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridge (Empore, Agilent technologies).   LC-MS analysis for proteomics: Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-exactive-HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 5μL of each sample were loaded at 10μL/min onto a trap column (100μm Å~ 2cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5μm, 100., Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 2% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 4 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column. The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 116min, and then to 98% buffer B by 118min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 15min and re-equilibrated in 2% buffer B for 31min. Q-exactive HF-X was used in data dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50ms, a resolution of 60000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3x106) followed by 40 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 1.4 Da, resolution at 7500, maximum ion injection time at 50ms and AGC 105, stepped collision energy was set to 27 and fixed first mass to 120m/z. Spectrum was acquired in centroid mode and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs were performed.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis: Raw mass spec data files were searched using the MaxQuants oftware package (version 1.6.0.1). Proteins and peptides were identified using a Uniprot canonical plus isoforms database (accessed 02/08/2017). The following search parameters within MaxQuant were selected: protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues wasselected as a fixed modification; trypsin selected as digestion enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages; the false discovery rate was set at 1% for protein and peptide and the match between runs function was disabled. Proteins were removed from the data set which were categorized as “reverse”, “contaminant” or “only identified by site”. Estimates of protein copy numbers per cell were calculated using the histone ruler method (Wisniewski et al, 2014) within the Perseus package (Tyanova et al, 2016). Differential protein expression was performed using the DEP (version 1.0.1) and limma (v3.34.9) packages in R (v3.4.4). Molecules showing nominal p<0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-7 receptor &#x3b1; (encoded by IL7R) is essential for lymphoid development. Whether acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-related IL7R gain-of-function mutations can trigger leukemogenesis remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that lymphoid-restricted mutant IL7R, expressed at physiological levels in conditional knock-in mice, establishes a pre-leukemic stage in which B-cell precursors display self-renewal ability, initiating leukemia resembling PAX5 P80R or Ph-like human B-ALL. Full transformation associates with transcriptional upregulation of oncogenes such as Myc or Bcl2, downregulation of tumor suppressors such as Ikzf1 or Arid2, and major IL-7R signaling upregulation (involving JAK/STAT5 and PI3K/mTOR), required for leukemia cell viability. Accordingly, maximal signaling drives full penetrance and early leukemia onset in homozygous IL7R mutant animals. Notably, we identify 2 transcriptional subgroups in mouse and human Ph-like ALL, and show that dactolisib and sphingosine-kinase inhibitors are potential treatment avenues for IL-7R-related cases. Our model, a resource to explore the pathophysiology and therapeutic vulnerabilities of B-ALL, demonstrates that IL7R can initiate this malignancy.

### Keywords
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, B cells

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,  Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor João T. Barata
Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculdade de Medicina,  Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal


