### Accession
PXD035577

### Title
Age-related decline in the resistance of mice to bacterial infection and in LPS/TLR4 pathway-dependent neutrophil responses

### Description
Host defense against bacterial and fungal infections diminishes with age. In humans, this is thought to be caused in part by a decline in neutrophil responses. However, it remains unclear whether a similar decline in neutrophil function occurs in mice. Here, we show that old mice have a reduced capacity to clear pathogenic E. coli during septic peritonitis. Neutrophil recruitment to the peritoneum was elevated during lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced septic peritonitis but not aseptic peritonitis. Neutrophils from old mice showed reduced chemoattractant-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production upon priming with LPS but not GM-CSF/TNF. Phagocytosis and degranulation were reduced in a partially LPS-dependent manner, whereas NETosis was impaired independently of LPS. The chemoattractant-stimulated production of PIP3 was reduced upon priming with LPS but not GM-CSF/TNF, whereas PI(4,5)P2 levels were constitutively low. Unexpectedly, chemotaxis was normal regardless of priming pathway, as were the chemoattractant-stimulated activities of Rac1 and Rac2. The expression of 5% of neutrophil proteins was deregulated in old age. Granule proteins, particularly cathepsins and serpins, as well as toll-like receptor (TLR) pathway proteins and membrane receptors were upregulated, whereas chromatin and RNA regulators were downregulated. Upregulation of Cd180 and downregulation of MyD88 may contribute to the impaired LPS priming and LPS-dependent PIP3 production. In summary, all major neutrophil responses except chemotaxis decline with age in mice, particularly upon LPS priming. This LPS-TLR4 pathway dependence resolves some of the controversy regarding the effects of age on murine neutrophils and confirms mice are an appropriate model for the declining human neutrophil function.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophils were lysed in 6M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM Tris, 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 50 °C, then cooled and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. The alkylated proteins were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone for 16 h at -20 °C, then solubilized in 100 mM triethyl-ammonium bicarbonate, 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, and sequentially digested with Lys-C and trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 30 °C. The resulting peptides were labelled with tandem mass-tags using two sets of 8-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific). The two combined sets of 8 samples were each separated into 60 fractions by high-pH reverse phase HPLC. The major peptide-containing fractions were analyzed by LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, using an SPS-MS3 scan sequence.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the mass spectrometry data by searching the Uniprot mouse proteome database using Mascot software (Matrix Science), and relative abundances of the identified proteins were determined using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific). Statistical analysis of the relative protein abundances was done using R software to calculate differences between young and old by two-sided t-tests on log-transformed data, with Benjamini-Hochberg false-discovery rate correction for multiple comparisons of all quantified proteins. Proteins were assigned to one or more categories of protein class or signaling pathway using a374 combination of PANTHER pathway analysis (www.pantherdb.org) and manual curation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nets, Neutrophils, Ros, Degranulation, Aging, Tlr4, Phagocytosis

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute

### Submitter
David Oxley

### Lab Head
Dr david oxley
Babraham Institute


