### Accession
PXD014327

### Title
Metaproteomic insights into two phytoplankton

### Description
we applied a metaproteomic approach to investigate the global protein expression profiles of two co-existing phytoplankton species H. akashiwo and P. donghaiense during their bloom periods, and characterized the differentially expressed proteins. Our results indicated different light-harvesting ability and nutritional niche divergence in utilization of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus drove bloom occurrence of the two phytoplankton species under different ambient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
1.Field survey and sampling 2.Chl a and nutrient measurements 3.DNA extraction and 18S rDNA sequencing. 4.Protein extraction, separation and LC-ESI-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw peptide data (.wiff) were converted to the Mascot generic file format (.mgf) using the SCIEX MS Data Converter (version 1.3 beta). The MS/MS peak lists were searched against the phytoplankton database, which was combined from four sources.

### Publication Abstract
Phytoplankton blooms are natural phenomena in the ocean, which are the results of rapid cell growth of some phytoplankton species in a unique environment. However, little is known about the molecular events occurring during the bloom. Here, we compared metaproteomes of two phytoplankton <i>Heterosigma akashiwo</i> and <i>Prorocentrum donghaiense</i> in the coastal East China Sea. <i>H. akashiwo</i> and <i>P. donghaiense</i> accounted for 7.82% and 4.74% of the phytoplankton community protein abundances in the nonbloom sample, whereas they contributed to 60.13% and 78.09%, respectively, in their individual blooming samples. Compared with <i>P. donghaiense</i>, <i>H. akashiwo</i> possessed a significantly higher abundance of light-harvesting complex proteins, carbonic anhydrasem and RuBisCO. The blooming <i>H. akashiwo</i> cells expressed more proteins related to external nutrient acquisition, such as bicarbonate transporter SLC4, ammonium transporter, nitrite transporter, and alkaline phosphatase, while the blooming <i>P. donghaiense</i> cells highly expressed proteins related to extra- and intracellular organic nutrient utilization, such as amino acid transporter, 5'-nucleotidase, acid phosphatase, and tripeptidyl-peptidase. The strong capabilities of light harvesting, as well as acquisition and assimilation of inorganic carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, facilitated the formation of the <i>H. akashiwo</i> bloom under the high turbidity and inorganic nutrient-sufficient condition, whereas the competitive advantages in organic nutrient acquisition and reallocation guaranteed the occurrence of the <i>P. donghaiense</i> bloom under the inorganic nutrient-insufficient condition. This study highlights the power of metaproteomics for revealing the underlying molecular behaviors of different coexisting phytoplankton species and advances our knowledge on the formation of phytoplankton blooms.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> A deep understanding of the mechanisms driving bloom formation is a prerequisite for effective bloom management. Metaproteomics was applied in this study to reveal the adaptive and responsive strategies of two coexisting phytoplankton species, <i>H. akashiwo</i> and <i>P. donghaiense</i>, during their bloom periods. Metabolic features and niche divergence in light harvesting, as well as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus acquisition and assimilation likely promoted the bloom occurrence under different environments. The molecular behaviors of coexisting bloom-causing species will give clues for bloom monitoring and management in the oceans.

### Keywords
Metaproteomic phytoplankton blooms

### Affiliations
BGI
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
He Yanbin

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen


