### Accession
PXD021414

### Title
Proteomics of Extracellular Vesicles Produced by Granulicatella adiacens, which causes Infective Endocarditis

### Description
Granulicatella adiacens is a non-motile, non-spore-forming, facultatively anaerobic Gram-positive coccus. It is part of the normal oral flora but cause serious infections such as infective endocarditis. Many bacterial species produce extracellular vesicles (EVs) as part of normal physiology, but also use it as a virulence strategy. In this study, it was hypothesized that G. adiacens produces EVs that possibly help the species in virulence. Therefore, the objectives were to isolate and characterize EVs produced by these species and to investigate their immune-stimulatory effects. The reference strain G. adiacens CCUG 27809  was cultured on chocolate blood agar for 2 days. From subsequent broth cultures, the EVs were isolated using differential centrifugation and filtration protocol and then observed using scanning electron microscopy. Proteins in the vesicle preparations were identified by nano LC-ESI-MS/MS. The EVs proteomes were analyzed and characterized using different bioinformatics tools. The immune-stimulatory effect of the EVs was studied via ELISA quantification of IL-8, IL-1β and CCL5, major proinflammatory cytokines, produced from stimulated human PBMCs. It was revealed that both G. adiacens and G. elegans produced EVs, ranging in diameter from 30 to 250 nm. Overall, G. adiacens EVs contained 112 proteins. The proteome consist of several ribosomal proteins, DNA associated proteins, binding proteins, and metabolic enzymes. It was also shown that these EVs carry putative virulence factors including moonlighting proteins. These EVs were able to induce the production of IL-8, IL-1β and CCL5 from human PBMCs. The diversity in EVs content indicates that these vesicles may have possible roles in bacterial survival, invasion, host immune modulation as well as infection. Further characterization of the composition and immunogenicity of G. adiacens EVs may provide new insights into virulence mechanisms of this bacterial species.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of EVs proteins, mass spectrometry was performed by Proteome Factory (Proteome Factory AG, Berlin, Germany) using nano-liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS). After pooling replicate samples from EVs preparations, 400 ng proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Then, the resulting peptides were subjected to the nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. 1% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid was used as eluent for 5 minutes to trap and desalt the peptides on the enrichment column (Zorbax SB C18, 0.3  5 mm, Agilent). An acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile was then used within 120 minutes to separate the peptides on a Zorbax 300 SB C18, 75 µm x 150 mm column (Agilent). The mass spectrometer automatically recorded the mass spectra according to the manufacturer's settings

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was made using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, England) and the National Center for Biotechnology Information non-redundant (NCBI-nr) protein database, version 20151202, (NCBI, Bethesda, USA). Ion charge in search parameters for ions from ESI-MS/MS data acquisition was set to "1+, 2+ or 3+" according to the instrument's and method's standard charge state distribution. The search parameters were: Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M); Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 3 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: ± 0.6 Da; Missed Cleavages: 2. The inclusion criterion was: peptides that match with a score of 20 or above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extravellular vesicles, Granulicatella, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Oral Microbiology research Laboratory, Faculty of Dentistry, Kuwait University, KUWAIT
Faculty of Dentistry
Kuwait University

### Submitter
Maribasappa Karched

### Lab Head
Dr Maribasappa Karched
Oral Microbiology research Laboratory, Faculty of Dentistry, Kuwait University, KUWAIT


