### Accession
PXD041899

### Title
Proteome and Phosphoproteome of Circulating Extracellular Vesicles in Type 1 Diabetes and Controls

### Description
This pilot study aimed to characterize the proteomic and phosphoproteomic landscape of circulating EVs in participants with established T1D (N=10) and healthy normal volunteers (Controls) (N=7) (NCT03379792) carefully matched by age, race/ethnicity, sex, and BMI. EVs were isolated using EVtrap® technology. EV proteins identified and quantified by LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from serum using Tymora’s EVtrap® method and dried completely. The isolated and dried EV samples were processed as described previously (Illiuk et al,  Proteome Res. 2020). Briefly, EV samples were lysed to extract proteins using the phase-transfer surfactant (PTS) aided procedure, normalized based on protein concentration using BCA assay, and the proteins digested with Lys-C (Fujifilm Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA, USA) at 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 37°C. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion at 37°C. After surfactant removal, the resulting peptides were desalted using Top-Tip C18 tips (Glygen Corp., Columbia, MD, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was split into 99% and 1% aliquots for phosphoproteomic and proteomic experiments respectively. The samples were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C. For phosphoproteome analysis, the larger portion of each sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using the PolyMAC Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit (Tymora Analytical, West Lafayette, IN, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions, and the eluted phosphopeptides dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge. For phosphoproteomic analysis the whole enriched sample was used, while for proteomics only 50% of the sample was loaded onto the LC-MS. Each dried peptide or phosphopeptide sample was dissolved at 0.1 μg/μL in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid with 3% (vol/vol) acetonitrile. 10 μL of each sample was injected into an Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were captured on a 2-cm Acclaim PepMap trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a heated 50-cm column packed with ReproSil Saphir 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (buffer B) run with a linear 60-min gradient of 6–30% buffer B at flow rate of 300 nL/min. The UHPLC was coupled online with a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 375 to 1,500 with the resolution of 60,000) was followed by MS/MS of the 15 most intense ions (30,000 resolution; normalized collision energy - 28%; automatic gain control target (AGC) - 2E4, maximum injection time - 200 ms; 60sec exclusion].

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly against the human Uniprot database with no redundant entries, using Byonic (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA) and Sequest search engines loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS2 tolerance was set at 20ppm. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da), and variable modifications of oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N terminus of proteins, and phosphorylation of S, T and Y residues (+79.996 Da) for the phosphoproteomics data. Search was performed with full trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false-discovery rates of proteins and peptides were set at 0.01. All protein and peptide identifications were grouped and any redundant entries were removed. Only unique peptides and unique master proteins were reported. All data were quantified using the label-free quantitation node of Precursor Ions Quantifier through the Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the quantification of proteomic or phosphoproteomic data, the intensities of peptides/phosphopeptides were extracted with initial precursor mass tolerance set at 10 ppm, minimum number of isotope peaks as 2, maximum ΔRT of isotope pattern multiplets – 0.2 min, PSM confidence FDR of 0.01, with hypothesis test of ANOVA, maximum RT shift of 5 min, pairwise ratio-based ratio calculation, and 100 as the maximum allowed fold change. The abundance levels of all peptides and proteins were normalized using the total peptide amount normalization node in the Proteome Discoverer. For calculations of fold-change between the groups of proteins, total protein abundance values were added together and the ratios of these sums were used to compare proteins within different samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Human', 'Type 1 diabetes', 'Extracellular vesicles', 'Proteome', 'Phosphoproteome']

### Affiliations
['AdventHealth', 'AdventHealth von Weller Family Chair in Type 1 Diabetes Research Associate Investigator, Translational Research Institute']

### Submitter
['Yury Nunez Lopez']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'AdventHealth von Weller Family Chair in Type 1 Diabetes Research Associate Investigator, Translational Research Institute', 'email': 'Anna.Casu@AdventHealth.com', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Anna Casu, MD', 'id': '2573112'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['blood serum']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['T1D' 'Healthy']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample; AC=MS:1002038']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Exactive; AC=MS:1000649']

