### Accession
PXD004004

### Title
BH4-deficiency induced changes in NO-redox balance reveals a novel role for BH4 in the mitochondria

### Description
The nitric oxide synthase (NOS) co-factor, tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), is a redox-active molecule that regulates nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production by NOS, and is an example of redox-dependent signalling in the endothelium that underlies both the maintenance of vascular homeostasis and the development of cardiovascular disease (CVD).  Loss of endothelial BH4 is observed in CVD states and results in decreased NO production and increased ROS generation by endothelial NO synthase (uncoupling).  Genetic mouse models of augmented endothelial BH4 synthesis have shown proof of concept that endothelial BH4 can alter CVD pathogenesis.  However, clinical trials of BH4 therapy in vascular disease have been limited by systemic oxidation and limited endothelial uptake of BH4, highlighting the need to explore the wider roles of BH4 in order to find novel therapeutic targets.  In this study we aim to elucidate the effects of BH4 depletion on mitochondrial function and bioenergetics using targeted knockdown of the BH4 synthetic enzyme GTPCH in vitro.  Knockdown of GTPCH (and, therefore, intracellular BH4 levels) by >90% lead to a striking induction of ROS generation in the mitochondria of murine endothelial cells.  This effect was likewise observed in BH4 depleted GCH fibroblasts devoid of NOS, indicating a novel NOS-independent role for BH4 in mitochondrial redox signalling.  Furthermore, this BH4-dependent, mitochondrial-derived ROS oxidized mitochondrial BH4 and is seen alongside distinct changes in the thioredoxin and glutathione antioxidant pathways, revealed by mass spectrometry using an unbiased proteomic approach.  These changes are accompanied by a modest increase in mitochondrial size, attenuated respiratory function, and marked changes in the cellular metabolic profile; including succinate accumulation.  Taken together, these data reveal a novel NOS-independent role for BH4 in the regulation of mitochondrial redox signalling and metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
NIH 3T3 murine fibroblasts were stably transfected with a Tet-Off transactivator construct, as previously described [15].  Addition of doxycycline blocks binding of the transactivator, preventing gene expression.  These 3T3-Tet-Off cells have previously been shown not to express GTPCH and are devoid of eNOS protein.  3T3-Tet-Off cells were stably transfected with a plasmid encoding hemagglutinin antigen-tagged human GTPCH, under the control of a tetracycline-responsive element.  A single isolated cell colony testing positive for GTPCH expression was expanded to establish a cell line, termed “GCH”.  The addition of doxycycline to cell culture medium results in diminished GCH mRNA, GTPCH protein, and BH4 levels. sEnd.1 murine endothelial cells, and tet-regulatable GCH cells were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% FBS, glutamine (2 mmol/litre), penicillin (100 units/ml), and streptomycin (0.1 mg/ml).  GCH cells were maintained using medium containing the antibiotics Hygromycin B (200 μg/ml) and Geneticin® (200 μg/ml).  Where appropriate, doxycycline (1 μg/ml) was added to cell culture media to abolish transcription of GCH1 mRNA. Cells grown to confluency in T175 flasks were harvested by trypsinisation and pelleted at 400 × g, at 4°C.  Mitochondria were isolated using the Qproteome Mitochondria Isolation Kit (Qiagen), as per the manufacturer’s instructions.  All steps were carried out on ice or at 4°C and mitochondrial pellets were stored at -80°C for BH4, Western, or proteomic analysis.   Western Blotting Cell or mitochondrial lysates were prepared by homogenisation in ice-cold CelLytic™ M buffer (Sigma) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science).  Lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and samples were prepared using LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen).  Western blotting was carried out using standard techniques with anti-GAPDH, -VDAC, -cytochrome C, -SDH, and -GTPCH antibodies. Mitochondrial pellets were dissolved in 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Dithiothreitol (10 mM) was added and samples were incubated at 60°C for 45 minutes followed by incubation in XYmM Iodoacetamide for XY minutes in the dark..  Samples were diluted 1:10 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added (1:50 w/w) for overnight digestion.  PMSF (0.5 mM) stopped the reaction and samples were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Speedvac, Thermo Scientific) and resuspended in acetonitrile (2%) and TFA (0.1%).  Samples were desalted using ZipTipC18 pipette tips (Millipore), vacuum concentrated again, and reconstituted in acetonitrile (2%) and TFA (0.1%), before mass spectrometric analysis.  LC-MS/MS used a Q Exactive mass spectrometer, coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC.  Samples underwent online desalting using a Trap column (PepMAP C18, 300µm x5mm, 5 µm particle, Thermo). Subsequently, an nEASY column (PepMAP C18, 75 µm x 500mm, 2 µm particle, Thermo)  was used with a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 60 minutes, and a gradient of 2%-35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO / 0.1% Formic acid to achieve UPLC separation.  Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 @ 200m/z and an ion target of 3E6 between 380 and 1800 m/z for up to 100ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17500 and an ion target of 1E5 for up to 128ms and a fixed first mass of 100m/z and normalized collision energy of 28. Selected precursors were picked above a threshold of 4.7E7 counts and excluded for 27s.

### Data Protocol
For label free quantitation raw data were imported into Progenesis QI (Waters) with default settings. MS2 spectra were identified with Mascot v 2.5 (Matrix Science) using 10ppm and 0.05Da peptide mass/fragment mass tolerances. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as fixed modification and Deamidation (N/Q) and Oxidation (M0 as variable modifications. Data was exported for integration in Progenesis with a peptides false discovery rate of 1%. Furthermore spectra with a peptide score <20 were discarded. Peptide abundances were mean normalized to identified features only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Nos, Mouse

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford


