### Accession
PXD014226

### Title
Determination of GPI structure of human CD59 in HEK293 cells

### Description
To determine GPI structure of human CD59 in wild-type,B3GALT4-KO, PIGZ-B3GALT4-DKO HEK293 cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells expressing His-FLAG-GST-FLAG tagged human CD59 (HFGF-CD59) were treated with 0.5 unit/ml PI-PLC in 5 ml Opti-MEM containing 10 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 1m M EDTA, and 0.1% BSA at 37C for 2.5 h. Supernatant was loaded to a column of 500 µl of Glutathione Sepharose 4B at 4 C. After washing with 5 ml PBS, HFGF-CD59 was eluted by 5 ml elution-buffer (pH7.4, PBS containing 30 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4) and 20 mM reduced glutathione). Eluted sample was precipitated by Trichloroacetic acid method. Pellet was resolved in 1 x sample buffer with 5% -mercaptoethanol and boiled at 60C for 60 min. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE gel, stained by Imperial Protein Stain, and In-gel Digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Mass data was analyzed by Xcalibur Software. In the MSMS profiles, characteristic fragments from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 477+, were selected first, and other fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structure variations.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins and glycosphingolipids interact with each other in the mammalian plasma membranes, forming dynamic microdomains. How their interaction starts in the cells has been unclear. Here, based on a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screen for genes required for GPI side-chain modification by galactose in the Golgi apparatus, we report that &#x3b2;1,3-galactosyltransferase 4 (B3GALT4), the previously characterized GM1 ganglioside synthase, additionally functions in transferring galactose to the N-acetylgalactosamine side-chain of GPI. Furthermore, B3GALT4 requires lactosylceramide for the efficient GPI side-chain galactosylation. Thus, our work demonstrates previously unexpected functional relationships between GPI-anchored proteins and glycosphingolipids in the Golgi. Through the same screening, we also show that GPI biosynthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is severely suppressed by ER-associated degradation to prevent GPI accumulation when the transfer of synthesized GPI to proteins is defective. Our data demonstrates cross-talks of GPI biosynthesis with glycosphingolipid biosynthesis and the ER quality control system.

### Keywords
Gpi anchor, Lc-msms, B3galt4

### Affiliations
Osaka University
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,Osaka University,Japan

### Submitter
Yicheng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,Osaka University,Japan


