### Accession
PXD038786

### Title
Amino acid availability acts as a metabolic rheostat to determine the magnitude of ILC2 responses - SLC7A5 and SLC7A8 KO

### Description
Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) are functionally poised, tissue-resident lymphocytes that respond rapidly to damage and infection at mucosal barrier sites. ILC2 reside within complex microenvironments where they are subject to cues from both the diet and invading pathogens – including helminths. Emerging evidence suggests ILC2 are acutely sensitive not only to canonical activating signals, but also perturbations in nutrient availability. In the context of helminth infection, we identify amino acid availability as a nutritional cue in regulating ILC2 responses. ILC2 were found to be uniquely pre-primed to import amino acids via the large neutral amino acid transporters Slc7a5 and Slc7a8. Cell-intrinsic deletion of these transporters individually impaired ILC2 expansion, while concurrent loss of both transporters markedly impaired the proliferative and cytokine producing capacity of ILC2. Moreover, amino acid determined the magnitude of ILC2 responses in part via tuning of mTOR. These findings implicate essential amino acids as a metabolic requisite for optimal ILC2 responses within mucosal barrier tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were washed extensively with PBS to remove residual FCS and snap frozen. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry by adding 100 µl of lysis buffer (5 % sodium dodecyl sulphate, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP) to each cell pellet and shaking at 1000 rpm at room temperature for 5 minutes. Lysates were boiled for 5 minutes at 95 °C, sonicated for 15 cycles of 30 seconds each and treated with 1 µl benzonase for 15 minutes at 37 °C. Protein yield was determined using the EZQ protein quantitation kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Protein lysates were loaded on to S-Trap micro columns (ProtiFi) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were digested with 20:1 protein:trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 3 hours at 47 °C before adding an additional 1 µg of trypsin and digesting for a further 1 hour at 47 °C. Peptides were eluted from columns and dried by SpeedVac and resuspended in 1 % formic acid at a peptide concentration of 0.1 µg/µl.   For conditional knockout LC-MS analysis, peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive™ plus, Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). The following LC buffers were used:  buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). An equivalent of 1.5 µg of each sample was loaded at 10 μL/min onto a µPAC trapping C18 column (Pharmafluidics). The trapping column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate with 0.1 % TFA and then switched in-line with a Pharma Fluidics, 200 cm, µPAC nanoLC C18 column. The column was equilibrated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 30 min. The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 1 % buffer B to 3.8 % buffer B in 6 min, from 3.8 % B to 12.5 % buffer B in 40 min, from 12.5 % buffer B to 41.3 % buffer B within 176 min and then from 41.3 % buffer B to 61.3 % buffer B in 14 min. The gradient was finally increased from 61.3 % buffer B to 100 % buffer B in 1 min, and the column was then washed at 100 % buffer B for 10 min.  Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over.  The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50oC.   Q-exactive plus was operated in positive ionization mode using an easy spray source. The source voltage was set to 2.2 Kv and the capillary temperature was 275oC. Data were acquired in Data Independent Acquisition Mode as previously described (Doellinger et al., 2020), with some modifications.  A scan cycle comprised of a full MS scan (m/z range from 345-1155), resolution was set to 70,000, AGC target 3 x 106, maximum injection time 200 ms.  MS survey scans were followed by DIA scans of dynamic window widths with an overlap of 0.5 Th. DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z using an automatic gain control target of 3 x 106, a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a first fixed mass of 200 m/z. Normalised collision energy was set to 25 % with a default charge state set at 3. Data for both MS scan and MS/MS DIA scan events were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed using Spectronaut (Biognosys; version 14.10.201222.47784 for conditional knockout comparisons). For all searches the DirectDIA option was selected. The following parameters were chosen; cleavage rules were set to Trypsin/P, maximum peptide length 52 amino acids, minimum peptide length 7 amino acids, maximum missed cleavages 2 and calibration mode automatic. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while the following variable modifications were selected: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The FDR threshold for both precursor and protein was set at 1 %. DirectDIA data were searched against a mouse database from Uniprot release 2020 06. This database consisted of all manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries along with mouse TrEMBL entries with protein level evidence and a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database. Estimates of protein copy number per cell were calculated using the histone ruler method (Wisniewski et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ilc2, Immunology

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Matthew R. Hepworth
Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom


