### Accession
PXD021882

### Title
Fully automated sample processing and analysis workflow for low-input proteome profiling

### Description
Recent advances in sample preparation and analysis have enabled direct profiling of protein expression in single mammalian cells and other trace samples for characterization of cellular heterogeneity and high-resolution mapping of tissues. Several techniques used to prepare and analyze low-input samples employ custom fluidics for nanoliter sample processing and manual sample injection onto a specialized separation column. While effective, these highly specialized systems require significant expertise to fabricate and operate, which has greatly limited the implementation in most proteomics laboratories. Here we developed a fully automated platform termed autoPOTS (Automated Preparation in One pot for Trace Samples) that uses only commercially available instrumentation for sample processing and analysis. An unmodified, low-cost commercial robotic pipetting platform was evaluated and utilized for fully automated sample preparation. We used low-volume 384-well plates and periodically added water or buffer to the microwells to compensate for limited evaporation during sample incubation. Prepared samples were analyzed directly from the well plate with a commercial autosampler that was modified with a 10-port valve for compatibility with 30-µm-i.d. nanoLC columns. We used autoPOTS to analyze 1–500 HeLa cells and observed only a modest reduction in peptide coverage for 150 cells and a 24% reduction in coverage for single cells compared to our previously developed nanoPOTS platform. As a test of clinical feasibility, we used autoPOTS to identify an average of 1070 protein groups from ~130 fluorescence-activated cell sorted (FACS) B or T lymphocytes. The dataset here includes all the raw files of HeLa cells and lymphocytes. We anticipate that the simplicity and ease of implementation of autoPOTS will make it an attractive option for low-input and single-cell proteomics in many laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were obtained from ATCC and cultured at 37 ℃ with 5% CO2 using Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The cells were split every 2 days and harvested upon reaching ~70% confluency. Before use, cultured HeLa cells were collected and washed 3 times in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with centrifugation at 200 ×g for 5 min each time. Blood was drawn from a healthy male donor into a 4 mL EDTA tube at the Brigham Young University Student Health Center and immediately placed on ice. Small samples of whole blood were added to 4 mL of red blood cell lysis buffer and incubated at room temperature for 3 min. The white blood cells were separated from the lysed red blood cells and extracellular debris by centrifugation at 250 ×g for 5 min. The samples were decanted and the white blood cells in the pellet were resuspended in 100 µL PBS. The following fluorescent stains were added to the sorting sample and the appropriate single-stain control: 5 µL APC anti-human CD19 to stain for B cells, 5 µL FITC anti-human CD3 to stain for T cells, and 10 µl PI to stain for ruptured cells and allow for selection of intact cells. The cells were washed and resuspended in 300 µL PBS and filtered using 40 µm filters prior to sorting. The fluorescently labeled cells were sorted into a 384-well microplate into 5 replicates of 145 cells each for both B and T cells. A 384-well microplate was pre-washed with mobile phase A (0.1% v/v FA in water) and 0.01% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM).  Before cell loading, 4 µL of 1% DDM was dispensed to the wells. Once cells were loaded into the wells by limiting dilution, the plate was covered with the sealing mat and sonicated for 5 min followed by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 1 min. The well plate was mounted in the OT-2 system and 1 µL of 25 mM DTT was dispensed to each well for reduction. During the 1 h incubation at 70 ℃, the OT-2 dispensed 2 µL of ABC buffer to each well every 15 min to compensate for evaporative losses. The microplate was then cooled to 25 ℃ and 1 µL of 60 mM IAA was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark. After alkylation, proteins were pre-digested using 1 µL of lys-C for 3 h at 37 ℃ and then digested by adding 1 µL of trypsin and incubating for 12 h at 37 ℃. The concentration of enzymes was 1 ng/µL for 0, 1, 10 and 140 cells, and 5 ng/µL for 500 cells. During the 37 ℃ incubations, 2 µL of H2O was added to each well every 3 h, and 1 µL was added at 12 h. After digestion with trypsin, 1 µL of 5% FA was dispensed and the reaction was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After sample preparation, the well plate was centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 2 min, a foil adhesive mat was used for long-term storage prior to LC-MS analysis. A home-packed nanoLC column of 30 µm i.d. and a split flow column of 75 µm i.d. were connected. The flow rate through the separation column was ~40 nL/min with a total LC pump flow rate of 0.3 µL/min and a pressure of ~340 bar. To load samples from the sample loop to the SPE column, a faster flow rate of 0.32 µL/min was used for the first 35 min. From 39 to 42 min, the flow rate was changed to 0. At 42 min, the valve was changed back to “Load” in the script editor and the flow rate of 0.3 µL/min was restored for separation. A 100 min linear gradient of 8% to 22% mobile phase B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile), followed by a 20-min linear gradient of 22%–45% mobile phase B. Then 90% mobile phase B was used to clean the column for 5 min before the column was re-equilibrated for 20 min with 2% mobile phase B.  An Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer with the Nanospray Flex ion source was used. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the ion transfer tube was set to 200 ℃. For MS1, the Orbitrap resolution was set at 120,000 (at m/z 200) with the normalized AGC target of 100%. The maximum injection time was set to 250 ms for 1 and 10 HeLa cells, and to 100 ms for 150 and 500 HeLa cells. Precursor ions of +2 to +6 charge were selected for MS2 analysis. The exclusion duration was set to 90 s for 1 and 10 HeLa cells, and 60 s for 150 or more HeLa cells. The intensity threshold was set to 5 × 103 for single-cell samples and 1 × 104 for other samples. For MS2, the HCD collision energy was 30% and the isolation window was 1.6. Orbitrap resolution and maximum injection times were varied based on sample size as follows. The maximum injection times were 500, 250, 100, and 50 ms for 1, 10, 150 and 500 HeLa cells, respectively. Resolution was 60,000 for 1 and 10 cells, 30,000 for 150 cells, and 15,000 for 500 cells. For primary immune cells, the settings corresponding to 10 HeLa cells were applied.

### Data Protocol
To compare the protein coverage with our previous nanoPOTS work, the raw files of HeLa cells were first processed with MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 for feature detection, searching and quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched against a FASTA file obtained through UniProt (Swiss-Prot, reviewed, downloaded on Jul. 2020). The minimum peptide length was 6. Equivalent cell loadings were grouped for label free quantitation (LFQ). All other settings were the default. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides, as well as those only identified as modified proteins were filtered out MSFragger with FragPipe was used to search against the same human proteome database for both HeLa cells and primary immune cells using default settings other than enabling quantification and disabling match between runs. Further analysis was conducted in iPython Jupyter notebooks. Data were normalized by log2 transforming the entire dataset. To account for batch effects between runs, values from each run were adjusted by the median value, resulting in a log2-scale dataset centered around zero. The data were adjusted back to an unlogged scale for coefficient of variation (CV) calculations. Gene set analysis was performed using Enrichr.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Low-input proteomics, Low-input sample preparation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA
Brigham Young University

### Submitter
Ryan Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan Thomas Kelly
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA


