### Accession
PXD001080

### Title
Entamoeba histolytica splicing/mRNP proteome

### Description
First, the snRNP component U1A was HA-tagged and the intron of the RabX13 gene was MS2-tagged and amoeba transformats were established with such constructs. Next, amoeba transformants were UV cross-linked and their nucler extracts were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-HA agarose or MS2-spharose beads. Precipitates were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analyses. MS2-IP helped to discriminate the nuclear roles (chromatin-, co-transcriptional-, splicing-related), of the proteins probed.

### Sample Protocol
Amoeba transformants were expossed to UV light in a Stratalinker® UV Crosslinker 2400 for 30 min. For nuclear extracts, amoebas were lysed with 2% NP-40 in HEPES+ buffer (10 mM HEPES, 0.15 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, proteinase inhibitiors E64 7 nM and Complete Mini 1 pill, added with 30 U/mL of RNAse inhibitor). Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 rcf 10 min, at 4ºC, and washed two times in HEPES+ buffer. Nuclear pellet was suspended in Splicing-PEG Buffer (35 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP, 20 mM creatine phosphate, 1.5 mM DTT, 50 μg/mL creatine kinase) and lysed by 5 freeze and thaw cycles, and lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 rcf for 20 min, at 4ºC. For unspecific protein bead-binding, extracts were precleared with 50 μL of protein G-sepharose, and anti-HA agarose or MS2-GST-sepahrose were blocked with 0.5 mg of yeast tRNA.  Anti-HA agarose or MS2-GST-sepharose immunoprecipitates were eluted with 20 mg/ml of HA peptide or elution buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 100 mM KCl, 0.6% Sarkosyl, 10% Glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1mM DTT). Eluates were treated with 5 μg of RNAse A and   U of RQ1 RNase-free DNase (Promega) in the appropriate buffer at 37ºC for 30 min and proteins were concentrated with 10 K Microcon® centrifuge filters and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Trans-Proteomic Pipeline 4.7.0 on MASSyPup was used for protein identification and validation, using Comet as search engine. A concatenated target-decoy database was constructed, using the NCBI protein entries for Entamoeba histolytica (version 12 June 2014). Results were validated by PeptideProphet/ ProteinProphet, using decoy hits to pin down the negative distribution.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clip, Thermo electron velos orbitrap etd, U1a, Entamoeba histolytica

### Affiliations
CINVESTAV Unidad Irapuato
CINVESTAV Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Robert Winkler

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jesus Valdes Flores
CINVESTAV Department of Biochemistry


