### Accession
PXD019465

### Title
ZAP-70 promotes microenvironment interactions and increases protein-translation in chronic lymphocytic leukemia

### Description
The expression of ZAP-70 in a subset of CLL patients strongly correlates with a more aggressive clinical course, though the exact underlying mechanisms remain elusive. The ability of ZAP-70 to enhance B cell receptor (BCR) signaling, independently of its kinase function, likely contributes. Here we employed RNA-sequencing and proteomic analyses of primary cells and cell lines, differing only in their expression of ZAP-70, to further define how ZAP-70 increases aggressiveness of CLL. We identified that ZAP-70 is required for the constitutive expression of T cell chemokines and the MHC class I molecule CD1c in the absence of an overt BCR signal, both promoting interactions with T cells. In addition, quantitative mass spectrometry of double-cross linked ZAP-70 complexes demonstrated that direct protein-protein interactions between ZAP-70 and cytoskeletal proteins positively regulate cell migration, irrespectively of CCR7 expression. Importantly, these functions of ZAP-70 did not require antigen-stimulation of the BCR. In contrast, we observed that ZAP-70 rapidly forms complexes with ribosomal proteins in BCR-activated cells, while decreasing the expression of ZAP-70 significantly reduced protein biosynthesis, providing evidences that ZAP-70 contributes to translational dysregulation in CLL. In conclusion, ZAP-70 promotes microenvironment-interactions and protein-translation in CLL cells, both likely to improve cellular fitness and to further drive disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
For full proteome the cell pellets lysed 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma), 0.1% SDS (Sigma) followed by heating at 90°C for 5 min and probe sonication.  90ug of total protein were reduced with TCEP, Sigma for 1 hour at 60°C and  alkylated MMTS for 10min at RT. Then protein samples were digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin.  For pull down beads were trypsinized overnight at 37 °C, in order to digest the bait and the interacting proteins. After the overnight digest, trypsin was added and digested for another 4 h at 37 °C. The supernatant was removed and the reaction was stopped. The peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Biochrom).  The protein digest from full proteome/pull down was labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents for 1 hour and quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. The TMT mix was fractionated using high pH RP system. Each fraction was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA-Thermo) for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis. Peptide fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the nano-ESI source Fusion Lumos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a 100μm ID X 2 cm microcapillary C18 column (5µm, 100A) followed by 2h elution using 75μm ID X 25 cm C18 RP column (3µm, 100A) with 5–45% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at 300nl/min flow rate. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (380–1,500 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (120K resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 3×105 and Maximum Injection Time (MIT) of 100 ms). The subsequent MS2 was conducted with a top speed approach using a 3-s duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting of 1×104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a MIT of 35ms. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 45s. During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and isolated using a 2.0 Da m/z window. MS2–MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology with the top10 settings. HCD was used for the MS3, it was performed using 55% collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap (50K resolution, an AGC setting of 5×104 and MIT of 86 ms).  For Velos (BJAB_8-Plex_TMT), after Dionex ultimate 3000 peptide elution, one full MS scan (380–1,500 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap. Scan event 2 was in ITMS with the 30% collision energy and scan event 3 was in FTMS with a fixed first mass range to 100m/z. Scan event 2 and 3 are repeated for top 5 peaks.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 2.1. (Thermo Scientific) was used for the processing of CID tandem mass spectra. The SequestHT search engine was used and all the spectra searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens FASTA database. All searches were performed using as a static modification TMT6plex (+229.163 Da) at any N-terminus and on lysines and only for Full proteome Methylthio at Cysteines (+45.988Da). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949Da) and Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine (+0.984) were included as dynamic modifications. Mass spectra were searched using precursor ion tolerance 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. For peptide confidence, 1% FDR was applied and peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used for quantification. Peptide intensities were normalised and protein level quantification was obtained by the summation of the normalized peptide intensities. A statistical analysis of differentially-regulated proteins was carried out using the Q-Plex analyzer.

### Publication Abstract
The expression of ZAP-70 in a subset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients strongly correlates with a more aggressive clinical course, although the exact underlying mechanisms remain elusive. The ability of ZAP-70 to enhance B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling, independently of its kinase function, is considered to contribute. We used RNA-sequencing and proteomic analyses of primary cells differing only in their expression of ZAP-70 to further define how ZAP-70 increases the aggressiveness of CLL. We identified that ZAP-70 is directly required for cell survival in the absence of an overt BCR signal, which can compensate for ZAP-70 deficiency as an antiapoptotic signal. In addition, the expression of ZAP-70 regulates the transcription of factors regulating the recruitment and activation of T cells, such as CCL3, CCL4, and IL4I1. Quantitative mass spectrometry of double-cross-linked ZAP-70 complexes further demonstrated constitutive and direct protein-protein interactions between ZAP-70 and BCR-signaling components. Unexpectedly, ZAP-70 also binds to ribosomal proteins, which is not dependent on, but is further increased by, BCR stimulation. Importantly, decreased expression of ZAP-70 significantly reduced MYC expression and global protein synthesis, providing evidence that ZAP-70 contributes to translational dysregulation in CLL. In conclusion, ZAP-70 constitutively promotes cell survival, microenvironment interactions, and protein synthesis in CLL cells, likely to improve cellular fitness and to further drive disease progression.

### Keywords
Zap70, Leukemia, Q-plex_rime

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics CRUK Cambridge Institute Cambridge University Robinson Way Cambridge CB2 0RE UK Email: clive.d’santos@cruk.cam.ac.uk Phone: +44 1223 769677
Research Assistant

### Submitter
Valar Nila Roamio Franklin

### Lab Head
Dr Clive D'Santos
Head of Proteomics CRUK Cambridge Institute Cambridge University Robinson Way Cambridge CB2 0RE UK Email: clive.d’santos@cruk.cam.ac.uk Phone: +44 1223 769677


