### Accession
PXD019093

### Title
Human DICER helicase domain recruits PKR and dsRNA binding proteins during viral infection

### Description
The innate immune response against viruses mainly involves type I interferon (IFN) in mammalian cells. The exact contribution of the RNA silencing machinery remains to be established, but several recent studies indicate that the type III ribonuclease DICER can generate viral siRNAs in specific conditions. In addition, it has been proposed that type I IFN and RNA silencing could be mutually exclusive responses. In order to decipher the implication of DICER during infection of human cells with the Sindbis virus, we determined its interactome by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis. Our results show that human DICER specifically interacts with several double-stranded RNA binding proteins and helicases during viral infection. In particular, proteins such as DHX9, ADAR-1 and the protein kinase PKR are enriched with DICER in virus-infected cells. We validated the importance of the helicase domain of DICER in its interaction with PKR and showed that it has functional consequences for the cellular response to viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was precipitated with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, and proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a reduction-alkylation step (dithiothreitol 5 mM – iodoacetamide 10 mM), proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (1:25, w/w, Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). The resulting vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A).  One sixth of the peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) operating in positive mode. Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo) coupled with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo). Peptides were eluted with a 160 min gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for fragmentation with a maximum injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set at 1e5 and a resolution of 17.5K. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was applied during the peak selection process.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against a database containing Human and Viruses UniProtKB sequences with a decoy strategy (GFP, Human and Sindbis Virus SwissProt sequences as well as Semliki Forest Virus SwissProt and TrEMBL sequences (releases from January 2017, 40439 sequences)). Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK) with the following search parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation, phosphorylation of serine / threonine / tyrosine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications; tryptic specificity with up to three missed cleavages was used. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively, and the instrument configuration was specified as “ESI-Trap”. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v1.4 package (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for post-processing. Proteins were validated with Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra (Spectral count or SpC) was used for subsequent protein quantification in the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Helicase, Rnai, Dicer, Pkr, Alphavirus, Interferon

### Affiliations
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Université de Strasbourg, Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Institut de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire du CNRS, 2 allée Konrad Roentgen, 67084 Strasbourg France

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Pfeffer
Université de Strasbourg, Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Institut de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire du CNRS, 2 allée Konrad Roentgen, 67084 Strasbourg France


