### Accession
PXD010578

### Title
Proteomic Analyses Role of Calcium in Radicle Elongation during Rice Seed Germination

### Description
our works provide evidences that radicle elongation will be hindered in presence of calcium ion mobilization inhibitors during rice seed germination.

### Sample Protocol
rice seeds were treated with 5 mM calcium chloride, 1 mM verapamil, 1 mM chlorpromazine, 1 mM verapamil plus 10 μM GAs (Wako, Osaka, Japan), 1 mM chlorpromazine plus 10 μM GAs, 5 mM calcium chloride plus 10 μM ABA(Tokyo Chemical Industry, Tokyo, Japan), 1 mM verapamil plus 1 mM chlorpromazine, 10 μM GAs, and 10 μM ABA solutions, and embryos were collected after 0, 24, 48 and 72 h of treatments. Embryos were separated from seeds after 0, 24, 48 and 72 h of imbibition using a knife blade and collected on ice. In total, 100 seeds were prepared for proteomic experiments and 50 seeds for RNA extraction experiments. Three independent experiments were performed as biological replicates for all experiments.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed using the Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra™ 2D System (AB SCIEX, Foster, USA) combined with the cHiPLC™-Nanoflex system (AB SCIEX) in Trap-Elute mode. Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 trap column (5 µm, 5 x 0.3 mm, Agilent Technologies) and then eluted into a C18 analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Eksigent). Mobile phase A (3% ACN, 97% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (3% water, 97% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used to establish a 100 min gradient, which comprised of: 0 min in 5% B, 65 min of 5-23% B, 20 min of 23-52% B, 1 min of 52–80% B. The gradient was maintained in 80% B for 4 min, followed by 0.1 min of 80–5% B, and a final step in 5% B for 10 min. A constant flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 350–1500 m/z and charge states from 2 to 5 using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum using a Triple-TOF 5600 system in data-dependent acquisition mode (AB SCIEX). The mass tolerance for MS1 and MS2 (MS/MS) were set as 0.05 Da and 0.1 Da, respectively. Resolving power for MS1 and MS2 were > 35000 and > 15000. Raw data were searched against the designated proteome database using the following parameters: sample type, identification; cys alkylation, iodoacetamide; digestion, trypsin. Search effort was set to rapid ID.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Calcium, Proteomics, Radicle elongation, Rice, Seed germination

### Affiliations
Hubei  University
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Specialty Agriculture Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China. 2, Sino-African Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China

### Submitter
Ming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Specialty Agriculture Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China. 2, Sino-African Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China


