### Accession
PXD028940

### Title
Connections between exoproteome heterogeneity and virulence in the oral pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans

### Description
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa) is a Gram-negative bacterial pathogen associated with severe periodontitis and non-oral diseases. Clinical isolates of Aa display a rough (R) colony phenotype with strong adherent properties. Upon prolonged culturing, non-adherent strains with a smooth (S) colony phenotype emerge. To date, most virulence studies on Aa have been performed with S strains of Aa, whereas the virulence of clinical R isolates received relatively little attention. Since the extracellular proteome is the main bacterial reservoir of virulence factors, the present study was aimed at a comparative analysis of this sub-proteome fraction for a collection of R isolates and derivative S strains, in order to link particular proteins to the virulence of Aa with serotype b. To assess the bacterial virulence, we applied different infection models based on larvae of the greater wax moth Galleria mellonella, a human salivary gland-derived epithelial cell line, and freshly isolated neutrophils from healthy human volunteers. A total number of 351 extracellular Aa proteins was identified by mass spectrometry, with the S strains consistently showing more extracellular proteins than their parental R isolates. A total of 50 known extracellular virulence factors was identified, of which 15 were expressed by all investigated bacteria. Importantly, the comparison of differences in exoproteome composition and virulence highlights critical roles of 10 extracellular proteins in the different infection models. Altogether, our present study provides novel cues for understanding the virulence of Aa, and for development of potential preventive or therapeutic avenues to neutralize this important oral pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial Isolates and Growth Conditions The Aa reference strain ATCC 29522 (S type) and 27 clinical R type isolates from Dutch patients with periodontitis were used in the present study. The bacteria were cultured at 5% CO2 and 37°C using brain heart infusion (BHI) agar plates or BHI broth (OXOID) supplemented with 5% L-cysteine, 5 mg/L hemin and 1 mg/L menadione. BHI broth was inoculated with a 3-days old colony from BHI agar and cultures were incubated for 40 hours. For exoproteome analyses, proteins were collected from the growth media of stationary phase cultures. To avoid contamination or cultures with R type bacteria by spontaneously arising S type bacteria, culturing was always started from frozen stock.  Preparation of Extracellular Proteins and Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry To collect extracellular proteins of Aa, the investigated bacteria were cultured in BHI broth in triplicates as described above. Bacteria were separated from the growth medium by centrifugation, and extracellular proteins were precipitated from the growth medium fraction with trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) at 4 °C overnight. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation, washed once with pure ice-cold acetone, and dried at 60°C. The dried proteins were resuspended in 6 M urea, 0.1 M Hepes and 0.25 M NaCl and their concentration was measured using the PierceTM bichinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Thermofisher Scientific), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples of 37,5 μg were separated by lithium dodecyl sulphate (LDS) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) on NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen), providing a 1 cm separating distance, and stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Life Technologies). Subsequently, the proteins were prepared for MS/MS analyses as previously described [Bonn, F., et al., Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal Chem, 2014. 86(15): p. 7421-7.]. Briefly, gel lanes were cut resulting in one gel piece per sample. These gel pieces were then cut into smaller blocks and transferred into low binding tubes, where they were destained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge prior to the addition of a solution of 0.02 μg/μL trypsin (Promega). Trypsin digestion was carried out at 37°C overnight and, subsequently, peptides were eluted in water by ultrasonication. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography separation by loading them on a self-packed analytical column (OD 360µm, length 20cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). Peptides were eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5-99% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 151 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and subsequently subjected to electrospray ionization based MS. For MS analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (DIC) of the five most abundant precursor ions. MS2 experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap.  A non-redundant RAST annotation was performed based on the whole-genome sequences of all investigated Aa bacteria. Protein sequences that differed in only 1 amino acid were included in this database. The resulting non-redundant database of Aa was supplemented with protein sequences of Bos taurus downloaded from Uniprot at 05th December 2019 (Proteome ID 9913), as well as common laboratory contaminants and a reverse entry for every forward entry resulting in a total of 101396 entries. Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research) was applied for database searching applying fully specific tryptic cleavage (KR/P) with up to two missed cleavages and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.8.7 (Proteome Software), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exhibited at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3, and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 unique peptides were identified. With these filter parameters, 0.5% false-positive hits were obtained. For protein quantification NSAF values were exported. Statistical significance required a p-value < 0.05 in a student’s t-test. Protein abundances were considered to be differential if the log2 fold change was greater than |0.8|. The data was exported from Scaffold to Microsoft Excel for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Virulence, Exoproteome, Serotype

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany


