### Accession
PXD011012

### Title
Quantitative (Glyco-)Proteomics of Haloferax volcanii Biofilm Formation

### Description
A quantitative proteomics analysis comparing planktonic and sessile cells at different stages of biofilm development, using iTRAQ labeling, has been performed for Haloferax volcanii. Samples were taken from liquid, shaking cultures were compared to samples from static cultures, separated into sessile (biofilm) and planktonic cells. This dataset resulted in the identification of more than 50% of the H. volcanii proteome. Most importantly, expression as well as N-glycosylation of various surface filaments (pili, flagella and SLG) has been quantified, strongly supporting the hypothesis, that differential N-glycosylation plays important roles in the biofilm formation of H. volcanii.

### Sample Protocol
H53 liquid cultures were grown with agitation to an OD of 0.3. After taking samples, the culture was devided into petri dishes (10 ml per petri dish) and incubated statically. After 24, 48 and 72 h, samples were taken from the planktonic phase (supernatant), the remaining culture was dicarded and the sessile cells (biofilm) were washed with 18 % salt water before scraping of the cells with a razor blade and colelcting them in 18 % salt water. Each sample was tranfered into 0.5 ml centrifugal filter units (Millipore) and lysed with 400 ul pure H2O containing protease inhibitors 1mM PMSF and 1 mM benzamidine. The lysis step was repeated once with H2O and twice with 2 % SDS in 10 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 containing protase inhibitors as well. The cell lysate was removed from the filter units and the protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay.  Proteins were digested with Trypsin and GluC, seperately, using 50 ug each and following the FASP procedure (Wisniewski et al 2009 Nat Methods, modified according to Esquivel et al 2016 J Biol Chem). After digest, peptides were dried and then labeld with iTRAQ (4plex Applications Kit, AB Sciex) following the manufacturers protocol. Samples were mixed as given in the sample_description.xlsx table.  Mass spectrometric analysis was performed as described in Esquivel et al (2016, J Biol Chem) with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were desalted on a C18 trap column and peptides were separated on a 50 cm C18 column (2 h gradient) directly coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. MS1 scan paramters were as follows: resolution 70,000, AGC target 1e6, maximum IT 50 ms, scan range 375 - 2000 m/z. The top 12 peaks were triggered forr HCD fragmentation with 30 NCE. MS2 scan parameters were as follows: resolution 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximum IT 125 ms, fixed first mass 100 m/z. A dynamic exclusion list (20 s) was used and charge states 1 and >6 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The Python framework Ursgal was used to perform protein database searches employing the search engines X! Tandem, MS-GF+, MSAmanda and MSFragger. The database consisted of the UniProt H. volcanii proteome (UP000008243) merged with sequences from cRAP. Decoy sequences were generated by peptide shuffling. The Ursgal profile QExactive+ was used, including a precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Additionally, carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification as well as iTRAQ4plex of any N-terminus. Potential modifications comprised iTRAQ4plex of Y and K, Hex(2) of S and T as well as Oxidation of M. Additionally, all glycans (final as well as intermediates) of the AglB-dependent and Agl15-dependent pathways (10 glycans in total) were added as potential modifications in separate searches. Statistical postprocessing was performed with Percolator and PSMs were filtered by posterior error probability (PEP < 0.01). Results from all engines were combined and sanitized (removing ambigious PSMs) and all spectra that led to an identification were subjected to quantification. For quantification, signals of the iTRAQ reporter ions were extracted, and each channel was normalized by the sum of the channel's intensities. Peptide ratios for all conditions of each sample were calculated, weighted by the precursor intensity, and normalized by the median of each combination.

### Publication Abstract
While many aspects of archaeal cell biology remain relatively unexplored, systems biology approaches like mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics offer an opportunity for rapid advances. Unfortunately, the enormous amount of MS data generated often remains incompletely analyzed due to a lack of sophisticated bioinformatic tools and field-specific biological expertise for data interpretation. Here we present the initiation of the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), a community-based effort to comprehensively analyze archaeal proteomes. Starting with the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii, we reanalyze MS datasets from various strains and culture conditions. Optimized peptide spectrum matching, with strict control of false discovery rates, facilitates identifying&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;72% of the reference proteome, with a median protein sequence coverage of 51%. These analyses, together with expert knowledge in diverse aspects of cell biology, provide meaningful insights into processes such as N-terminal protein maturation, N-glycosylation, and metabolism. Altogether, ArcPP serves as an invaluable blueprint for comprehensive prokaryotic proteomics.

### Keywords
Haloferax volcanii, Biofilm, Glycosylation, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Mechthild Pohlschroder
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania


