### Accession
PXD040360

### Title
Differential proteomic profiling between Cancer Associated Fibroblasts and KRAS mutated cancer cell lines

### Description
Purpose Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a key component of tumors. We aimed to profile the proteome of cancer cell lines representing three common cancer types (lung, colorectal and pancreatic) and a representative CAF cell line from each tumor type to gain insight into CAF function and identify new CAF biomarkers. Experimental Design We used isobaric labeling, liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to evaluate the proteome of 9 cancer and 3 CAF cell lines. Functions of selected differentially expressed proteins in CAF cell lines were further investigated using siRNA and the expression levels of candidate novel CAF biomarkers were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 30 human tumor specimens. Results Of the 9460 proteins evaluated, functional enrichment analysis revealed N-glycan biosynthesis and extracellular membrane proteins to be upregulated in CAFs and not in cancer cells. 85 proteins had 16-fold higher expression in CAFs compared to cancer cells. These included previously known CAF markers like ACTA2, FAP and SDC2. Novel biomarkers overexpressed in CAFs were noted, including HSPB6 and PTGS1. SiRNA knockdown of these genes encoding these proteins did not reduce contractility in lung CAFs, suggesting they were not crucial to this function despite high expression. Immunohistochemical analysis of 30 tumor samples (10 lung, 10 colorectal and 10 pancreatic) showed HSPB6 and PTGS1 expression were restricted to the stroma. Conclusions An unbiased analysis of the differences in the proteome of cancer cells compared to CAFs revealed increased expression of HSPB6 and PTGS1 in CAFs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis: Cell pellets were generated by washing the cell resuspensions in PBS on ice twice and snap frozen after excess liquid was removed. Cell pellets were lysed with sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis buffer [1% SDC, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% glycerol, 50mM NaCl] with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific). Cell pellet samples were homogenized with probe sonication (EpiShear) for 15 seconds at 40% power with 1 second on and 1 second off, heated at 90oC for 5 minutes and then repeated the probe sonication. Proteins were quantified using Pierce Rapid Gold BCA (ThermoFisher). Additionally, 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; Sigma) was added to the previous lysate to 5% (final) and proteins were quantified again. 100 µg protein were reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride solution (Sigma) at 60°C for 30 min for the SDC and SDS lysate, respectively. Proteins were then alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. For the SDS lysates, protein was precipitated by chloroform/methanol precipitation and the protein pellet was resuspended in 100 µL 100 mM TEAB. Protein from both the SDC and SDS lysates were digested by 3.3 µg trypsin (Pierce) (trypsin:protein = 1:30 (w:w)) at 37°C for 18 hours with shaking. For SDC lysed samples, 30 µg protein were labelled with 0.25 mg TMTproTM 16plex reagents in 10 µl ACN (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. For SDS lysed sample, 50 µg proteins were labelled with 0.5 mg TMTproTM reagent in 20 µl ACN. After 1 hour incubation at room temperature and 15 min quenching by 4 µl of 5% hydroxylamine (ThermoFisher Scientific), the labelled samples were combined and the SDC lysate samples were precipitated using 20 µl formic acid (FA) (Honeywell Fluka). After centrifugation, the supernatant was dried in Speedvac. The samples were resuspended in 0.1% NH4OH/100% H2O, and fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with an initial 5 min loading then linear gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% NH4OH (pH 10) to 35% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 30 min, then to 80% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 5 min and stayed for another 5 min. The flow rate was at 200 µl/min. Fractions were collected at every 42 seconds from retention time from 7.8 min to 50 min and then concatenated to 28 fractions and dried in SpeedVac. Samples were then resuspended in 0.5% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis: The LC-MS/MS analysis was on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. All instrument and columns used below are from ThermoFisher Scientific. For the proteome analysis, 50% of peptides were injected. The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 nanotrap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, and then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min with a linear gradient of 8-32% ACN/0.1% FA in 90 min /cycle time at 120 min for each fraction. The data acquisition used standard data-dependent acquisition mode with a cycle time at 3 sec. The full MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in Orbitrap with a resolution at 120,000 at m/z 200 and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 100,000 with maximum injection time at 50 msec. The most abundant multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 5) with intensity threshold at 5000 were isolated by quadrupole at the isolation window at 0.7 Da and then subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) in ion trap at 35% normalized collision energy (NCE). The AGC was set at 10,000 and maximum injection time at 35 ms. The TMT report ions were detected by further fragmentation of the 5 most abundant fragment ions produced in MS2: they were isolated by synchronous precursor selection (SPS) method with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and fragmented by higher energy collisionally activated dissociation (HCD) at 55% NCE, and detected in the Orbitrap in a scan range 100-500 m/z. The resolution was set at 50,000 at m/z 200, the AGC at 50,000 with maximum injection time at 86 msec. The dynamic exclusion was set 40 s with ± 10 ppm exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using Sequest HT to search against reviewed Homo Sapiens Uniprot database (March 2021), cell line specific variant databases from Cosmic (April 2021) and contaminate database (ThermoFisher Scientific). Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum missed-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 20 ppm for the precursor, and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions; Deamidated (N, Q) and oxidation (M) as dynamic modification, and Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMTpro (K, N-terminus) as static modification. Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 for the decoy database search, and only high confident PSMs (Peptide Spectrum Matches) were considered. Protein FDR was set at 0.01. Only master proteins were reported. For reporter ion intensity detection, the reporter ion quantifier node parameters were integration window tolerance 20 ppm, integration most confident centroid for peak detection. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. TMTpro Quan value correction factor, provided by the manufacturer’s certificate of analysis, was applied. Reporter ions average S/N threshold was set at 3 and SPS mass matches threshold 55%. Report ions intensities were normalized by total peptide amount, and then scaled on all average.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a key component of tumors. We aimed to profile the proteome of cancer cell lines representing three common cancer types (lung, colorectal and pancreatic) and a representative CAF cell line from each tumor type to gain insight into CAF function and novel CAF biomarkers. We used isobaric labeling, liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to evaluate the proteome of 9 cancer and 3 CAF cell lines. Of the 9460 proteins evaluated, functional enrichment analysis revealed an upregulation of N-glycan biosynthesis and extracellular matrix proteins in CAFs. 85 proteins had 16-fold higher expression in CAFs compared to cancer cells, including previously known CAF markers like fibroblast activation protein (FAP). Novel overexpressed CAF biomarkers included heat shock protein &#x3b2;-6 (HSPB6/HSP20) and cyclooxygenase 1 (PTGS1/COX1). SiRNA knockdown of the genes encoding these proteins did not reduce contractility in lung CAFs, suggesting they were not crucial to this function. Immunohistochemical analysis of 30 tumor samples (10 lung, 10 colorectal and 10 pancreatic) showed restricted HSPB6 and PTGS1 expression in the stroma. Therefore, we describe an unbiased differential proteome analysis of CAFs compared to cancer cells, which revealed higher expression of HSPB6 and PTGS1 in CAFs. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD040360). SIGNIFICANCE: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are highly abundant stromal cells present in tumors. CAFs are known to influence tumor progression and drug resistance. Characterizing the proteome of CAFs could give potential insights into new stromal drug targets and biomarkers. Mass spectrometry-based analysis comparing proteomic profiles of CAFs and cancers characterized 9460 proteins of which 85 proteins had 16-fold higher expression in CAFs compared to cancer cells. Further interrogation of this rich resource could provide insight into the function of CAFs and could reveal putative stromal targets. We describe for the first time that heat shock protein &#x3b2;-6 (HSPB6/HSP20) and cyclooxygenase 1 (PTGS1/COX1) are overexpressed in CAFs compared to cancer cells.

### Keywords
Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Cafs, Kras

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics, ICR


