### Accession
PXD045765

### Title
Peptidoglycan from S. aureus digested with mutanolysin and lysostaphin catalytic domain

### Description
(Manuscript abstract) "Peptidoglycan, a gigadalton polymer, functions as the scaffold for bacterial cell walls and provides cell integrity. Peptidoglycan is remodelled by a large and diverse group of peptidoglycan hydrolases, which control bacterial cell growth and division. Over the years, many studies have focused on these enzymes, but knowledge on their action within peptidoglycan  mesh from a molecular basis is scarce. Here, we provide structural insights into the interaction between short peptidoglycan fragments and the entire sacculus with two evolutionarily related peptidases of the M23 family, lysostaphin and LytM. Through nuclear magnetic resonance, mass spectrometry, information-driven modelling, site-directed mutagenesis and biochemical approaches, we propose a model in which peptidoglycan cross-linking affects the activity, selectivity and specificity of these two structurally related enzymes differently."

### Sample Protocol
(Methods section from Manuscript): "The muropeptides were loaded in 10 µl volume onto Acquity UPLC Protein BEH C4 column, 300 Å, 1.7 um, 1 mm x 50 mm (Waters) and eluted in an acetonitrile gradient by applying phase A (0.1 % formic acid in H2O) and phase B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) during 12 minutes run (100 % A for 2 minutes, 0 %- 40 %  B for 6 minutes, 40 %-90 % B for 2 min and 99 % A for 2 minutes). The flow rate was 100 μL min−1. The MS analysis was performed on Synapt G2 MS, time-of-flight mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters). Sodium Iodide was  used as a reference material for mass spectrometer calibration. The MS was set to ESI positive (ESI+) mode with a scan range m/z 100-3000. The capillary voltage was 2.5 kV. Sampling cone was set to 35 and extraction cone to 2.0. Source temperature was set to 80o C and desolvation temperature to 150 oC. The flow rate of the desolvation gas was 650 L/h. Two blank runs were injected between the runs. The MS data were analysed using MassLynx software (V4.1; Waters)."

### Data Protocol
"Mass spectra were deconvoluted using the MaxEnt3 algorithm provided with the Masslynx software with parameters set for minimal molecular mass of 200 Da, maximal molecular mass of 8000 Da and maximal number of charges 5. "

### Publication Abstract
Peptidoglycan, a gigadalton polymer, functions as the scaffold for bacterial cell walls and provides cell integrity. Peptidoglycan is remodelled by a large and diverse group of peptidoglycan hydrolases, which control bacterial cell growth and division. Over the years, many studies have focused on these enzymes, but knowledge on their action within peptidoglycan mesh from a molecular basis is scarce. Here, we provide structural insights into the interaction between short peptidoglycan fragments and the entire sacculus with two evolutionarily related peptidases of the M23 family, lysostaphin and LytM. Through nuclear magnetic resonance, mass spectrometry, information-driven modelling, site-directed mutagenesis and biochemical approaches, we propose a model in which peptidoglycan cross-linking affects the activity, selectivity and specificity of these two structurally related enzymes differently.

### Keywords
Peptidoglycan, S. aureus, Mutanolysin

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologie Structurale
Mossakowski Medical Research Institute Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Alicja Razew

### Lab Head
Dr Izabela Sabala
Mossakowski Medical Research Institute Polish Academy of Sciences


