### Accession
PXD010120

### Title
Laboratory adaptation of Bacillus anthracis

### Description
The spore forming pathogen Bacillus anthracis is the etiologic agent of anthrax in humans and animals. It cycles through infected hosts as vegetative cells and is eventually introduced into the environment where it generates an endospore resistant to many harsh conditions. The endospores are subsequently ingested by the next host to begin the next cycle. Outbreaks of anthrax occur regularly worldwide in wildlife and livestock, and the potential for human infection exists whenever humans encounter infected animals. It is also possible to encounter intentional releases of anthrax spores, as was the case in October 2001. Consequently, it is important to be able to rapidly establish the provenance of infectious strains of B. anthracis. Here, we compare protein expression in seven low-passage wild isolates and four laboratory strains of B. anthracis grown under identical conditions using LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Of the 1,023 total identified proteins, 96 had significant abundance differences between wild and laboratory strains. Of those, 28 proteins directly related to sporulation were upregulated in wild isolates, with expression driven by Spo0A, CodY, and AbrB/ScoC. In addition, we observed evidence of changes in cell division and fatty acid biosynthesis between the two classes of strains, despite being grown under identical experimental conditions. These results suggest wild B. anthracis cells are more highly tuned to sporulate than their laboratory cousins, and this difference should be exploited as a method to differentiate between laboratory adapted cultures and low passage wild strains isolated during an anthrax outbreak.  This knowledge should distinguish between intentional releases and exposure to strains in nature providing a basis for the type of response by public health officials and investigators.

### Sample Protocol
100 μL of each sample was pelleted by centrifugation at maximum speed for 5 minutes and resuspended in 500 μL freshly prepared ice-cold 20% w/v TCA. Resuspended cells were incubated at -20 °C for 24 hours. Samples were pelleted by centrifugation at maximum speed for 5 minutes at 4 °C and washed twice with 200 μL ice-cold acetone. Excess acetone was drawn off and samples were dried in a Vacufuge Plus under vacuum without heat for ~5 minutes.  Dried samples were resuspended by pipetting and vortexing in 100 μL lysis buffer (8 M urea, Sigma; 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5; 14.3 mM β-mercaptoethanol) and gently centrifuged to remove liquid from the sides of tubes. Resuspended samples were incubated at 60 °C for 1 hour with shaking in a ThermoMixer. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 1.5 mM to alkylate cysteine residues, and samples were mixed by vortexing and gently centrifuged. Samples were incubated in the dark at 37 °C for 30 minutes with shaking. After alkylation samples were diluted 10-fold in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and calcium chloride was added at a final concentration of 1 mM. Samples were mixed thoroughly by vortexing and centrifuged gently to remove liquid from the sides of tubes. 4 μg Trypsin Gold was added to each sample and mixed by pipetting. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with gentle (~200 rpm) shaking.  After digestion samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid at a final concentration of 0.1% v/v. Solid phase extraction was performed with a vacuum manifold using Strata C-18T columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 1 mL of 100% methanol was added to activate the resin, followed by a conditioning rinse using 1 mL 0.1% v/v TFA in water. Samples were added and passed through the resin, followed by a rinse with 1 mL 0.1% v/v TFA/5% v/v acetonitrile in water. Peptides were eluted from SPE columns into clean 1.5 mL low-protein binding tubes using 1 mL 0.1% v/v TFA/80% v/v ACN in water. ACN was removed and samples brought to ~100 μL using a Vacufuge Plus.  Peptide concentration was determined using BCA assay. Peptides were diluted to ~1 μg/μL in 0.1% v/v formic acid and transferred to HPLC vials with inert glass inserts, sealed with screw caps, and stored at -20 °C until analysis. Each biological replicate was injected in duplicate, using a randomized run order for each block. Peptides were separated using HPLC on an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC system. The column was a fused silica capillary (40 cm x 150 μm inner diameter) packed with 5 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size Jupiter C18 resin. 1 μg peptides were injected and subjected to the following 160-minute gradient: 100% Solvent A for 10 minutes; 0%-7.5% Solvent B over 1 minute; 7.5%-45% Solvent B over 109 minutes; 45%-95% Solvent B over 2 minutes; 95% Solvent B for 10 minutes; 95%-0% Solvent B over 4 minutes; 100% Solvent A for 23 minutes. Solvent A was 5% v/v ACN/0.1% v/v formic acid and Solvent B was 95% v/v ACN/0.1% v/v formic acid. Blanks consisting of 5 μl injections of 50% v/v isopropanol/50% v/v acetone/0.1% v/v formic acid were run with a shorter gradient between samples to minimize column carryover.  The HPLC was coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer via a custom electrospray emitter consisting of an etched fused silica capillary. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent “high-low” mode with a high-resolution (R=30,000) precursor scan collected in the Orbitrap followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragment scans of the top seven most intense precursors collected in the ion trap. Data dependent acquisition parameters were: dynamic exclusion repeat count 2, repeat duration 30 seconds, exclusion list size 250, exclusion list duration 180 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Relative protein abundance was determined using label-free quantification (LFQ) functionality of MaxQuant v1.5.3.30, as well as match between runs and requantify options. All other MaxQuant settings were left at default values. Translated B. anthracis genomes for Ames Ancestor (accession 261594.21), Sterne (accession 260799.41), Vollum (accession 261591.12), and Western North America (WNA, accession 212045.4) were downloaded from PATRIC [21] on 2/3/16. All LC-MS/MS output spectra were searched against each database separately. After MaxQuant LFQ a custom R script was used to ensure differences in protein names between genomes, as well as subtle differences in protein sequence between genomes, did not artificially influence protein abundance measurements across genomes. Briefly, this script first retrieved protein abundance values from a given set of samples (e.g. Ames-related strains from the Ames Ancestor database search, Sterne-related strains from the Sterne database search, etc.). BLASTp was then used to match protein sequences annotated in the Sterne, Vollum, and WNA genomes to those in Ames Ancestor. Finally, protein abundance values for Sterne, Vollum, and WNA proteins were matched to corresponding Ames Ancestor proteins and outputted in a single file.  To investigate protein abundance differences between wild and laboratory strains of B. anthracis, as opposed to abundance differences between individual cultures, all biological and technical replicates for each strain were averaged. Statistical analysis of average protein abundance between wild and laboratory strains was carried out using Inferno (http://omics.pnl.gov/software/infernordn), a freely available version of DAnTE. Proteins were judged to have significantly changing abundance if the q-value from ANOVA (comparing all wild to all laboratory strains) was less than 0.05, or if the protein was detected in only one category, and in more than half of the strains for that category. Proteins were assigned to functional categories using KEGG and eggNOG.

### Publication Abstract
The spore forming pathogen Bacillus anthracis is the etiologic agent of anthrax in humans and animals. It cycles through infected hosts as vegetative cells and is eventually introduced into the environment where it generates an endospore resistant to many harsh conditions. The endospores are subsequently taken up by another host to begin the next cycle. Outbreaks of anthrax occur regularly worldwide in wildlife and livestock, and the potential for human infection exists whenever humans encounter infected animals. It is also possible to encounter intentional releases of anthrax spores, as was the case in October 2001. Consequently, it is important to be able to rapidly establish the provenance of infectious strains of B. anthracis. Here, we compare protein expression in seven low-passage wild isolates and four laboratory strains of B. anthracis grown under identical conditions using LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Of the 1,023 total identified proteins, 96 had significant abundance differences between wild and laboratory strains. Of those, 28 proteins directly related to sporulation were upregulated in wild isolates, with expression driven by Spo0A, CodY, and AbrB/ScoC. In addition, we observed evidence of changes in cell division and fatty acid biosynthesis between the two classes of strains, despite being grown under identical experimental conditions. These results suggest wild B. anthracis cells are more highly tuned to sporulate than their laboratory cousins, and this difference should be exploited as a method to differentiate between laboratory and low passage wild strains isolated during an anthrax outbreak. This knowledge should distinguish between intentional releases and exposure to strains in nature, providing a basis for the type of response by public health officials and investigators.

### Keywords
Bacillus anthracis, Anthrax, Sporulation, Evolution, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Owen Leiser

### Lab Head
Dr Helen Kreuzer
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


