### Accession
PXD009693

### Title
Analysis of reversibly oxidized cysteines from the Chlamydomonas proteome with yeast spike-in

### Description
Benchmarking dataset for the objective evaluation of quantitative and statistical workflows.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type Chlamydomonas reinhardtii strain CC-2895 6145c mt- was grown photoheterotrophically in 250 mL flasks holding 100 mL of Tris-acetate-phosphate medium. Cultures were maintained at 22°C on a platform shaker at 120 rpm under continuous illumination and grown to mid-log phase (OD750 0.4-0.5). Cells were harvested by centrifugation and pellets were flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen before storage at -80°C.  The oxidized status of protein cysteines was quenched by performing cell lysis under denaturing conditions in the presence of iodoacetamide to block reduced thiols. The protein lysate was then split into technical replicates and spiked with the appropriate amount of MS Compatible Yeast Protein Extract (Promega), either 50 ng or 100 ng yeast per 1 µg Chlamydomonas protein. All reversibly oxidized cysteine residues were then reduced using dithiothreitol and nascent thiols enriched at the protein-level using Thiopropyl Sepharose 6B resin for thiol-disulfide exchange chromatography. On-resin trypsin digestion of cysteine-bound proteins was performed and unbound peptides were removed with extensive washing steps. Cysteine-bound peptides were then eluted from the resin using dithiothreitol and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis to survey reversible oxidation.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification using Progenesis QI for proteomics v2.0, database searching with Mascot v2.5.1, and bioinformatics using R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Yeast, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
Graduate Research Assistant

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


