### Accession
PXD019380

### Title
The Caveolin3 complex stabilizes functional surface expression of the Lactate-Proton Shuttle McT1 but not the sodium channel Nav1.5 in cardiomyocytes

### Description
Caveolin3 variants were associated with action potential prolongation. As Caveolin1 was recently identified in cardiomyocytes, we hypothesize that conserved isoform-specific protein interactions underlie human loss-of-function variants. To analyze the Caveolin1 and Caveolin3 interactome, we developed unbiased live-cell proteomic and isoform-specific mass spectrometry techniques. We demonstrate the functional relevance and pathogenic mechanism of a novel Caveolin3 interactor in gene-edited human iPSC-cardiomyocyte models.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated by Blue Native-PAGE (NativePAGE Bis-Tris; Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes. Each lane was sliced into 23 equidistant regardless of staining. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with Endopeptidase Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and prepared for nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For mass spectrometric analysis samples were enriched on a self-packed reversed phase-C18 precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical reversed phase-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 200 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1). The eluent was analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a FlexIon nanoSpray source and operated under Excalibur 2.5 software using a data-dependent acquisition method. Each experimental cycle was of the following form: one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 70,000 FWHM, and AGC target of 1*10e6 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Up to the 15 most abundant peptide precursors of charge states 2 to 5 above a 2*10e4 intensity threshold were then sequentially isolated at 2.0 FWHM isolation width, fragmented with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 25%, and the resulting product ion spectra recorded at a resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM, and AGC target of 2*10e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Selected precursor m/z values were then excluded for the following 15 s. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis samples were enriched on a self-packed reversed phase-C18 precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical reversed phase-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 200 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1). The eluent was analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a FlexIon nanoSpray source and operated under Excalibur 2.5 software using a data-dependent acquisition method. Each experimental cycle was of the following form: one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 70,000 FWHM, and AGC target of 1*10e6 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Up to the 15 most abundant peptide precursors of charge states 2 to 5 above a 2*10e4 intensity threshold were then sequentially isolated at 2.0 FWHM isolation width, fragmented with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 25%, and the resulting product ion spectra recorded at a resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM, and AGC target of 2*10e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Selected precursor m/z values were then excluded for the following 15 s. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

### Publication Abstract
[Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Cardiomyopathy; cell biology; metabolism; proteomics; stem cells

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen


