### Accession
PXD009514

### Title
1 A post-transcriptional regulatory code for mRNA stability dur-ing the maternal-to-zygotic transition

### Description
Post-transcriptional regulation is crucial to shape gene expression. During the Maternal-to-Zygotic transition (MZT), thousands of maternal transcripts are regulated upon fertili-zation and genome activation. Transcript stability can be influenced by cis-elements and trans-factors, but how these inputs are integrated to determine the overall mRNA stability is unclear. Here, we show that most transcripts are under combinatorial regulation by multiple decay pathways. Characterization of the cis-regulatory motifs revealed that nu-cleotide composition bias characteristic of 3’-UTRs poly-U is associated with mRNA stability. In contrast, miR-430, CCUC, CUGC, elements appeared as the main destabiliz-ing motifs, with miR-430 and UAUUUAU (ARE) sequences causing mRNA deadenyla-tion depending on the activation of the genome. We comprehensively identify RNA-protein interactions across the transcriptome during MZT, and their associated regulatory activity. We find that poly-U binding proteins are preferentially associated with 3’-UTR sequences and stabilizing motifs. Analysis of differentially regulated regions revealed antagonistic sequence contexts for poly-C and poly-U binding proteins that shape protein binding and magnitude of regulation across the transcriptome. Finally, we integrate these regulatory motifs into a machine learning model, able to predict the stability of mRNA reporters in vivo. Our findings reveal how mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation are coordinated to direct changes in mRNA stability within the early embryo.

### Sample Protocol
embryos. Interactome capture was conducted as described in @{=castello2012}. Embryos were lysed in Lysis/Binding Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% LiDS, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT) and the poly(A)+ mRNAs with the associated cross-linked proteins were pulled-down with oligo d(T)25Magnetic Beads (NEB). Next, the pellets of oligo d(T)25 beads were sequentially washed with buffers with decreasing concentration of LiDS and LiCl (Wash Buffer I (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 0.1% LiDS, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT); Wash Buffer II (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT); Low Salt Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA; Elution Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA)). After washes, the pellets of beads were frozen, awaiting further processing. Crosslinked material was rinsed three times with wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4) and then denaturated for 30 minutes with urea (8 M) in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT before alkylation and on-bead pre-digestion with Endoproteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals USA, Inc.). After incubation for 3 hours, samples were diluted 4-fold with ammonium bicarbonate (25 mM) and further digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight. Digestions were stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 1 μL), and the resulting peptides were loaded and desalted on C18 Stage Tips.###LC-MS/MS analysisPeptides were eluted from C18 Stage Tips with 60 μL of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), and samples were dried down to 5 μL in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were then subjected to reversed phase chromatography on an Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 50-cm column (New Objective) with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with an acetonitrile gradient (5–30% for 95 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min) and directly electrosprayed into a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired on the spectrometer in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 20 ms, with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z = 200. The ten most intense multiple charged ions (z ≥ 2) from the survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 3Th and fragmented with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25. Target values for MS/MS were set to 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 160 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z = 200. To avoid repetitive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 35 s

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.8.1), utilizing its integrated ANDROMEDA search algorithms. Scoring of peptides for identification was carried out with an initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 6 ppm for the search for peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides. Peak lists were searched against a local database for human proteome. Maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The final list of proteins was curated to remove duplicates and retain only proteins with at least two peptides and at least one of them unique.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranscriptional regulation plays a crucial role in shaping gene expression. During the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT), thousands of maternal transcripts are regulated. However, how different <i>cis</i>-elements and <i>trans</i>-factors are integrated to determine mRNA stability remains poorly understood. Here, we show that most transcripts are under combinatorial regulation by multiple decay pathways during zebrafish MZT. By using a massively parallel reporter assay, we identified <i>cis</i>-regulatory sequences in the 3' UTR, including U-rich motifs that are associated with increased mRNA stability. In contrast, miR-430 target sequences, UAUUUAUU AU-rich elements (ARE), CCUC, and CUGC elements emerged as destabilizing motifs, with miR-430 and AREs causing mRNA deadenylation upon genome activation. We identified <i>trans</i>-factors by profiling RNA-protein interactions and found that poly(U)-binding proteins are preferentially associated with 3' UTR sequences and stabilizing motifs. We show that this activity is antagonized by C-rich motifs and correlated with protein binding. Finally, we integrated these regulatory motifs into a machine learning model that predicts reporter mRNA stability in vivo.

### Keywords
Embrio, Alpha amanitin, Zebra fish, Rna binding proteins

### Affiliations
Harvard School of Public Health

### Submitter
romain christiano

### Lab Head
Dr Romain Christiano
Harvard School of Public Health


