### Accession
PXD028295

### Title
Age prediction from human blood plasma using proteomic and small RNA data: a comparative analysis

### Description
Aging clocks, built from comprehensive molecular data, have emerged as promising tools in medicine, forensics, and ecological research. However, few studies have compared the suitability of different molecular data types to predict age in the same cohort and whether combining them would improve predictions. Here, we explored this at the level of proteins and small RNAs in 103 human blood plasma samples. First, we used a two-step mass spectrometry approach measuring 612 proteins to select and quantify 21 proteins that changed in abundance with age. Notably, proteins increasing with age were enriched for components of the complement system. Next, we used small RNA sequencing to select and quantify a set of 315 small RNAs that changed in abundance with age. Most of these were microRNAs (miRNAs), downregulated with age, and predicted to target genes related to growth, cancer, and senescence. Finally, we used the collected data to build age-predictive models. Among the different types of molecules, proteins yielded the most accurate model (R² = 0.59 ± 0.02), followed by miRNAs as the best-performing class of small RNAs (R² = 0.54 ± 0.02). Interestingly, the use of protein and miRNA data together improved predictions (R2 = 0.70 ± 0.01). Future work using larger sample sizes and a validation dataset will be necessary to confirm these results. Nevertheless, our study suggests that combining proteomic and miRNA data yields superior age predictions, possibly by capturing a broader range of age-related physiological changes. It will be interesting to determine if combining different molecular data types works as a general strategy to improve future aging clocks.

### Sample Protocol
103 plasma samples from disease-free and generally healthy individuals were acquired from Precision Med Inc. The cohort includes 12 females and 91 males. All participants provided written informed consent.

Targeted proteomics measuring 125 human plasma proteins was performed using the commercially available PeptiQuant™ Plus Proteomics Kit (MRM Proteomics Inc.) developed for the Agilent 6490 tripple quadruople instrument (Agilent Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. This kit was chosen because it measures 44 out of the 145 significant proteins from our first proteomics screen. Briefly, plasma proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. One proteotypic peptide per protein was used as a surrogate marker for determining plasma protein concentrations. Each batch was comprised of 50 experimental samples, 9 quality control samples, and 8 calibration samples. A constant concentration of a stable isotope-labeled standard (SIS) peptide was added to each sample, which was used for normalization. The calibration curve spanned a 1000-fold concentration range with 8 different calibration points. The quality controls and standard curve peptides were spiked into a digested bovine serum albumin surrogate matrix to avoid the problems associated with the presence of the endogenous analytes in normal human plasma.

Samples were injected onto the LC system (Agilent 1290, Waldbronn, Germany) and separated using a Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18 2.1 × 150 mm column packed with 1.8 μm particles with a pore size of 80 Å (Agilent Technologies), which was interfaced to a Triple Quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent 6490, Agilent Technologies) using the Agilent Jet Stream flow ESI source that was operated in a positive ion mode. The LC-MS parameters were provided by the manufacturer. Briefly, the gradient started at 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, H2O) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 0.400 ml/min. Peptides were eluted with a linear  increase of solvent B from 2%–7% over 2 min, from 7%-30% over 48 min, from 30% to 45% over 3min, followed by a 2 min washout as the percentage of solvent B was increased to 80%. The column was then re-equilibrated for 4 min with 2% of solvent B. The temperature of the column compartment was set to 50 °C and the autosampler temperature was maintained at 8 °C. The mass spectrometric parameters of the Agilent 6490 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer were the following: positive ion mode, 3.5 kV capillary voltage, nozzle voltage 300 V, drying gas flow rate 15 L/min at 150 °C, nebulizer gas pressure 30 PSI at 250 °C, and Q1 and Q3 set to unit resolution.

### Data Protocol
The quantification of protein concentration from raw MRM data was done using the software Skyline (version 3.7) (MacLean et al., 2010). Proteins with too low measurements were removed from all analyses. Proteins were kept if they had more than 50% of samples with values higher than the lowest calibration threshold measurement in all 3 batches. This resulted in 77 proteins being kept, out of which 31 were significantly associated with age in our untargeted proteomics screen. Measurement values below zero were set to zero, and one count was added to each value before log2 transformation. All analyses were made on the 31 proteins selected from untargeted proteomics. Batch correction between experimental runs was done using parametric empirical Bayes (via the ComBat function from the sva package (version 3.42.0) (Leek et al. 2020)) and chronological age as the outcome of interest. Significant proteins were determined by linear modeling, using protein levels as the dependent variable and chronological age as the explanatory variable. Correction for multiple testing was done using the Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (BH FDR) adjustment method with the R function p.adjust). A total of 21 out of 31 proteins were significant at an FDR of 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
Aging clocks, built from comprehensive molecular data, have emerged as promising tools in medicine, forensics, and ecological research. However, few studies have compared the suitability of different molecular data types to predict age in the same cohort and whether combining them would improve predictions. Here, we explored this at the level of proteins and small RNAs in 103 human blood plasma samples. First, we used a two-step mass spectrometry approach measuring 612 proteins to select and quantify 21 proteins that changed in abundance with age. Notably, proteins increasing with age were enriched for components of the complement system. Next, we used small RNA sequencing to select and quantify a set of 315 small RNAs that changed in abundance with age. Most of these were microRNAs (miRNAs), downregulated with age, and predicted to target genes related to growth, cancer, and senescence. Finally, we used the collected data to build age-predictive models. Among the different types of molecules, proteins yielded the most accurate model (R&#xb2; = 0.59 &#xb1; 0.02), followed by miRNAs as the best-performing class of small RNAs (R&#xb2; = 0.54 &#xb1; 0.02). Interestingly, the use of protein and miRNA data together improved predictions (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.70 &#xb1; 0.01). Future work using larger sample sizes and a validation dataset will be necessary to confirm these results. Nevertheless, our study suggests that combining proteomic and miRNA data yields superior age predictions, possibly by capturing a broader range of age-related physiological changes. It will be interesting to determine if combining different molecular data types works as a general strategy to improve future aging clocks.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Mrm-ms

### Affiliations
Biosciences and Nutrition, Riedel Lab, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Jerome Salignon

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Riedel
Biosciences and Nutrition, Riedel Lab, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


