### Accession
PXD039063

### Title
Identification of CD24 interaction partners in urologic tumor cell lines

### Description
Being involved in adhesion, migration, and invasion, the highly glycosylated signal transducer CD24 (cluster of differentiation 24) has been implicated to play an essential role during carcinogenesis. Previously, the molecular and (epi)genetic regulation of CD24 has been characterized in testicular germ cell tumors (GCT). Here, CD24 was exclusively found in embryonal carcinoma (EC), which represents the stem cell like population of GCT (see project PXD025110). For a better understanding of the molecular function of CD24, this study aimed at the identification of the direct interaction partners of CD24 not only in GCTs, but also in other urologic malignancies, such as urothelial- (UC), prostate- (PC), and renal cell carcinoma (RCC). For this purpose, co-immunoprecipitations of CD24 were performed in GCT, UC, PC, and RCC cell lines, while CD24-deficient EC cells as well as IgG2a controls were included for high validity. Extracted proteome was measured by liquid-chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LS-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations (Co-IP) were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol by using 3 mg ‘Dynabeads M-270 Epoxy Beads’ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to 18 µg CD24 (SWA11) antibody or IgG2a isotype control and 1 mg of total protein (n = 3). Upon elution in 1 x sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer (30 % glycerin, 12 % SDS, 150 mM Tris Base in H2O, pH 7.0) at 37°C for 20 minutes on a rocking platform, samples were further subjected to LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Database searches as well as labelfree quantification was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15. using Sequest HT and the UniProt database (human; date 2020-01-23, 20303 sequences) applying a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a mass tolerance of 0.6 Da for fragment spectra. Methionine oxidation was considered as variable modification, carbamidomethylation as static modification as well as tryptic cleavage specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Germ cell tumor, Co-immunoprecipitation, Renal cell carcinoma, Cd24, Urothelial carcinoma, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, GermanyMolecular Proteomics Laboratory, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Anja Stefanski

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, GermanyMolecular Proteomics Laboratory, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany


