### Accession
PXD006271

### Title
Proteome Analysis of Human Embryonic Stem Cells Organelles

### Description
Here, we have utilized a sub-cellular proteomics approach to analyze the localization of proteins in the nucleus, mitochondria, crude membrane, cytoplasm, heavy and light microsomes. Out of 2002 reproducibly identified proteins, we detected 762 proteins in a single organelle whereas 160 proteins were found in all sub-cellular fractions. We verified the localization of identified proteins through databases and discussed the consistency of the obtained results. With regards to the ambiguity in the definition of a membrane protein, we tried to clearly define the plasma membrane, peripheral membrane and membrane proteins by annotation of these proteins in databases, along with predictions of transmembrane helices.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation of freshly harvested H9 hESCs has been performed through discontinuous sucrose gradient approach. Western blotting confirmed the efficiency of fractionation. Gel-assisted tryptic digested proteins were subjected to the TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science). We restricted the database search to human tryptic peptides (IPI_human_3.87; 91464 sequences). Deamidated (NQ), methylthio (C), oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and the peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm. All MS/MS spectra were also searched against a decoy database by the MASCOT engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells, Organelles

### Affiliations
Department of Systems Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute of Iran, Karaj, Iran  Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran
Royan institute

### Submitter
Faezeh Shekari

### Lab Head
Dr Ghasem Hosseini Salekdeh
Department of Systems Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute of Iran, Karaj, Iran  Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran


