### Accession
PXD011654

### Title
A web-based search tool for visualizing instrument performance using the Triple Knockout (TKO) proteome standard

### Description
Multiplexing strategies are at the forefront of mass spectrometry-based proteomics, with SPS-MS3 methods becoming increasingly commonplace. A known caveat of isobaric multiplexing is interference resulting from co-isolated and co-fragmented ions that do not originate from the selected precursor of interest. The triple knockout (TKO) standard was designed to benchmark data collection strategies to minimize interference. However, a limitation to its widespread use has been the lack of an automated analysis platform. Here, we present a TKO Visualization Tool (TVT). The TVT viewer allows for automated, web-based, database searching of the TKO standard, returning traditional figures of merit, such as peptide and protein counts, scan-specific ion accumulation times, as well as the TKO-specific metric, the IFI (interference-free index). Moreover, the TVT viewer allows for plotting of multiple TKO standards to assess protocol optimizations, compare instruments, or measure degradation of instrument performance over time. To showcase the TVT viewer, we investigated the selection of 1) stationary phase resin, 2) MS2 isolation window width, and 3) number of SPS ions for SPS-MS3 analysis. Using the TVT viewer will allow the proteomics community to search and compare TKO results to optimize user-specific data collection workflows.

### Sample Protocol
Unfractionated yeast TKO standard that was prepared as described previously. The protocol is based on SL-TMT sample processing, with the omission of the high pH reversed-phase fractionation performed prior to LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all entries from the yeast SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database) (March 20, 2016), concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da for ion trap-based MS2 or 0.03 Da for Orbitrap-based MS2 scans. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexing strategies are at the forefront of mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, with SPS-MS3 methods becoming increasingly commonplace. A known caveat of isobaric multiplexing is interference resulting from coisolated and cofragmented ions that do not originate from the selected precursor of interest. The triple knockout (TKO) standard was designed to benchmark data collection strategies to minimize interference. However, a limitation to its widespread use has been the lack of an automated analysis platform. We present a TKO Visualization Tool (TVT). The TVT viewer allows for automated, web-based, database searching of the TKO standard, returning traditional figures of merit, such as peptide and protein counts, scan-specific ion accumulation times, as well as the TKO-specific metric, the IFI (interference-free index). Moreover, the TVT viewer allows for plotting of two TKO standards to assess protocol optimizations, compare instruments, or measure degradation of instrument performance over time. We showcase the TVT viewer by probing the selection of (1) stationary phase resin, (2) MS2 isolation window width, and (3) number of synchronous precursor selection (SPS) ions for SPS-MS3 analysis. Using the TVT viewer will allow the proteomics community to search and compare TKO results to optimize user-specific data collection workflows.

### Keywords
Tko; interference; tmt; itraq; sps-ms3; tvt; shiny

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


