### Accession
PXD015989

### Title
Molecular architecture of photoreceptor phosphodiesterase (PDE6) with activated G protein elucidates the mechanism of visual excitation

### Description
Photoreceptor phosphodiesterase 6 (PDE6) is the central effector of the visual excitation pathway in both rod and cone photoreceptors, and PDE6 mutations that alter PDE6 structure or regulation can result in several human retinal diseases. The rod PDE6 holoenzyme consists of two catalytic subunits (Pαβ) whose activity is suppressed in the dark by binding of two inhibitory γ-subunits (Pγ). Upon photoactivation of rhodopsin, the heterotrimeric G protein (transducin)is activated, resulting in binding of the activated transducin α-subunit (Gtα) toPDE6, displacement of Pγ from the PDE6 active site, and enzyme activation. Although the biochemistry of this pathway is understood, a lack of detailed structural information about the PDE6 activation mechanism hampers efforts to develop therapeutic interventions for managing PDE6-associated retinal disease. To address this gap, here we used a cross-linking MS-based approach to create a model of the entire interaction surface of Pγ with the regulatory and catalytic domains of Pαβin its nonactivated state. Following reconstitution of PDE6 and activated Gtαwith liposomes and identification of cross-links between Gtα and PDE6 subunits, we determined that the PDE6-Gtα protein complex consists of two Gtα binding sites per holoenzyme. Each Gtα interacts with the catalytic domains of both catalytic subunits and induces major changes in the interaction sites of interaction of the Pγ subunit with the catalytic subunits. These results provide the first structural model for the activated state of the transducin-PDE6-Tα*complex during visual excitation, thereby enhancing our understanding of the molecular etiology of inherited retinal diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Samples injected into a UHPLC system and separated by PepMap RSLC column.  Eluant collected directly to source of LTQ Orbitrap XL.  LC-MS data acquired followed by CID analysis.

### Data Protocol
RAW files concerted to peaklists using RawConverter version 1.1.0.19 for by run on ProteinProspector version 5.14.0 or newer.  The following setting were applied: precursor charge range = 2 3 4 5, parent tol = 15ppm sys err=10, frag tol =0.7 Da.  The constant modifications used are Carbamidomethyl (C). The variable modifications (max of 2) are Acetyl (N-term), acetyl+xoidation (N-term M), Gln-->pyro-Gln, Met-loss (N-term M), Met-loss+acetyl(N-term M), Oxidation (M), as well as specific crosslinker modifications when appropriate.  Trypsin or a Trypsin/Asp-N double digestion was selected with 3-5 max missed cleavages.  Samples scoring above 10 for trypsin digest or 5 for a double digest were further validated based on the spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Photoreceptor phosphodiesterase 6 (PDE6) is the central effector of the visual excitation pathway in both rod and cone photoreceptors, and <i>PDE6</i> mutations that alter PDE6 structure or regulation can result in several human retinal diseases. The rod PDE6 holoenzyme consists of two catalytic subunits (P&#x3b1;&#x3b2;) whose activity is suppressed in the dark by binding of two inhibitory &#x3b3;-subunits (P&#x3b3;). Upon photoactivation of rhodopsin, the heterotrimeric G protein (transducin) is activated, resulting in binding of the activated transducin &#x3b1;-subunit (Gt<sub>&#x3b1;</sub>) to PDE6, displacement of P&#x3b3; from the PDE6 active site, and enzyme activation. Although the biochemistry of this pathway is understood, a lack of detailed structural information about the PDE6 activation mechanism hampers efforts to develop therapeutic interventions for managing PDE6-associated retinal diseases. To address this gap, here we used a cross-linking MS-based approach to create a model of the entire interaction surface of P&#x3b3; with the regulatory and catalytic domains of P&#x3b1;&#x3b2; in its nonactivated state. Following reconstitution of PDE6 and activated Gt<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> with liposomes and identification of cross-links between Gt<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> and PDE6 subunits, we determined that the PDE6-Gt<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> protein complex consists of two Gt<sub>&#x3b1;</sub>-binding sites per holoenzyme. Each Gt<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> interacts with the catalytic domains of both catalytic subunits and induces major changes in the interaction sites of the P&#x3b3; subunit with the catalytic subunits. These results provide the first structural model for the activated state of the transducin-PDE6 complex during visual excitation, enhancing our understanding of the molecular etiology of inherited retinal diseases.

### Keywords
Pde6, Chemical cross-linking

### Affiliations
University of New Hampshire

### Submitter
Rick Cote

### Lab Head
Dr Rick H. Cote
University of New Hampshire


