### Accession
PXD024423

### Title
Histone Sample Preparation for Bottom-Up Mass spectrometry: A Roadmap to Informed Decisions

### Description
we aimed to provide an objective roadmap for histone sample preparation wherein the most notable findings and most important metrics were highlighted. This roadmap included a Histone Coverage Tool that allows researchers to make a snapshot of public or in-house data in search of a protocol that suits their specific needs. However, despite the fact that the coverage provided by a sample preparation workflow is pivotal to answer specific research questions, it should be noted that other metrics such as enzyme specificity and workflow variability can be equally important. Moreover, when it comes to histone sample preparation there are multiple additional challenges and pitfalls compared to regular bottom-up proteomics workflows. First there is the abundance and unequal distribution of arginine and lysine cleavage sites, which makes it virtually impossible to cover the entire histone code with a single bottom-up workflow. The most widely spread workaround for the abundance of cleavage sites is derivatization of lysine residues used to block tryptic digest and create longer peptides. However, this also introduces chemical noise, which obscures biological PTMs, while lowering sensitivity due to diluted signal. The most obvious alternative is an arginine specific digest. However, on the one hand, derivatization of lysine residues not only increases peptide length but also increases retention on the LC-system, while decreasing charge state distribution of the precursor ions. The latter presumably reduces instrumental variation of the workflow, which is remarkable since this source of variation is generally assumed to be constant in the field of LC-MS/MS based proteomics.  On the other hand, lysine derivatization also increases the singly charged precursor fraction, which is usually not fragmented in regular data dependent acquisitions, thus increasing the risk of losing annotations.    It is clear that not one histone sample preparation workflow will fit all research questions. However, we hope that this manuscript will guide researchers in making informed decisions about the many pitfalls and trade-offs involved in optimizing or assessing histone sample preparation workflows.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation   A bovine histone standard extracted from calf thymus (Sigma-Aldrich, 10223565001) was used to avoid bias towards specific regions of the histone code caused by the extraction of histone proteins from cell lines or tissue. All protocols were executed in five-fold on 20 µg of histone standard.    The ArgC and RgpB protocols—hereafter embedded in and referred to as the ArgC and GRX workflow respectively—were executed according to the instructions of the manufacturer. In brief, 5 µg ArgC (Sigma-Aldrich, 11370529001) was resuspended in 50 µL ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ.cm resistivity) of which 4 µL was added to the samples, followed by 10 µL of activation solution, and addition of digestion buffer (100 mM TrisHCL, 10 mM CaCl2) to a final volume of 100 µL. For the RgpB protocol, cysteine and dithiothreitol were added to the samples to a final concentration of 20 mM and 10 mM respectively. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. Next, 5 µg RgpB (Genovis, GingisREX®) was resuspended in 50 µL ultrapure water of which 4 µL was added. All samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C and vacuum dried.   The tryptic digest samples—hereafter embedded in and referred to as the NoPropTryp workflow—were resuspended in 500 mM Triethyl Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer with an aimed final volume of 50 µL, followed by addition of CaCl2 and acetonitrile to a final concentration of 1 mM and 5% (v/v) respectively. Finally trypsin was added in a 1:20 (w/w) ratio and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight and vacuum dried.   The tryptic digest with propionylation of the lysine residues—hereafter embedded in and referred to as the PropTryp workflow—has been described previously by Meert et al.[16] In brief, the samples were resuspended in 20 µL TEAB. First, 20 µL of an isopropyl alcohol : propionic anhydride (7:1) solution was added, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes. Next, 20 µL of ultrapure water was added, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 30 minutes to quench the reaction. The samples were vacuum dried and digested as described for the tryptic digest. After digestion, the N-termini of the resulting peptides were propionylated accordingly and the samples were vacuum dried. To reverse over-propionylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, 50 µL 0.5 M hydroxylamine and 15 µL ammonium hydroxide (pH 12) were added, followed by incubation for 20 minutes at room temperature. The samples were acidified (pH 3) with formic acid and vacuum dried.

### Data Protocol
Sample Acquisition   All samples in the sample list were randomized to avoid systematic variation, blocked to correct for drift in sensitivity of the instrument, and interspersed with quality control samples to monitor instrumental variation. Seven different quality control samples were prepared, four of which were mixtures of all separate digest conditions. In addition, a mixture of GRX and ArgC samples, a mixture of NoPropTryp, ArgC, and GRX samples and a mixture of PropTryp and NoPropTryp samples were prepared. These were used to increase alignment efficiency and quantitative accuracy during analysis with Progenesis QIP.    3 µg of each sample was LC-separated prior to MS-analysis with a Nano Acquity system coupled to an Acquity UPLC CSH-C18 analytical column (1.7 µm, 300 µm x 100 mm, Waters) using a two-step linear gradient of 50 minutes (3-30% B) and 10 minutes (30-40% B). 0.1% formic acid and 3% DMSO in water was used as solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as solvent B.   All samples were acquired on a Synapt G2-Si (Waters) in HD-DDA mode. Herein fragment ions are mobility separated based on charge state, which allows the instrument to selectively sample single charged fragment ions in the ion beam that enters the TOF-tube. This significantly increases duty cycle and thus sensitivity for these fragment ions. Precursor scan time was set to 0.2 s and each scan cycle allowed for fragmentation of a maximum of 12 precursor ions with an intensity threshold of 3000, a scan time of 0.1 – 0.3 s and a switchback threshold of 100000. The mass range was set to m/z 50-5000 for both precursor and fragment scans.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone code; coverage; epigenetics; mass spectrometry; sample preparation; work-flow optimization; gingisrex

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology/ProGenTomics, Ghent University, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology/ProGenTomics, Ghent University, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium


