### Accession
PXD016004

### Title
Neuronal proteome dynamics during homeostatic scaling.

### Description
Homeostatic scaling adjusts synaptic strength in response to persistent changes in neuronal network activity. This compensatory mechanism requires proteome remodeling accomplished via regulation of protein synthesis as well as degradation, but the global patterns of proteome remodeling and the underlying dynamics of individual proteins remain elusive. Here we used dynamic SILAC labeling in cultured hippocampal cells to identify proteins involved in homeostatic up- or down-scaling and to quantify their changes in synthesis and degradation as well as resulting changes in protein abundance or turnover. Our data demonstrate that a large fraction of the neuronal proteome is remodeled during homeostatic scaling. Most proteins were down-regulated by decreased synthesis or up-regulated by decreased degradation. Comparably fewer proteins showed increased synthesis or degradation rates. More than half of the quantified synaptic proteins were regulated, including pre- as well as postsynaptic proteins with diverse molecular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation and maintenance of primary cultured hippocampal cells. Dissociated hippocampal neurons were prepared and maintained as previously described (Aakalu et al., 2001). Briefly, hippocampi from postnatal day 1 rat pups (strain Sprague-Dawley) were dissected and dissociated by papain and plated onto poly-D-lysine-coated Petri dishes (MatTek). Cultured cells were maintained in Neurobasal-A medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with B-27 (Invitrogen) and Glutamax (Invitrogen) at 37°C. Dynamic SILAC experiment. After 18-19 DIV, the culture medium was exchanged with a medium that was depleted of arginine and lysine (customized; Invitrogen) and was supplemented with ‘heavy’ isotopically labeled arginine (R10; Thermo) and lysine (K8; Thermo) resulting in a final percentage of 80% heavy arginine/lysine and 20% remaining light arginine/lysine. Together with the medium change, 20 µM BIC, 1 µM TTX or no drug (Ctrl) was added. The cells were harvested after 1, 3 or 7 days of the treatment and heavy SILAC pulse. The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS (Invitrogen) supplemented with protease inhibitor (cOmplete EDTA-free, Roche), then scraped and pelleted by centrifugation. The cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 200 mM Tris/HCl [pH 8.4], 4% CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) using a pistil and sonication for 4 x 30 s at 4°C. The lysates were incubated with Benzonase (1 µL of a ≥250 units/mL stock solution; Sigma) for 10 min and cleared by centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 x g. Three independent biological replicates from different preparations were performed. Preparation of semi-heavy neurons as internal standard. Primary hippocampal neurons were prepared and plated as described above. Six hours after plating, the medium was fully exchanged with a medium that was depleted of arginine and lysine and supplemented with ‘semi-heavy’ isotopically labeled arginine (R6; Thermo) and lysine (K4; Thermo). After 21 DIV, the cells were harvested and lysed as described above. Semi-heavy lysates from different culture dishes were merged to create one master mix (‘semi-heavy internal standard’; IS). Each 50 µg (protein amount) of the dynamic SILAC lysates were mixed with 25 µg of semi-heavy internal standard lysate (‘triple SILAC’ samples) and further processed for MS analysis. In addition, 25 µg of the dynamic SILAC lysates without internal standard (‘double SILAC’ samples) were also processed for MS analysis. The proteins were digested according to the ‘Filter-Aided Sample Preparation’ (FASP) protocol as described by Wisniewski et al. (2009). After digestion, the ‘double SILAC’ samples were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The digested ‘triple SILAC’ samples were fractionated into four fractions using strong-cation-exchange (SCX) StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). All fractions were desalted using C18 StageTips. The dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) onto a PepMap100 loading column (C18, L = 20 mm, 3 µm particle size, Dionex) and washed with loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.05% TFA in water) for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 µL/min. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, L = 50 cm, <2 µm particle size, Dionex) by a gradient of phase A (water with 5% v/v DMSO and 0.1% FA) and phase B (5% DMSO, 15% water and 80% ACN v/v/v). The gradient was ramped from 4% B to 48% B in 178 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluting peptides were ionized online using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed either in a QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) or in a Lumos Fusion (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition mode. All fractions of the ‘triple SILAC’ samples were measured in technical duplicates. For ‘double SILAC’ samples, one technical replicate was measured.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016). For all searches, spectra were matched to a Rattus norvegicus database downloaded from uniprot.org (reviewed and unreviewed) and a contaminant and decoy database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and protein-N-terminal acetylation as well as methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the PSM and protein level. To assess the rate of re-incorporation of ‘light’ arginine and lysine into nascent proteins during the ’heavy’ pulse (“recycling rate”), the ‘double SILAC’ samples were analyzed with multiplicity set to 1 and heavy arginine (R10) and heavy lysine (K8) were set as additional variable modifications. For precise quantification of nascent and pre-existing proteins, the ‘triple SILAC’ samples were searched with a multiplicity of 3 (light (K0, R0), semi-heavy (K4, R6), heavy (K8, R10)).

### Publication Abstract
Protein turnover, the net result of protein synthesis and degradation, enables cells to remodel their proteomes in response to internal and external cues. Previously, we analyzed protein turnover rates in cultured brain cells under basal neuronal activity and found that protein turnover is influenced by subcellular localization, protein function, complex association, cell type of origin, and by the cellular environment (D&#xf6;rrbaum et al., 2018). Here, we advanced our experimental approach to quantify changes in protein synthesis and degradation, as well as the resulting changes in protein turnover or abundance in rat primary hippocampal cultures during homeostatic scaling. Our data demonstrate that a large fraction of the neuronal proteome shows changes in protein synthesis and/or degradation during homeostatic up- and down-scaling. More than half of the quantified synaptic proteins were regulated, including pre- as well as postsynaptic proteins with diverse molecular functions.

### Keywords
Proteome turnover, Proteome remodelling, Dynamic silac, Synaptic plasticity, Homeostatic scaling

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPIs for Brain Research and Biophysics

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPIs for Brain Research and Biophysics


