### Accession
PXD036437

### Title
Senolytics improve the neurogenic potential of non-glial progenitors and neurorepair in the dorsal pallium of aged killifish independent of inflammation

### Description
With advancing age, senescent cells accumulate as they are not efficiently cleared by the immune system anymore. Via a senescence-associated secretory phenotype, chronic senescent cells alter the microenvironment, creating an unfavorable milieu for neurogenesis and neurorepair. Using an innovative and rapid aging model, the African turquoise killifish, we have previously demonstrated a dramatic decline in neurogenic potential of non-glial progenitors with age. Even after traumatic brain injury, progenitor proliferation and neuron production was very low in aged killifish in comparison to young adult killifish, and overall neurorepair was incomplete. In the present study, we validated if the senolytic cocktail dasatinib and quercetin (D+Q) could reboot the neurogenic output by clearing chronic senescent cells from the aged killifish brain to re-create the necessary supportive environment. Our results confirm that the aged killifish telencephalon holds a very high senescent cell burden, which we could diminish by short-term systemic D+Q treatment. As a consequence of D+Q administration, proliferation of non-glial progenitors increased and more new neurons were generated and migrated into the parenchyma after injury. Injury-induced inflammation and glial scarring, a phenomenon only seen in aged killifish, remained unaltered. Senolytic treatment with D+Q might thus hold promise for improving brain function in aged populations, and is especially interesting for reviving the neurogenic potential of an already aged central nervous system.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation. Young adult and aged fish were euthanized in 0.1% buffered tricaine (MS-222, Sigma-Aldrich, diluted in system water). Brains were extracted and the right hemisphere of the telencephalon was quickly dissected and placed on dry ice. Samples were immediately stored at -80 °C. Next, samples were homogenized using drill-driven, sterile, disposable pestiles (Argos technologies) in 500 µL RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 1% Triton, 0.5% Na deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 4% protease inhibitor, pH 8). The samples were shaken for 2 h at 4 °C before being centrifuged for 20 min at 12 000 g and at 4 °C. Hereafter, the supernatant was taken and the total protein concentration was measured using the Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen). Samples were stored at -80 °C and shipped to the Center for proteomics, Prof. Dr. G. Baggerman research group (University of Antwerp). Samples were reduced using 2 µL of 500 mM tris (2-caroxyethyl) phosphine in a volume of 100 µL Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffert (TEAB, 100 mM). After incubation for 1 h at 55 °C, samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide and precipitated with acetone. Samples were resuspended in TEAB and digested with trypsin overnight (1/50 enzyme/protein ratio). The digests were desalted via Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Fischer).  Reverse phase liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Reverse phase chromatography was performed on the acquired peptide mixture, using a nano-acquity nano-UPLC system, and nano Acquity UPLS pre-column BEH C18 300 µm X 50 µm, 5 µm particle size, connected to nano Acquity UPLS nano column BEH C18 75 µm X 150 µm, 1.7 µm particle size (Waters). Samples were dissolved in mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and loaded using a linear gradient of mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) from 0 to 45% in 280 min. This was followed by a steep increase to 100% mobile phase B in 5 min, followed by 15 min at 100% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The nano-LC was coupled with the mass spectrometer online via PicoTip Emitter (New Objective) with nanospray ion source (Thermo Fischer). The Q Exactive (Thermo Fischer) was set up in MS/MS mode. The Orbitrap performed a full scan spectrum (350-1850 m/z, resolution 70 000), followed by a maximum of twenty HCD tandem mass spectra (resolution 17 500). In full MS, a maximum inject time of 100 ms was indicated, while 80 ms in MS2. The normalized collision energy used was 27 and the minimal AGG target was 1.7e3. For data-dependent acquisition, a dynamic exclusion list of 20 s was taken.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis. Identification of proteins was performed with MaxQuant by searching against the Uniprot Nothobranchius furzeri database with the following parameters. Trypsin was indicated as digestive enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Fixed modification was set to cysteine carbomidomethylation, and variable modifications to methionine oxidation and N-protein acetylation. The FDR for PSM and protein identification was 1%. The analysis was specified to label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimal ratio count of 2 for unique or razor peptides. Raw output data from MaxQuant was further analyzed using Perseus v.1.6.15

### Publication Abstract
The young African turquoise killifish has a high regenerative capacity, but loses it with advancing age, adopting several aspects of the limited form of mammalian regeneration. We deployed a proteomic strategy to identify pathways that underpin the loss of regenerative power caused by aging. Cellular senescence stood out as a potential brake on successful neurorepair. We applied the senolytic cocktail Dasatinib and Quercetin (D&#x2009;+&#x2009;Q) to test clearance of chronic senescent cells from the aged killifish central nervous system (CNS) as well as rebooting the neurogenic output. Our results show that the entire aged killifish telencephalon holds a very high senescent cell burden, including the parenchyma and the neurogenic niches, which could be diminished by a short-term, late-onset D&#x2009;+&#x2009;Q treatment. Reactive proliferation of non-glial progenitors increased substantially and lead to restorative neurogenesis after traumatic brain injury. Our results provide a cellular mechanism for age-related regeneration resilience and a proof-of-concept of a potential therapy to revive the neurogenic potential in an already aged or diseased CNS.

### Keywords
N. furzeri, Senescent cells, Aging, Senolytics, D+q, Neurorepair, Neuroregeneration

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuroplasticity and Neuroproteomics, Department of Biology, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
University of Antwerp, VITO

### Submitter
Kurt Boonen

### Lab Head
Dr Lut Arckens
Laboratory of Neuroplasticity and Neuroproteomics, Department of Biology, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium


