### Accession
PXD007204

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 wild type, deg10-1, deg10-2 and catr3-1 root proteome

### Description
Deg/HtrA proteases are important factors of the cellular protein quality control system, but little is know about their function in mitochondria. DEG10 loss-of-function mutants were impaired in root elongation at elevated temperature and reduced seed set in field trials. This study analysed the root proteome of two DEG10 loss-of-function mutants, deg10-1 and deg10-2, in comparison to wild type and the catr3-1 mutant (which is a second mutation in deg10-1).

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis of roots, 3-week-old seedlings of Arabidopsis wild type, deg10-1 and deg10-2 were transferred to an aerated hydroponic culture system with constant renewal (1 l/d) of the nutrient solution (1 mM Ca(NO3)2, 0.5 mM MgSO4, 0.5 mM K2HPO4, 0.1 mM KCl, 20 µM Fe(III)-EDDHA, 10 µM H3BO3, 0.1 µM MnSO4, 0.2 µM Na2MoO4, 0.5 µM NiSO4, 0.1 µM CuSO4, 0.1 µM ZnSO4, 1 mM MES pH 5.8, adapted from {Küpper, 2007 #47}. After 3 additional weeks, the nutrient solution was heated to 30°C for 2 days before the roots were harvested, rinsed briefly and snap-frozen in liquid N2. Deep-frozen roots were ground with a mortar and pestle, transferred into 2 ml reaction cups and thawed in protein extraction buffer (6 M Guanidine-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1x Complete protease inhibitor (Roche)). Protein concentration was determined with the Pierce BCA assay (ThermoFisher) with BSA as standard, and adjusted to 1.5 µg/µL. 200 µL of each sample were reduced with 12.5 mM DTT for 30 min at 55°C and alkylated with 37.5 mM iodoacetic acid (IAA) for 40 min at 22°C. Excess IAA was quenched with 25 mM DTT for 20 min at 37°C before purification by chloroform/methanol precipitation (Wessel & Flügge, 1984). Protein pellets were dissolved in 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, proteomics-grade trypsin (Thermo) at a ratio of 1:125 protease/protein (w/w) and incubated at 37°C for 16 h, and the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 reverse phase cartridges (Sep-Pak, Waters). An estimated 500 ng desalted tryptic protein digest was loaded onto a C18 reverse phase capillary trap column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo) followed by separation on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å, Thermo) with an nano-HPLC system (UltiMate3000 RSLCnano Thermo) on-line coupled to a high-resolution quadrupole-time of flight tandem mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) using a nano-electrospray source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker) as described (Beck et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 1414: 2014–2029, 2015. Doi 10.1074/mcp.M114.047407). Peptides were eluted with a 90 min gradient from 2% to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in H2O at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and MS spectra were acquired at 4Hz in a range from m/z 300 to 1750. For each MS scan, the 18 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS spectra were recorded in a mass range from m/z 200 to m/z 1750 at an intensity-dependent collection rate of 12 to 20 Hz spectrum and dynamically excluded for the next 0.4 min. Each biological sample was injected twice to increase proteome coverage.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified, quantified and matched to corresponding proteins using the Max-Quant software package, version 1.5.5.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Generic settings for Bruker Q-TOF instruments were used to match spectra to proteins sequence in the A. thaliana Uniprot proteome database (release 2017-07-09). Trypsin was set as digestion protease allowing for up to three missed cleavages. N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were considered as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. PSM and protein false discovery rates were set to 0.01. For label free quantification, the “match between runs” algorithm was enabled with standard settings. One replicate experiment of the Col-0 wild type correlated poorly with the other conditions due to poor digest efficiency and was therefore excluded from statistical analysis with the Perseus software package, version 1.6.1.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016b). Relative abundances (LFQ-intensities) were log2-transformed and contaminants, reverse hits and “proteins only identified by site” excluded, as were proteins not quantified in at least three biological replicates in at least one genotypes. Missing values were imputed using Perseus with standard settings before determination of proteins with significantly altered abundance by ANOVA testing with a permutation-based FDR 0.05. Tukey’s honestly significant difference (THSD) post-hoc tests was used to determine significant pair-wise differences among the four genotypes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Arabidopsis, Protease, Roots, Deg10

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschugnszentrum Jülich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter F. Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschugnszentrum Jülich


