### Accession
PXD024647

### Title
proteomics of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) from adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs) stimulated with or without IFN-γ

### Description
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are used for ameliorating liver fibrosis and aiding liver regeneration after cirrhosis; Here, we analyzed the therapeutic potential of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from interferon-γ (IFN-γ) pre-conditioned MSCs (γ-sEVs). to anlyze the proteins in sEVs, proteomics of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) from adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs) stimulated with or without IFN-γ were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Passage 4 AD-MSC or γ-AD-MSC were cultured without serum in advanced Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with GlutaMAXTM (100x) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 48 h. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 2000 × g for 10 min to remove cell debris and filtered using a 0.22 μm filter (StericupTM Quick Release DuraporeTM, Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA). The filtered supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 210,000 × g for 70 min at 4C using Optima XL-100K (Beckman Coulter, Inc, Brea, CA, USA) in a swing rotor SW41Ti (Beckman Coulter, Inc). The residual fraction was washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4) and again collected by ultracentrifugation at 210,000 × g. PBS was added to the final sEV-enriched fraction. Protein was quantified using Qubit3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sEV samples were added to a 100 µl reduction processing solution [100 mM NH4HCO3 containing 0.15% (w/v) dithiothreitol as the reducing agent] and incubated at 57 °C for 30 min. After incubation, 100 µl alkylation process solution [100 mM NH4HCO3 containing 1% (w/v) iodoacetamide as the alkylation reagent] was added and the mixture was incubated at 20 °C. After adding 100 µl modified trypsin and 50 mM NH4HCO3 (in this order), the mixture was incubated overnight at 30 °C. Digestive fluid was dried using a centrifugal concentrator (CC–105, TOMY SEIKO, Tokyo, Japan), dissolved in 30 µl 0.1% formic acid, and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant was used for nano-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Ultimate 3000: Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA connected to QExactive Orbitrap: Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen).

### Data Protocol
The samples were loaded on the column (75 µm internal diameter and 500 mm length: L-column2 ODS (octadecylsilane), CERI, Tokyo, Japan) using nano-high performance liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000, Dionex Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Eluted peptides were analyzed using Q-Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Nano-LC and MS were controlled by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). To identify and quantify proteins, the nano-LC-MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the Mascot server (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science Inc, MA, USA). The spectral data were submitted to SWISS–PROT and National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI) of green plants. The Mascot search parameters were: threshold of the ion score cut–off, 10; peptide tolerance, 0.8 Da; MS/MS tolerance, 0.5 Da; peptide charge 2-4, trypsin as the enzyme and allowing up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Statistical analysis of protein spectral counts was performed using Scaffold (version 4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., OR, USA). Significant differences were detected using Fisher’s least significant difference procedure at P < 0.05. Only identified proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are used for ameliorating liver fibrosis and aiding liver regeneration after cirrhosis; Here, we analyzed the therapeutic potential of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from interferon-&#x3b3; (IFN-&#x3b3;) pre-conditioned MSCs (&#x3b3;-sEVs). &#x3b3;-sEVs effectively induced anti-inflammatory macrophages with high motility and phagocytic abilities in vitro, while not preventing hepatic stellate cell (HSC; the major source of collagen fiber) activation in vitro. The proteome analysis of MSC-derived sEVs revealed anti-inflammatory macrophage inducible proteins (e.g., annexin-A1, lactotransferrin, and aminopeptidase N) upon IFN-&#x3b3; stimulation. Furthermore, by enabling CX<sub>3</sub>CR1+ macrophage accumulation in the damaged area, &#x3b3;-sEVs ameliorated inflammation and fibrosis in the cirrhosis mouse model more effectively than sEVs. Single cell RNA-Seq analysis revealed diverse effects, such as induction of anti-inflammatory macrophages and regulatory T cells, in the cirrhotic liver after &#x3b3;-sEV administration. Overall, IFN-&#x3b3; pre-conditioning altered sEVs resulted in efficient tissue repair indicating a new therapeutic strategy.

### Keywords
Small extracellular vesicle, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Niigata University
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University

### Submitter
Atsunori Tsuchiya

### Lab Head
Dr Shuji Terai
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University


