### Accession
PXD023310

### Title
X. laevis single embryo phosphoproteomics

### Description
We analysed dynamics of protein phosphorylation throughout unperturbed early cell cycles in individual Xenopus embryos using high-resolution time-resolved phosphoproteomics, and confirmed cell cycle behaviour in egg extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were digested using the FASP method. Proteins were thawed and immediately reduced and alkylated with 10mM DTT and 0.05M iodoacetamide, respectively. Next, proteins were digested with Lys-C (overnight) at 37°C in a wet chamber, followed by addition of trypsin and further incubation under the same conditions for 4 hours. Both enzymes were used at 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. For the egg extract experiment, each FASP filter was loaded with 200μg of protein. Peptides were cleaned using the Oasis HLB 96 well plates (Waters Corporation) and consequently subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe(III)-NTA 5μL cartridges in the automated AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies).  All samples for label-free shotgun proteomics were analyzed using a UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first trapped onto a pre-column (inner diameter [ID] of 100μm and 2cm length; packed in-house with 3μm C18 ReproSil particles [Dr. Maisch GmbH]) and eluted for separation into an analytical column (ID of 75μm and 50cm length; packed in-house with 2.7μm Poroshell EC-C18 particles (Agilent Technologies). The latter was done using a two-buffer system, consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid [FA] in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Peptides were trapped during 5 minutes at 5μL/min flow-rate with solvent A. For the measurement of the full proteome, we used a 155 minutes gradient from 10 to 36% of solvent B. For the phosphoproteome we used a 95 minutes gradient from 8 to 32% of solvent B. Both methods included a wash with 100% solvent B for 5 minutes followed by a column equilibration with 100% solvent A for the last 10 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full scan MS was acquired from 375-1600m/z with a 60,000 resolution at 200m/z. Accumulation target value was set to 3e6 ions with a maximum injection time of 20ms. Up to 15 (12 for the phosphoproteome) of the most intense precursor ions were isolated (1.4m/z window) for fragmentation using high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. For MS2 scans an accumulation target value of 1e5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50ms were selected. Scans were acquired from 200-2000m/z with a 30,000 resolution at 200m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set at 24s for the proteome and 12s for the phosphoproteome. For targeted proteomics, an EASY-nLC 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF was used. Peptides were separated using an EASY-Spray analytical column (ID of 75μm and 25cm length; packed with 2μm C18 particles with a 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient lengths were shortened to 60 minutes. Phosphopeptides of interest from the previous experiment were selected and heavy-labeled versions were synthesized (JPT Peptide Technologies). These synthetic standards were used during method development for retention time scheduling and instrument ion fill-time optimization. Additionally, synthetic heavy peptides were pooled and combined with synthetic retention time peptide standards (iRT, Biognosys) to generate a spectral library, measured in DDA mode using the same LC-MS setup. This spectral library provided fragment intensity and retention time information for quality control assessment of targeted measurements. Samples were reconstituted in 2% FA containing ~200fmol of each synthetic standard. The mass spectrometer was operated in data independent acquisition mode with an inclusion list of targets for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). The list included the m/z values for the heavy and light versions of the phosphopeptides. Optimal measurement parameters were determined using test samples spiked with the heavy-labeled standards in order to guarantee optimal sensitivity for detection of endogenous phosphopeptides. We measured the targets of interest in a scheduled fashion, during a four-minute window with a 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time of 246ms and an accumulation target value of 2e5 ions, in order to ensure maximum specificity and sensitivity.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1) using a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01. The default settings were used, with the following exceptions: variable modifications, specifically methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were selected. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. We also enabled the ‘match between runs’ option with the default values. Fractions were set so that matching was done only among biological replicates and samples of consecutive time points. The data was uploaded to the Perseus platform for further analysis. Briefly: decoy sequences and potential contaminants were filtered out. Only high confidence localization (>0.75 localization probability) phosphosites were conserved for further analysis. Intensities were log2 transformed and then normalized by subtracting the median intensity of each sample. Biological replicates were grouped accordingly by time point; this grouping allowed us to filter the data and keep only those phosphosites that could be detected in at least two out of three biological replicates in any of the time points. Missing values were imputed from a random normal distribution applying a downshift of 1.8 times the standard deviation of the dataset, and a width of 0.3 times the standard deviation.  We then performed an ANOVA (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <0.05) in order to determine which phosphosites displayed statistically significant changes through the time course. Average phosphosite intensities were grouped using a combination of k-means and hierarchical clustering using the Complex Heatmap package in R. Protein intensities were processed in a similar fashion, removing proteins that were only identified by peptides that carry one or more modified amino acids. PRM raw files were analyzed with Skyline software. Signal quality for each target of interest was assessed visually for all samples. Quality control of endogenous signals was done by confirming the perfect co-elution of both peptide forms (heavy and light), assessing their retention time and peak shape. We also used the similarity of the relative intensity of fragment ions (rdotp > 0.9) between light and heavy to exclude signals that showed poor correlation.

### Publication Abstract
Cell cycle transitions result from global changes in protein phosphorylation states triggered by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). To understand how this complexity produces an ordered and rapid cellular reorganisation, we generated a high-resolution map of changing phosphosites throughout unperturbed early cell cycles in single Xenopus embryos, derived the emergent principles through systems biology analysis, and tested them by biophysical modelling and biochemical experiments. We found that most dynamic phosphosites share two key characteristics: they occur on highly disordered proteins that localise to membraneless organelles, and are CDK targets. Furthermore, CDK-mediated multisite phosphorylation can switch homotypic interactions of such proteins between favourable and inhibitory modes for biomolecular condensate formation. These results provide insight into the molecular mechanisms and kinetics of mitotic cellular reorganisation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Cell cycle, Single embryo

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Juan Manuel Valverde

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


