### Accession
PXD000948

### Title
Macro-porous Reversed Phase Separation of Proteins Combined with Reversed Phase Separation of Phosphopeptides and Tandem Mass Spectrometry for Profiling the Phosphoproteome of MDA-MB-231 cells

### Description
A new method of combining macro-porous reversed phase (mRP) protein fractionation with reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) peptide separation tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is reported for profiling the phosphoproteome of a complex sample. In this method, an mRP-C18 column was used to fractionate the proteins from a whole cell lysate of a breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, into 38 fractions. Each fraction was subjected to tryptic digestion, sequential phosphopeptide enrichment by immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) and titanium dioxide (TiO2), followed by capillary RPLC-MS/MS analysis. For comparison, the conventional method of using strong cation exchange (SCX)-RPLC separation of peptides combined with MS/MS was also used for analyzing the phosphoproteome. Replicate experiments by the mRP-RPLC method identified 1585 distinct phosphoproteins with 4519 phosphopeptides, compared to 1585 phosphoproteins with 4297 phosphopeptides by SCX-RPLC, with a total of 1947 phosphoproteins and 6278 phosphopeptides identified from the combined results. While the two methods have similar ability in the identification of the phosphoproteome, they produce complementary information. The phosphoproteins identified in this study, including 67 novel phosphorylation sites from 56 breast cancer related proteins, can serve as the entry point for future validation with biological implications in breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
In this work, two methods were used to analyze the phosphoproteome of the MDA-MB-231 cells. In SCX-RPLC, cell lysates were first digested by trypsin, followed by sequential phosphopeptide enrichment using IMAC and TiO2 beads. Phosphopeptides enriched by IMAC and TiO2 were then fractionated by SCX into 38 fractions, respectively. Individual fractions were finally analyzed by capillary RPLC-MS/MS. In the mRP-RPLC method, cell lysates were first fractionated by an mRP-C18 column at the protein level into 38 fractions. Individual fractions were subjected to trypsin digestion, sequential phosphopeptides enrichment by IMAC and TiO2 beads. Each phosphopeptide sample was finally analyzed by capillary RPLC-MS/MS. Replicate experiments were performed for both methods.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were lock-mass-corrected, de-isotoped, and converted to peak list files by ProteinLynx Global Server 2.3 (Waters, Milford, MA). Protein identification was performed by using MASCOT 2.2 search engine for searching the Swiss-Prot database (http://ca.expasy.org/sprot/) (Swiss-Prot database; version 57.4; 410518 sequences). Searching was restricted HOMO sapiens (20401 sequences) and preformed using the following parameters: fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages, 2; peptide tolerance, 30 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.2 Da; peptide charge, 1+, 2+ and 3+.  The search results, including protein names, access IDs, molecular mass, unique peptide sequences, ion score, and MASCOT threshold score for identity, calculated molecular mass of the peptide, and the difference (error) between the experimental and calculated masses, were extracted to Excel files using in-house software. All the identified peptides with scores lower than the Mascot threshold score for identity at the confidence level of 95% were then removed from the protein list. The redundant peptides for different protein identities were deleted, and the redundant proteins identified under the same gene name but different access ID numbers were also removed from the list.

### Publication Abstract
A new method of combining macroporous RP (mRP) protein fractionation with RPLC peptide separation MS/MS is reported for profiling the phosphoproteome of a complex sample. In this method, an mRP-C18 column was used to fractionate the proteins from a whole cell lysate of a breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, into 38 fractions. Each fraction was subjected to tryptic digestion, sequential phosphopeptide enrichment by immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography and titanium dioxide (TiO2 ), followed by capillary RPLC-MS/MS analysis. For comparison, the conventional method of using strong cation exchange RPLC separation of peptides combined with MS/MS was also used for analyzing the phosphoproteome. Replicate experiments by the mRP-RPLC method identified 1585 distinct phosphoproteins with 4519 phosphopeptides, compared to 1585 phosphoproteins with 4297 phosphopeptides by strong cation exchange RPLC, with a total of 1947 phosphoproteins and 6278 phosphopeptides identified from the combined results. While the two methods have similar ability in the identification of the phosphoproteome, they produce complementary information. The phosphoproteins identified in this study, including 67 novel phosphorylation sites from 56 breast cancer related proteins, can serve as the entry point for future validation with biological implications in breast cancer. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000948 and DOI 10.6019/PXD000948.

### Keywords
Scx-rplc, Mrp-rplc, Phosphoproteome, Mda-mb-231, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Chemistry Department, University of Alberta

### Submitter
Xiaoxia Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoxia Ye
Chemistry Department, University of Alberta


