### Accession
PXD016782

### Title
Digestion of a variety of synthetic peptides by proteasomes

### Description
Proteasomes are large multi-subunit enzymes that act as the main producers of antigenic peptides presented at the cell surface to CD8+ T cells. They can simply cut proteins or recombine their fragments thereby generating novel sequences, i.e. spliced peptides via a process called proteasome-catalysed peptide splicing (PCPS). In order to gain more insight into these processes, we here perform in vitro digestions of 55 synthetic polypeptide substrates by proteasome isoforms followed by LC-MS/MS measurements using different Mass Spectrometers.

### Sample Protocol
All peptides were synthesized using Fmoc solid phase chemistry. 20S or 26S standard- and immuno-proteasomes were purified from peripheral blood and T2 cell line (standard proteasomes) and EBV-immortalized B lymphocytes (immunoproteasomes). Synthetic polypeptides were digested by 20S proteasomes in TEAD buffer for different time points (4, 20, 24 h) at 37°C. In vitro digestions were measured by the Shared Facility Mass Spectrometry of the Charité (Berlin) using LTQ Orbitrap XL and Q Exactive mass spectrometers, as well as by the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry (MPI-BPC) Core Facility for Proteomics (Göttingen) using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. This dataset was generated in cooperation with Michele Mishto (michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk), Senior Lecturer and group leader at Centre for Inflammation Biology and Cancer Immunology (CIBCI) & Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to peak list files in mascot generic format (mgf) using Msconvert software (ProteoWizard). Peptides were identified using the Mascot version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Data was searched against custom databases for each synthetic substrate. The following mass tolerances were set for MS and MS/MS for Q Exactive and LTQ Orbitrap XL analysed as Fourier Transform (FT): 6 ppm and 20 ppm; Orbitrap XL analysed as Ion Trap (IT): 10 ppm and 0.5 Da.  The post-translational modifications that were set include NQ deamidation and M oxidation as variable modifications

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomes are the main producers of antigenic peptides presented to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. They can cut proteins and release their fragments or recombine non-contiguous fragments thereby generating novel sequences, i.e. spliced peptides. Understanding which are the driving forces and the sequence preferences of both reactions can streamline target discovery in immunotherapies against cancer, infection and autoimmunity. Here, we present a large database of spliced and non-spliced peptides generated by proteasomes in vitro, which is available as simple CSV file and as a MySQL database. To generate the database, we performed in vitro digestions of 55 unique synthetic polypeptide substrates with different proteasome isoforms and experimental conditions. We measured the samples using three mass spectrometers, filtered and validated putative peptides, identified 22,333 peptide product sequences (15,028 spliced and 7,305 non-spliced product sequences). Our database and datasets have been deposited to the Mendeley (doi:10.17632/nr7cs764rc.1) and PRIDE (PXD016782) repositories. We anticipate that this unique database can be a valuable source for predictors of proteasome-catalyzed peptide hydrolysis and splicing, with various future translational applications.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Synthetic peptides, Digestion, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen;Germany

### Submitter
Artem Mansurkhodzhaev

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen;Germany


