### Accession
PXD031519

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry and integrative modelling of Methanocaldococcus jannaschii GMP synthetase

### Description
GMP synthetases are enzymes that catalyze the conversion of XMP to GMP. The two-subunit type GMP synthetases are composed of a glutamine amidotransferase (GATase) subunit that catalyzes the conversion of Gln to Glu and ammonia, and the ATP pyrophosphatase (ATPPase) subunit that catalyzes the formation of AMP-XMP from ATP and XMP. The inactive GATase subunit is allosterically activated by the binding of substrates to the ATPPase subunit. Upon activation, the GATase subunit binds Gln and hydrolyzes it producing ammonia which is tunnelled to the ATPPase subunit. The two subunits form a tight complex to enable domain crosstalk. However, the Methanocaldococcus jannaschii GMP synthetase (MjGMPS) is unique as the GATase (MjGATase) and ATPPase (MjATPPase) subunits interact transiently. Here, we employed enzyme kinetics, X-ray crystallography, cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) and integrative modelling to understand the mechanistic basis for the various steps in the catalytic cycle of MjGMPS.

### Sample Protocol
The MjGATase and MjATPPase subunits were first buffer exchanged into 20 mM HEPES-Na, pH 7.0 and 2 mM DTT. A 50 µl reaction mix consisting of 20 mM HEPES-Na, pH 7.0, 50 µM each of MjGATase and MjATPPase, 0.2 mM XMP, 3 mM ATP and 20 mM MgCl2 was incubated at 70 °C for 2 min to promote the formation of complex. Following this, the amine reactive cross-linker bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM from a stock solution prepared in 20 mM HEPES-Na, pH 7.0. The contents of the tube were quickly mixed and incubated at 50 °C for 5 min. The cross-linking reaction was quenched by adding 4X SDS-PAGE loading dye. Experimental controls included a reaction where both the subunits were cross-linked in absence of substrates and reactions containing only one of the subunits that were cross-linked in the presence and absence of substrates. The cross-linked products were separated using 12 % (w/v) SDS-PAGE and the bands were visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The molecular masses of the protein bands were assessed by comparing with the mass of the bands in the lane containing the standards (Abcam). The experiment was performed in triplicate and the bands corresponding to the heterodimer and heterotetramer were visualized in all the three experiments.  The SDS-PAGE bands corresponding to the heterodimer (56 kDa) and heterotetramer (112 kDa) from duplicate experiments were excised and the proteins trypsinised in-gel following a published protocol (doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.468). Briefly, the gels were minced into small pieces (~ 1 mm3), destained by incubating in 1:1 (v/v) 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate: acetonitrile (15 min, two washes), dehydrated in acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gel pieces were then treated with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the cystines, washed with acetonitrile, and the cysteines were alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The gels were dehydrated with acetonitrile and rehydrated with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 13 ng µl-1 trypsin (Promega). The protease digestion was carried out for 12 h at 37 °C following which the peptides were extracted from the gels using 1:2 (v/v) 5% formic acid: acetonitrile. The peptides were dried using a SpeedVac, re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and injected into an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (C18, 2 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) using an Easy-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using an Easy-Spray column (C18, 25 cm, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) maintained at 40 °C and a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The peptides were eluted using a gradient, with the concentration of buffer B ramped up from 5% to 35% in 45 min and held constant at 35% for 3 min. The concentration was increased from 35% to 95% in 2 min and held constant at 95% for 10 min to wash the column. The eluted peptides were infused into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. The orbitrap detector was calibrated using LTQ Velos ESI positive ion calibration mixture (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometric data were acquired using the data dependent acquisition mode with the ten most abundant precursor ions selected for fragmentation using a higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) cell. To maximize the identification of cross-linked peptides, upto six LC-MS/MS data sets were acquired for each sample by varying the MS1 and MS2 scanning parameters, as well as the HCD fragmentation settings.

### Data Protocol
The cross-linked residues in the biological replicates of the heterodimer and the heterotetramer were identified using the program pLink2 version 2.3.9 (doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11337-z) against a database consisting of the MjGATase (Uniprot ID: Q58970) and MjATPPase (Uniprot ID: Q58531) protein sequences. The six RAW data files (4 files for one among the two heterodimer samples) for each in-gel digest were together input into pLink2 and analysed collectively. The settings used were, cross-linker-BS3 (reactivity only to N-terminus and Lys residues), proteolytic enzyme-trypsin, number of missed cleavages-3, peptide mass range 400 to 6000 Da, peptide length 4 to 60 residues, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fixed modifications- carbamidomethylation of Cys, variable modifications- deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, modification of the protein amino terminus and residues Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr by BS3_OH (156.078644 Da), modification of residues Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr by BS3_NH2 (155.09463 Da) and modification of residues Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr by BS3_Tris (259.141973 Da). An additional filter tolerance of 10 ppm and false discovery rate of 5 % at the peptide spectrum matches level was applied. The MjGATase intralinks, MjATPPase intralinks and MjATPPase-MjGATase inter-subunit cross-links that were reproducibly identified in the two biological replicate experiments involving the heterodimer and heterotetramer were listed. The tandem mass spectra of the MjGATase-MjATPPase inter-cross-links were visualized using the program pLabel (doi.org/10.1002/rcm.3173). The 21🞨2 tandem mass spectra of the inter-subunit cross-links in the heterodimer samples and 13🞨2 spectra from the heterotetramer were manually inspected for the presence of fragment ions that permit unambiguous identification of cross-linked residues.

### Publication Abstract
Guanosine 5'-monophosphate (GMP) synthetases, enzymes that catalyze the conversion of xanthosine 5'-monophosphate (XMP) to GMP, are composed of two different catalytic units, which are either two domains of a polypeptide chain or two subunits that associate to form a complex. The glutamine amidotransferase (GATase) unit hydrolyzes glutamine generating ammonia, and the ATP pyrophosphatase (ATPPase) unit catalyzes the formation of an AMP-XMP intermediate. The substrate-bound ATPPase allosterically activates GATase, and the ammonia thus generated is tunneled to the ATPPase active site where it reacts with AMP-XMP generating GMP. In ammonia channeling enzymes reported thus far, a tight complex of the two subunits is observed, while the interaction of the two subunits of <i>Methanocaldococcus jannaschii</i> GMP synthetase (MjGMPS) is transient with the underlying mechanism of allostery and substrate channeling largely unclear. Here, we present a mechanistic model encompassing the various steps in the catalytic cycle of MjGMPS based on biochemical experiments, crystal structure, and cross-linking mass spectrometry guided integrative modeling. pH dependence of enzyme kinetics establishes that ammonia is tunneled across the subunits with the lifetime of the complex being &#x2264;0.5 s. The crystal structure of the XMP-bound ATPPase subunit reported herein highlights the role of conformationally dynamic loops in enabling catalysis. The structure of MjGMPS derived using restraints obtained from cross-linking mass spectrometry has enabled the visualization of subunit interactions that enable allostery under catalytic conditions. We integrate the results and propose a functional mechanism for MjGMPS detailing the various steps involved in catalysis.

### Keywords
Ammonia tunnelling, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Integrative modelling, Allostery, Gmp synthetase

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit,  Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research,  Jakkur, Bengaluru 560064, India.
Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, JNCASR

### Submitter
Santosh Shivakumaraswamy

### Lab Head
Dr Hemalatha Balaram
Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit,  Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research,  Jakkur, Bengaluru 560064, India.


