### Accession
PXD009020

### Title
Pathogenesis of dominant-negative mutant GFI1B and associated proteomic abnormalities in megakaryocytes and platelets

### Description
Dominant-negative mutations in transcription factor Growth Factor Independence-1B (GFI1B) cause a bleeding disorder characterized by a plethora of megakaryocyte and platelet abnormalities. The  deregulated molecular mechanisms and pathways are unknown. Here we show that normal and mutant GFI1B interacted most strongly with the LSD1-RCOR-HDAC corepressor complex in megakaryoblasts. Sequestration of this complex by mutant GFI1B and chemical separation of GFI1B from LSD1 induced abnormalities in normal megakaryocytes comparable to those seen in patients. Megakaryocytes derived from GFI1B-mutant induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) also phenocopied abnormalities seen in patients. Proteome studies on normal and mutant iPSC-derived megakaryocytes identified a multitude of deregulated pathways downstream of mutant GFI1B. Proteome studies on primary normal and GFI1B-mutant platelets showed reduced expression of proteins implicated in platelet function, and sustained expression of proteins normally downregulated during megakaryocyte differentiation. Thus, GFI1B regulates a broad developmental program during megakaryopoiesis. Mutant GFI1B deregulates this program through LSD1-RCOR-HDAC sequestering.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry. All fine chemicals were from Thermo Scientific unless indicated otherwise. 100 x 10⁶ washed platelets per donor or 1 x 106 cultured megakaryoid cells were lysed in 100 μl 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl (Life Technologies) at pH 8. For iPSC MKs, sorted CD41a+ cells were used. Samples were sonicated for 10 minutes and centrifuged at 12000g to remove insoluble material. The protein concentration of the lysates was measured using a Bradford assay. For label-free quantification, three replicates of 5 µg protein from platelets or from cultured megakaryoid cells were taken. The same amount of protein was used for each iPSC sample. Samples were diluted at least 7-fold (v/v) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka). Proteins were reduced for 60 minutes at 25°C in 10 mM dithiothreithol (DTT) and alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Finally, proteins were proteolysed by trypsin (Promega) overnight at 25°C using a protein:trypsin ratio of 1:20 (mg/mg). Protein samples were acidified with 5 μl 99% formic acid, and prepared for MS analysis using Empore-C18 StageTips.  Mass spectrometry data acquisition. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The gradient that was employed to separate the peptides as well as the top-speed method to acquire MS/MS spectra on the Fusion are described previously (Stokhuijzen et al, J Proteome Res 2017). All MS data were acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.2.8. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (89796 entries; downloaded February 2015). Standard settings with the additional options ‘match between runs’, ‘Label Free Quantification (LFQ)’, and ‘unique peptides for quantification’ were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was imported into Perseus 1.5.1.6 and filtered for ‘only identified by site’ and reverse hits. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale and potential contaminant proteins were removed, except for ALB and THBS1. For primary cultured megakaryocyte and platelet samples, the three technical replicates of samples were grouped, and the proteins were filtered for three valid values in at least one of these groups. The three replicates of the control and GFI1BQ287* platelet samples were then averaged. For the analysis of differentially expressed proteins between GFI1BQ287* and control platelets, only proteins that were detected in four patient and/or four control platelet samples were included. For iPSC-derived samples, proteins detected in at least five control and/or GFI1BQ287* samples were included. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit.

### Publication Abstract
Dominant-negative mutations in the transcription factor Growth Factor Independence-1B (GFI1B), such as GFI1B<sup>Q287*</sup>, cause a bleeding disorder characterized by a plethora of megakaryocyte and platelet abnormalities. The deregulated molecular mechanisms and pathways are unknown. Here we show that both normal and Q287* mutant GFI1B interacted most strongly with the lysine specific demethylase-1 - REST corepressor - histone deacetylase (LSD1-RCOR-HDAC) complex in megakaryoblasts. Sequestration of this complex by GFI1B<sup>Q287*</sup> and chemical separation of GFI1B from LSD1 induced abnormalities in normal megakaryocytes comparable to those seen in patients. Megakaryocytes derived from GFI1B<sup>Q287*</sup>-induced pluripotent stem cells also phenocopied abnormalities seen in patients. Proteome studies on normal and mutant-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived megakaryocytes identified a multitude of deregulated pathways downstream of GFI1B<sup>Q287*</sup> including cell division and interferon signaling. Proteome studies on platelets from GFI1B<sup>Q287*</sup> patients showed reduced expression of proteins implicated in platelet function, and elevated expression of proteins normally downregulated during megakaryocyte differentiation. Thus, GFI1B and LSD1 regulate a broad developmental program during megakaryopoiesis, and GFI1B<sup>Q287*</sup> deregulates this program through LSD1-RCOR-HDAC sequestering.

### Keywords
Lsd1, Lc-ms, Platelet, Gfi1b, Proteomics, Megakaryocytes, Bleeding disorder

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Johanna Koornneef

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Meijer
Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


