### Accession
PXD008098

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling of cerebrospinal fluid to identify candidate biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of dementia and the number of AD patients is expected to increase as human life expectancy improves.  The deposition of β-amyloid protein (Aβ) in the extracellular matrix and neurofibrillary tangles intracellularly are pathologic hallmarks of AD in the brain. However, there are no reliable circulating biomarkers for accurate diagnosis of AD. In this study, we employed high-resolution mass spectrometry and tandem mass tags (TMT) to identify candidate biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. A subset of the identified candidates was validated using multiplexed targeted PRM-LC-MS/MS analysis in an independent cohort.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples from each individual were depleted of high abundance proteins using an antibody-based approach (MARS 14 column). Equal amounts of protein from each CSF sample was reduced and alkylated. Protein digestion was carried out using Lys-C (1:100) for 4 h. followed by trypsin at 1:20 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37°C for 12-16 h. Peptides were purified using Sep-Pak C18 material. Peptides from each CSF samples were labeled with TMT reagents as per manufacturer’s instructions (Catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides derived from control CSF samples were labeled with TMT tags 126, 127N, 127C, 128N and 128C while the patient samples were labeled with TMT tags 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131. The labeled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation generating 96 fractions. Briefly, TMT labeled peptides mixture was resuspended in 1 ml of bRPLC solvent A (7 mM TEABC, pH 8.5) and fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA) by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (7 mM TEABC, pH 8.5, 90% acetonitrile) on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system. A total of 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated into 24 fractions and vacuum dried. For PRM analysis, 100 μl CSF sample from each individual were used. CSF sample were diluted with 100 mM TEABC. Protein were reduced using 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA and digested using Lys-C (1:100) for 4 h. followed by trypsin (1:20) for 12-14 h. Resulting peptides were purified using Sep-Pak C18 material and samples were dried in a speed vac.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data were searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 73, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using SEQUEST search algorithm through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptides and lysines were set as fixed modifications while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level as well as at 1% at protein level. Acquired PRM data was processed using Skyline software package. Peak intensities were calculated within the platform and reviewed manually; results were exported for additional data and statistical analysis. PRM data was assessed for (i) peak symmetry and baseline; (ii) consistency of retention times (iii) retention time consistency across transitions of the same analyte; and (iv) signal:noise ratio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker, Cerebrospinal fluid, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Departments of Biological Chemistry, Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205 USA
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Departments of Biological Chemistry, Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205 USA


