### Accession
PXD016088

### Title
Proteomic profiling of murine melanoma treated with bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling inhibitor

### Description
Melanoma is a highly aggressive skin cancer, which has the fastest and second fastest growing incidence of any cancer in men and women, respectively. Although melanoma accounts for 5% of skin cancers, it is responsible for 80% of deaths related to skin cancers. The lifetime risk of melanoma is currently estimated to be 1 in 75 and is rising every year. The present study shows that inhibition of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway is a potential target for treating metastatic melanoma. To characterize the underlying signaling mechanism, comparative proteomic profile of the mouse melanoma tissue treated with and BMP inhibitor (LDN193189) with untreated controls was performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Our mass spectrometry data analysis leads to identification of a total of 3231 nonredundant proteins. Of the 3231 proteins, 117 were up-regulated (fold change≥ 1.5) while 14 were down-regulated (fold change ≤ 0.66). Pathway enrichment analysis showed that altered proteins were primarily grouped into: regulation of actin cytoskeleton, phagosomes, proteoglycans in cancer, Focal adhesion, ECM receptor interaction and fatty acid metabolism pathway. Our studies suggest that inhibition of the BMP signaling cascade with small molecule inhibitors decreased the expression of the MT1 and MT2 (metallothionine 1 and 2) which are well known for the antiapoptotic, antioxidant, proliferative, and angiogenic effects in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Melanoma tissue lysate was prepared in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS in 50 mM TEABC (Sigma), and phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate). The total protein was estimated by using BCA protein assays. Equal amount of proteins (300 µg) from control and melanoma treated with BMP inhibitor were reduced by using DTT (10 mM) for 20 min at 60˚C, and alkylation was carried out by treating with iodoacetamide (20 mM) at room temperature, respectively. The lysate was precipitated by acetone, and protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) buffer and subjected to digestion with TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp) for 12-16 h at room temperature (1:20 w/w - trypsin/sample ratio). Trypsin-digested peptides were labeled with Amine-Reactive Tandem Mass Tag Reagents (TMT6 Label Reagents; Thermo Scientific;#90068). The tumor tissues from the sham control group were labeled with reagent 126,127 and 128, and treatment group were labeled with 129,130 and 131.   Fractionation of the TMT labeled pooled peptide digest was done using basic reverse phase chromatography into six fractions. Samples were dried and desalted by using C18 Stage Tip column and LC-MS/MS analysis of the samples was performed using Q-Exactive plus hybrid quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer data were searched in SEQUEST and Mascot (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) search algorithm against RefSeq mouse protein database (version 83 containing 76,332 entries with common contaminants) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  The workflow for both algorithms included spectrum selector, MASCOT (Version 2.5.1), SEQUEST search nodes, percolator, peptide validator, event detector, and precursor quantifier nodes. The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with maximum of 2 missed cleavage allowed; oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modifications while static modifications included carbamidomethylation at cysteine and TMT modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by carrying out decoy database searches and peptides scoring better than 1% FDR score cut-off were considered for further analysis. The ratios were calculated by the quantitation node in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brplc, Mouse, Melanoma, Protein profiling, Skin, Cancer

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Centre.  Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), University Road, Deralakatte, Mangalore 575018, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Centre.  Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), University Road, Deralakatte, Mangalore 575018, India


