### Accession
PXD012554

### Title
In situ imaging of the bacterial flagellar motor reveals stable inner- and outer-membrane associated sub-complexes during motor assembly and disassembly

### Description
Using electron cryo-tomography (ECT), we show that, in three bacterial species, the flagellar motor disassembly process results in stable outer-membrane-embedded sub-complexes. These sub-complexes consist of the periplasmic embellished P- and L-rings, and bend the membrane inward while it remains apparently sealed. Our experiments show that these sub-complexes are more enriched in the cells at high optical-density (OD 600 ). In order to identify candidates for the protein(s) that may play a role in sealing the outer membrane we performed mass spectrometry experiments on membrane vesicles isolated from Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 cells grown to two different optical densities (OD 600 sample 1 ~ 5, OD 600 sample 2 ~ 0.6). Based on certain criteria, we identified few candidate proteins that are overexpressed in cells grown to high OD 600 and that might be involved in sealing the membrane after flagellar motor disassembly.

### Sample Protocol
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 cells were grown in 250 ml of LB medium over night at 30C with shaking (175 rpm). The next morning, 50 ul of the overnight culture were inoculated in a fresh 250 ml of LB and both samples were incubated under the above-mentioned growth conditions for 5 more hours. Both samples were spun at 3000x g for 20 minutes and pelleted cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS. The cells spun down again and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl and 200 mM NaCl pH 8). Subsequently, the cells were lysed using microfluidizer in the presence of protease inhibitors and DNase. Thereafter, both samples were subsequently spun down at low speed (3000x g for 15 minutes at 4 C) to remove cell debris. To isolate membrane vesicles, samples were spun down at 150,000x g for 11 minutes at 4C. The pellets were resuspended in 10 mM HEPES pH 7 buffer and used for mass spectrometry experiments.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.3.3). Mass spectra were searched against the UniProt Shewanella oneidensis (strain MR-1) database (4068 sequences) as well as a common protein contaminant database (246 sequences). Trypsin was specified as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm after mass recalibration and fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. “Match between runs” was enabled as well as “Label-free quantitation”.  Protein and peptide score thresholds were determined so as to achieve a 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate as estimated by a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flagellar motor, Shewanella

### Affiliations
Proteome Exploration Laboratory
Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Michael Sweredoski

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros Garbis
Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman Institute, California Institute of Technology


