### Accession
PXD008567

### Title
Molecular mechanism on water deficiency tolerance induced by TaCPK34 calcium kinase

### Description
Calcium-dependent protein kinase (CPK) family is involved in diverse functions including abiotic tolerance, however, biological functions of some CPK members have not been clarified. In our previous study, abundance of a wheat CPK protein (TaCPK34) was remarkably induced during both grain and leaf organs of wheat plants suffering from various abiotic and biotic stresses, inferring its function involved in abiotic and biotic tolerance. In present study, its function involved in abiotic tolerance was further verified. Using Agroinfiltration-mediated transient transformation, TaCPK34 protein localizes to the plasma membrane in N. benthamina leaves. Its transcripts were significantly increased during 20% PEG-induced water deficiency, and its barley stripe mosaic virus-induced silencing wheat plants exhibited more sensitive phenotype to natural drought stress, suggesting that it could play key role in response to water deficiency in wheat. Isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) proteomic method further revealed that, in leaves of BSMV-VIGS-induced TaCPK34 silencing wheat plants, 48 protein species exhibiting significantly altered abundance were identified during water stress condition. The identified protein species were related to diverse functions (e.g. stress and defense, carbohydrate metabolism, nucleotide metabolic, photosynthesis, transportation, protein metabolism, signal transduction, lipid and phosphate metabolism), suggesting its potential regulatory mechanism. Our results provided insights on molecular mechanism of TaCPK34 on abiotic tolerance in higher plants.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomes were performed using fourth independent biological replicates (1.5g). Total proteins were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone method. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, US), and proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using the filter–aided sample preparation procedure followed by previous research in our laboratory. The peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster city, CA). The samples were labeled as 113-116-BSMV:TaCPK34-infected wheat plants, 117-119,121-BSMV:GFP-infected wheat plants. The peptides were separated by strong cation-exchange chromatography, desalted using a C18 Cartridge (Sigma, USA), and then subjected to further LC-MS/MS analysis. For MS analysis, we used the cHiPLC Nanoflex microchip system (Dublin, CA, USA) with nanoLC-MS/MS (Nano Ultra 2D Plus, Eksigent) equipped with an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 MS (Toronto, Concord, Canada) . The MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The dates analysis used the cHiPLC Nanoflex microchip system (Dublin, CA, USA) with nanoLC-MS/MS (Nano Ultra 2D Plus, Eksigent) equipped with an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 MS (Toronto, Concord, Canada). The MS / MS spectrogram retrieval runs on combinatorial NCBInr database(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (released June 10, 2015, 4,075,097 entries)  with the recently published bread wheat database (IWGSC, http://plants.ensembl.org/Triticum_aestivum/Info/Index) (released May 31 2015, 100,344 sequences) using the Mascot 2.2 engine software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) and  Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.). In addition, the identified protein species were filtered using the cRAP database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP), with the following parameters: type = MS/MS ion search, enzyme = trypsin, mass values = monoisotopic, max missed cleavage = 2, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex, variable modification: oxidation (M), peptide mass tolerance = ± 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.1 Da, peptide false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01. In each experiment, bias correction for unequal mixing of the different labeled samples was performed. This correction was based on the assumption that the expression of most proteins does not have prominent change. Thus, if samples from each experimental condition were not combined in exactly equal amounts, bias correction fixed this systematic error. The software identified the median average protein ratio and corrected it to unity, and then applied this factor to all quantification results. To evaluate the repeatability of the replicates, we compared the protein abundance among four independent biological replicates and compared the ratios for each protein in each comparison with those of control. The abundance of a fold change ≥+1.50 or ≤0.67 regulated protein species using Duncan’ s multiple range test (P < 0.05) was applied to the three biological replicates to identify significant differences, and multiple testing corrections were then used to adjust P values for controlling the false discovery rate. Furthermore, the ratios have been analyzed by Benjamini and Hochberg (BH) test .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Water deficiency, Proteome, Itraq, Wheat

### Affiliations
Henan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Mengjun Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Guozhang Kang
Henan Agricultural University


