### Accession
PXD040230

### Title
Differential proteome of C. elegans strains expressing human β2-microglobulin

### Description
The expression of human β2-m affects the proteomic and metabolic profiles of nematodes

### Sample Protocol
Synchronized worms recovered at day 5 of adulthood were lysed by sonication in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, protease inhibitor cocktail Roche Applied Science). Following proteins extraction by Chloroform/Methanol/Water precipitation, three dry extracts of about 3000 worms for each strain were digested in TEZ buffer (10mM TrisHCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 0.2% Rapigest) by heating at 99° for 20 min. After centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 5 min and sonication for 15 min at room temperature the samples were treated with trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then reduced with dithiothreitol at 99°C for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data acquisition was performed on a Thermo ScientificTM Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system. Samples were trapped on a Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18 cartridge (0.3 mm x 5 mm, 5 µm/100 Å) and then chromatographed on a Thermo Scientific Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75µm x 15cm, 3µm/100Å packing) with a 41 min linear gradient of acetonitrile:water:formic acid (3:97:0.1 – 44:56:0.1 v/v/v) at 300 ml/min. A full MS scan (m/z 350-1400) was acquired with a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and the 10 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).  The normalized collision energy was set to 28, with an isolation width of 2 Da and dynamic exclusion of 20 s; singly charged ions were excluded. A total number of 27 LC-MS/MS raw files, three technical replicates for each biological sample, were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) for protein identification and quantification according to the MaxLFQ algorithm

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-microglobulin (&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m) is a plasma protein derived from physiological shedding of the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHCI), causing human systemic amyloidosis either due to persistently high concentrations of the wild-type (WT) protein in hemodialyzed patients, or in presence of mutations, such as D76N &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m, which favor protein deposition in the adulthood, despite normal plasma levels. Here we describe a new transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans (<i>C. elegans</i>) strain expressing human WT &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m at high concentrations, mimicking the condition that underlies dialysis-related amyloidosis (DRA) and we compare it to a previously established strain expressing the highly amyloidogenic D76N &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m at lower concentrations. Both strains exhibit behavioral defects, the severity of which correlates with &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m levels rather than with the presence of mutations, being more pronounced in WT &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m worms. &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m expression also has a deep impact on the nematodes' proteomic and metabolic profiles. Most significantly affected processes include protein degradation and stress response, amino acids metabolism, and bioenergetics. Molecular alterations are more pronounced in worms expressing WT &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m at high concentration compared to D76N &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m worms. Altogether, these data show that &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m is a proteotoxic protein in&#xa0;vivo also in its wild-type form, and that concentration plays a key role in modulating pathogenicity. Our transgenic nematodes recapitulate the distinctive features subtending DRA compared to hereditary &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m amyloidosis (high levels of non-mutated &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m vs. normal levels of variant &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-m) and provide important clues on the molecular bases of these human diseases.

### Keywords
Proteomics; c. elegans; human β2-microglobulin

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia

### Submitter
Paola Nocerino

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Nocerino
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia


