### Accession
PXD001182

### Title
Metabolic changes in adaptation to biofilm growth by streptococcus pneumoniae

### Description
Comparative analyses of protein expression between log-phase planktonic and 1-day and 7-day biofilm cultures from Streptococcus pneumoniae representing nascent and late phase biofilm growth were performed using the proteomic approach iTRAQ

### Sample Protocol
Comparative analyses of protein expression between planktonic log-phase culture and 1-day and 7-day biofilms were performed for 3 technical replicates of 3 biological replicates. iTRAQ labelling of samples was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using an iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB Sciex U.K. Limited). To each of 4 samples containing ~60 µg of sample, 2 µl of the reducing agent and 50 mM (tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine were added and mixed. Samples were incubated at 60°C for 1 h. Methyl methane-thiosulfonate in isopropanol (1 µl of 200 mM) was then added and incubated for a further 10 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested by adding 10 μl of 1 mg/ml trypsin in 80 mM CaCl2. Samples were incubated for 16 h at 37°C. Labelling of tryptic peptides with iTRAQ 8-plex tags was achieved by mixing the appropriate iTRAQ labeling reagent with the relevant sample, and incubation at room temperature for 2h.   Mass Spectrometry Two dimensional separations were performed using a nanoAcquity 2D UPLC system (Waters). For the first dimension separation, 2.0 µl of the prepared protein lysates containing 3.2  µg of iTRAQ labeled peptides were injected onto a 5 µm Xbridge BEH130 C18, 300 µm ID x 50 mm (Waters) column equilibrated in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 (buffer A). The first dimension separation was achieved by increasing the concentration of acetonitrile (buffer B) in 7 steps consisting of 11, 14, 16, 20, 25, 50, 65%. At each step the programmed percentage composition was held for 1 min at a low rate of 1000 nl/min and the eluant diluted by buffer C (H20 + 0.1% formic acid) from the second dimension pump at a flow rate of 20  µl/min, effectively diluting the ammonium formate and acetonitrile, allowing trapping of the eluting peptides onto a Symmetry C18, 180 µm x 20 mm trapping cartridge (Waters). After 20 min washing of the trap column, peptides were separated using an in-line second dimension analytical separation performed on a 75 µm ID x 200 mm, 1.7 µm BEH130 C18, column (Waters) using a linear gradient of 5 to 40% B (buffer A = water containing 0.1% formic acid, buffer B = 95% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) over 120 min with a wash to 85% B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. All separations were automated and performed on-line to the mass spectrometer. All data were acquired using a Q-tof Global Ultima (Waters Ltd, Manchester, UK) fitted with a nanoLockSpray™ source. A survey scan was acquired from m/z 350 to 1700 with the switching criteria for MS to MS/MS including ion intensity and charge state.  The collision energy used to perform MS/MS was varied according to the mass and charge state of the eluting peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using ProteinLynx Global Server 2.4 (Waters Ltd, Manchester, UK). The following parameters were used for processing the MS/MS spectra; normal background subtraction with a 25% background threshold and medium de-isotoping with a threshold of 1%, no smoothing was performed.  Peak list generation and database searching Peak lists from the MS/MS analysis of were submitted to the MASCOT search engine version 2.2.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and the data searched against a protein translation of the CGSP14 NCBI genome (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?id=516950). The corresponding quantitative information using the iTRAQ reporter ions was also obtained via MASCOT. A maximum of one missed cleavage for tryptic digestion and fixed modifications for methyl methane-thiosulfonation of cysteine and the N-terminus and lysine side chains using the 8-plex iTRAQ label were allowed (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK). Variable modification for the oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ modification of tyrosine were also allowed. Precursor ion and sequence ion mass tolerances were set at 100 ppm and 0.3 Da respectively.  Protein identifications required the assignment of ≥2 different peptides with a significance threshold for accepting a match of p < 0.05. The protein ratios were calculated using MASCOT version 2.2.1, where the peptide ratios were weighted and median normalisation was performed, automatic outlier removal was chosen and the peptide threshold was set to ‘at least homology’. False discovery rates were calculated by running all spectra against a decoy database using the MASCOT software.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae accounts for a significant global burden of morbidity and mortality and biofilm development is increasingly recognised as important for colonization and infection. Analysis of protein expression patterns during biofilm development may therefore provide valuable insights to the understanding of pneumococcal persistence strategies and to improve vaccines. iTRAQ (isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification), a high-throughput gel-free proteomic approach which allows high resolution quantitative comparisons of protein profiles between multiple phenotypes, was used to interrogate planktonic and biofilm growth in a clinical serotype 14 strain. Comparative analyses of protein expression between log-phase planktonic and 1-day and 7-day biofilm cultures representing nascent and late phase biofilm growth were carried out. Overall, 244 proteins were identified, of which &gt;80% were differentially expressed during biofilm development. Quantitatively and qualitatively, metabolic regulation appeared to play a central role in the adaptation from the planktonic to biofilm phenotype. Pneumococci adapted to biofilm growth by decreasing enzymes involved in the glycolytic pathway, as well as proteins involved in translation, transcription, and virulence. In contrast, proteins with a role in pyruvate, carbohydrate, and arginine metabolism were significantly increased during biofilm development. Downregulation of glycolytic and translational proteins suggests that pneumococcus adopts a covert phenotype whilst adapting to an adherent lifestyle, while utilization of alternative metabolic pathways highlights the resourcefulness of pneumococcus to facilitate survival in diverse environmental conditions. These metabolic proteins, conserved across both the planktonic and biofilm phenotypes, may also represent target candidates for future vaccine development and treatment strategies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001182.

### Keywords
Biofilm, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton

### Submitter
Paul Skipp

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Paul Skipp
Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton


