### Accession
PXD003258

### Title
A quantitative spatial proteomics analysis of proteome turnover in human cells

### Description
Measuring the properties of endogenous cell proteins, such as expression level, subcellular localization and turnover rates, on a whole proteome level remains a major challenge in the post-genome era. Quantitative methods for measuring mRNA expression do not reliably predict corresponding protein levels and provide little or no information on other protein properties. Here we describe a combined pulse-labelling, spatial proteomics and data analysis strategy to characterize the expression, localization, synthesis, degradation and turnover rates of endogenously expressed, untagged human proteins in different subcellular compartments. Using quantitative mass spectrometry and SILAC, a total of 80,098 peptides from 8,041 HeLa proteins were quantified, and their spatial distribution between the cytoplasm, nucleus and nucleolus determined and visualised using specialised software tools developed in PepTracker. Using information from ion intensities and rates of change in isotope ratios, protein abundance levels and protein synthesis, degradation and turnover rates were calculated for the whole cell and for the respective cytoplasmic, nuclear and nucleolar compartments. Expression levels of endogenous HeLa proteins varied by up to seven orders of magnitude. The average turnover rate for HeLa proteins was approximately 20 hours. Turnover rate did not correlate with either molecular weight or net charge, but did correlate with abundance, with highly abundant proteins showing longer than average half-lives. Fast turnover proteins had overall a higher frequency of PEST motifs than slow turnover proteins but no general correlation was observed between amino or carboxy terminal amino acid identities and turnover rates. A subset of proteins was identified that exist in pools with different turnover rates depending on their subcellular localization. This strongly correlated with subunits of large, multi-protein complexes, suggesting a general mechanism whereby their assembly is controlled in a different subcellular location to their main site of function.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured as adherent cells in DMEM (Dulbeccos’s modified eagle medium, Invitrogen, custom order) depleted of arginine and lysine. The DMEM was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum dialyzed with a cut-off of 10 kDa (Invitrogen, 26400-044), 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, 2 mM L-Glutamine. Arginine and lysine was added in either light (Arg0, Sigma, A5006; Lys0, Sigma, L5501), medium (Arg6, Cambridge Isotope Lab (CIL), CNM-2265; Lys4, CIL, DLM-2640), or heavy (Arg10, CIL, CNLM-539; Lys8, CIL, CNLM-291) form to a final concentration of 28 μg/ml for arginine and 49 μg/ml for lysine. Proteins were tested for >99% incorporation of the label after six passages by mass spectrometry. Cytoplasm, nuclei and nucleoli were prepared from HeLa cells essentially as previously described (19). Briefly, cells were washed three times with PBS, resuspended in 5 ml buffer A (10 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.9], 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT), and dounce homogenized ten times using a tight pestle. Dounced nuclei were centrifuged at 228 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant represents the cytoplasmic fraction. The nuclear pellet was resuspended in 3 ml 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM MgCl2, and layered over 3 ml 0.35 M sucrose, 0.5 mM MgCl2, and centrifuged at 1430 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The clean, pelleted nuclei were resuspended in 3 ml 0.35 M sucrose, 0.5 mM MgCl2, and sonicated for 6 × 10 s using a microtip probe and a Misonix XL 2020 sonicator at power setting 5. The sonication was checked using phase contrast microscopy, ensuring that there were no intact cells and that the nucleoli were readily observed as dense, refractile bodies. The sonicated sample was then layered over 3 ml 0.88 M sucrose, 0.5 mM MgCl2 and centrifuged at 2800 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The pellet contained the nucleoli, while the supernatant consisted of the nucleoplasmic fraction. The nucleoli were then washed by resuspension in 500 μl of 0.35 M sucrose, 0.5 mM MgCl2, followed by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 2 min at 4°C. Proteins were quantified using the Quant-IT protein assay (Invitrogen) and measured using a Qubit. Trypsin digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate U3000 (Dionex Corporation) nanoflow LC-system.

### Data Protocol
Quantitation was performed using the program MaxQuant version 1.1.1.14 (22, 23). The derived peak list generated by Quant.exe (the first part of MaxQuant) was searched using Andromeda as the database search engine for peptide identifications against the International Protein Index (IPI) human protein database version 3.68 containing 89,422 proteins, to which 175 commonly observed contaminants and all the reversed sequences had been added. The initial mass tolerance was set to 7 p.p.m. and MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Enzyme was set to trypsin/p with 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidation of methionine were searched as variable modifications. Identification was set to a false discovery rate of 1%. To achieve reliable identifications, all proteins were accepted based on the criteria that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number of reverse database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. A minimum of 2 peptides were quantified for each protein. Protein isoforms and proteins that cannot be distinguished based on the peptides identified are grouped and displayed on a single line with multiple IPI numbers (see supplementary tables)

### Publication Abstract
Measuring the properties of endogenous cell proteins, such as expression level, subcellular localization, and turnover rates, on a whole proteome level remains a major challenge in the postgenome era. Quantitative methods for measuring mRNA expression do not reliably predict corresponding protein levels and provide little or no information on other protein properties. Here we describe a combined pulse-labeling, spatial proteomics and data analysis strategy to characterize the expression, localization, synthesis, degradation, and turnover rates of endogenously expressed, untagged human proteins in different subcellular compartments. Using quantitative mass spectrometry and stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture, a total of 80,098 peptides from 8,041 HeLa proteins were quantified, and their spatial distribution between the cytoplasm, nucleus and nucleolus determined and visualized using specialized software tools developed in PepTracker. Using information from ion intensities and rates of change in isotope ratios, protein abundance levels and protein synthesis, degradation and turnover rates were calculated for the whole cell and for the respective cytoplasmic, nuclear, and nucleolar compartments. Expression levels of endogenous HeLa proteins varied by up to seven orders of magnitude. The average turnover rate for HeLa proteins was ~20 h. Turnover rate did not correlate with either molecular weight or net charge, but did correlate with abundance, with highly abundant proteins showing longer than average half-lives. Fast turnover proteins had overall a higher frequency of PEST motifs than slow turnover proteins but no general correlation was observed between amino or carboxyl terminal amino acid identities and turnover rates. A subset of proteins was identified that exist in pools with different turnover rates depending on their subcellular localization. This strongly correlated with subunits of large, multiprotein complexes, suggesting a general mechanism whereby their assembly is controlled in a different subcellular location to their main site of function.

### Keywords
Hela, Silac, Subcellular

### Affiliations
Principle Investigator
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Principle Investigator


