### Accession
PXD021238

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals dual effects of calcium on radicle protrusion in soybean

### Description
To better elucidate the mechanisms of calcium-mediated germination of soybean seed, morphological analysis was performed in seed imbibed with different concentrations of CaCl2. Based on morphological results, radicle of germinating seed imbibed with 5 and 50 mM CaCl2 was collected for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds were sterilized with 3% sodium hypochlorite solution, rinsed in water, and germinated on culture plates (9 cm × 9 cm) with filter paper saturated with 11 cm3 of water or CaCl2. Seed germination was conducted in growth chamber at 25oC for 3 days in darkness. A portion (0.1 g) of radicles was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. Protein extraction was extracted and concentration was determined.Proteins were purified with methanol and chloroform methods.Dried pellet was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in darkness. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio for 16 h at 37°C. Resulting peptides were acidified with 20% formic acid and centrifuged at 20,000×g for 10 min at 25oC. Clean supernatant was collected as digested peptides and analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
Peptides dissolved in formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3,000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (100 µm ID × 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted from trap column and separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile with flow rate of 600 nL/min. Eluted peptides were separated on a C18 Tip column (150 µm ID × 120 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transfer tube temperature was 320oC. Mobile phases were solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B containing 0.08% formic acid in acetonitrile/water (80%:20%). Peptide ions were detected using MS (Orbitrap Fusion ETD MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument was operated in positive mode using top speed method with a cycle time of 3 s. Full scan MS spectra over 200-2,000 m/z in Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 5E5 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (2-6) and filtrated precursors were dynamically excluded for 18 s. Peptide precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6 m/z. Ion trap MS2 spectra were collected at an AGC of 5E3 with maximum injection time of 19 ms and collision-induced dissociation collision energy of 32%.

### Publication Abstract
To reveal calcium-mediated germination in soybean, a gel-free/label-free proteomics was performed in radicle of seed imbibed with CaCl<sub>2</sub>. Morphological analysis presented promoting and suppressing performance of seed growth under 5 and 50&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>, respectively. A total of 106 and 581 proteins were identified in response to 5 and 50&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>, respectively. Among 33 proteins, which were simultaneously affected by 5 and 50&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub> imbibition, proteins related to protein metabolism, cell, development, and stress showed reversed abundance in response to CaCl<sub>2</sub> on dose-dependent manner. Notably, protein abundance of late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) 4-5, LEA4, and dehydrin decreased and increased by 5 and 50&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>, respectively, consistent with the transcript level. Moreover, inhibited biosynthesis of gibberellic acid repressed growth of 5&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>-imbibed soybean, while inhibition of abscisic acid biosynthesis released the suppressing effects of 50&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>. Taken together, these results suggest that decreased or increased protein abundance of LEA4-5, LEA4, and dehydrin might determine promoting or suppressing effects of low or high level of calcium on soybean through enhancing seed sensitivity to gibberellic acid or abscisic acid during radicle protrusion. SIGNIFICANCE: Calcium serves as a versatile signal in plant growth; however, calcium-mediated germination on dose-dependent manner remains elusive. In this study, dual effects of calcium on radicle protrusion in soybean were investigated using proteomic approach. Radicle growth of germinating seed was improved by 5&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>; however, it was retarded by 50&#xa0;mM CaCl<sub>2</sub>. Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) 4-5, LEA4, and dehydrin displayed converse profiles in response to low and high concentrations of CaCl<sub>2</sub> at both protein abundance and gene expression level. Inhibited biosynthesis of gibberellic acid (GA) significantly impeded radicle protrusion in presence of low concentration of CaCl<sub>2</sub>, while inhibiting of abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis released suppression induced by high concentration of CaCl<sub>2</sub>. These findings suggest that LEA proteins are associated with calcium-mediated radicle protrusion on dose-dependent manner, and seed sensitivity to GA and ABA might determine promoting and suppressing effects of calcium on radicle protrusion in soybean.

### Keywords
Soybean; calcium; germination; radicle; proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xin WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Shun-Li Zhou
College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China


