### Accession
PXD045921

### Title
Immunoproximity biotinylation reveals the axon initial segment proteome

### Description
The axon initial segment (AIS) is a specialized neuronal compartment required for action potential generation and neuronal polarity. However, understanding the mechanisms regulating AIS structure and function has been hindered by an incomplete knowledge of its molecular composition. Here, using immuno-proximity biotinylation we further define the AIS proteome and its dynamic changes during neuronal maturation. Among the many AIS proteins identified, we show that SCRIB is highly enriched in the AIS both in vitro and in vivo, and exhibits a periodic architecture like the axonal spectrin-based cytoskeleton. We found that ankyrinG interacts with and recruits SCRIB to the AIS. However, loss of SCRIB has no effect on ankyrinG. This powerful and flexible approach further defines the AIS proteome and provides a rich resource to elucidate the mechanisms regulating AIS structure and function.

### Sample Protocol
4% formaldehyde fixed neurons were used for proximity labeling and lysed with lysis solution. Protein lysis was de-crosslinked at 99ºC for 1 h. The lysed solution was sonicated on ice and then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4ºC to collect supernatant. Proteins were precipitated in cold methanol at -80ºC. Precipitated proteins were washed twice using cold methanol. Purified proteins were dissolved completely in 0.5% SDS (w/v). Protein concentrations were measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit to adjust protein quantity for enrichment. The enrichment was performed by incubating dissolved biotinylated samples with 200 µl streptavidin beads for 3 h with gentle rotation at RT. The protein-beads mixture was sequentially washed twice by 2% SDS (w/v), 8 M urea and 2 M sodium chloride. The mixture was reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and then with 20 mM iodoacetamide for alkylation. After washing four times with 100 mM TEAB, proteins on beads were digested with the addition of 2 µg trypsin (Promega, Cat# V511A) for 18 h at 37°C. For dimethyl labeling, the resulting peptides were treated with isotope-encoded formaldehyde (heavy D13CDO for anti-NFASC samples and light HCHO for negative control/reference samples) and NaBH3CN for their –NH2 groups methylation, resulting in a mass shift from 34.0631 Da to 28.0313 Da. For pairs of anti-NFASC and no primary antibody, peptides were combined directly and desalted by C18 tips (ThermoFisher, Cat#87784). For pairs of anti-NFASC/ anti-NeuN or anti-NFASC/ anti-MAP2, peptides were desalted first separately and then equal amounts of peptides were combined. Peptides concentration was measured by Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (ThermoFisher, Cat# 23275). Combined peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator. For 10-plex TMT labeling, digested peptides were desalted by C18 tips (ThermoFisher, Cat#87784). TMT labeling was performed as instructed by TMT 10-plex Mass Tag Labeling Kits and Reagents (ThermoFisher, Cat# 90110). Briefly, TMT reagents were maintained at RT and reconstituted with 41 µl anhydrous acetonitrile for 0.8 mg vial of each tag. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl 100 mM TEAB and dissolved completely. Add 12.5 µl TMT solution into dissolved peptides and label for 2 h in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl 5% hydroxylamine and which was incubated for 15 min. Peptides from ten conditions were mixed and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Mixed peptides were re-dissolved in 300 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and fractionated according to the instructions of Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher, Cat# 84868). Samples were eluted by gradient acetonitrile of 10.0%, 12.5%, 15.0%, 17.5%, 20.0%, 22.5%, 25.0%, 50.0% solution in 0.1% triethylamine and defined as fraction 1-8 respectively. Fractions were combined as pairs of ‘1+5’, ‘2+6’, ‘3+7’ and ‘4+8’ and dried again in vacuum concentrators. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated in a loading column (100 µm × 2 cm) and a C18 separating capillary column (75 µm × 15 cm) packed in-house with Luna 3 μm C18(2) bulk packing material (Phenomenex, USA). A 2-h liquid chromatography (LC) was applied to peptides separation. The LC gradient was held at 2% for the first 8 minutes of the analysis, followed by an increase from 2% to 10% B from 8 to 9 minutes, an increase from 10% to 44% B from 9 to 123 minutes, and an increase from 44% to 99% B from 123 to 128 minutes (A: 0.1% formic acid in water and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). Samples were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. The precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 350-1600 Th with an advance gain control (AGC) target of 400,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, RF lens at 30%, and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. In the case of HCD scans, an automated scan range determination was enabled. An isolation window of 1.6 Th was used to select precursor ions with the quadrupole. Product ions were collected in the Orbitrap with the first mass of 110 Th, an AGC target of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 30 ms, HCD collision energy at 30%, and a resolution of 15,000. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-7 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 s of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor mono-isotope.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were loaded in MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) and searched against Rattus norvegicus proteomes from uniport database (Taxonomy, 10116, downloaded on Nov 15th, 2020). Trypsin was selected as the digestion mode. In the case of searching dimethyl proteomics, the composition of Hx(6)C(2)H(-2) was replaced by Hx(4)Cx(2) in heavy labels of DimethLys6 and DimethNter6. Cysteine acetylation (carbamidomethyl) was a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were variable modifications. Re-quantify button in Misc. module and match between runs in Identification module were activated. In the case of 10-plex TMT proteomics, reporter ion MS2 was selected and 10-plex TMT was activated. Correction factors were added to the tags based on the reagent instructions (ThermoFisher, Cat# 90110, Lot: UL291038). In both cases, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuron, Ankyring, Proteomics, Scrib, Axon initial segment, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Synthetic and Functional Biomolecules Center, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Peking University, Beijing, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, PKU-Tsinghua Center for Life Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

### Submitter
Wei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Zou
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Synthetic and Functional Biomolecules Center, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Ministry of Education, Peking University, Beijing, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, PKU-Tsinghua Center for Life Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China


