### Accession
PXD009378

### Title
A chemoproteomic portrait of the oncometabolite fumarate

### Description
Hereditary cancer disorders often provide an important window into novel mechanisms supporting tumor growth and survival. Understanding these mechanisms and developing biomarkers to identify their presence thus represents a vital goal. Towards this goal, here we report a chemoproteomic map of the covalent targets of fumarate, an oncometabolite whose accumulation marks the genetic cancer predisposition syndrome hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC). First, we validate the ability of known and novel chemoproteomic probes to report on concentration-dependent fumarate reactivity in vitro. Next, we apply these probes in concert with LC-MS/MS to identify cysteine residues sensitive to either fumarate treatment or fumarate hydratase (FH) mutation in untransformed and HLRCC cell models, respectively. Mining this data to understand the structural determinants of fumarate reactivity led to the discovery of an unexpected anti-correlation with nucleophilicity, indicating a novel influence of pH on fumarate-cysteine interactions. Finally, we show that many fumarate-sensitive and FH-regulated cysteines are found in functional protein domains, and perform functional studies of a fumarate-sensitive cysteine in SMARCC1 that lies at a key protein-protein interface in the SWI-SNF tumor suppressor complex. Our studies provide a powerful resource for understanding the influence of fumarate on reactive cysteine residues, and lay the foundation for future efforts to exploit this distinct aspect of oncometabolism for cancer diagnosis and therapy.

### Sample Protocol
For Cysteine Reactivity: HEK-293 (+/- fumarate) or UOK262/UOK262WT lysates were labeled with IA-alkyne, appended to chemically cleavable biotin-azide tags through copper catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloadditon (CuAAC), and enriched on streptavidin-agarose beads. Proteins were then denatured, reduced, and alkylated, followed by on-bead trypsin digestion and release of labeled peptides by sodium hydrosulfite cleavage. For Protein Abundance: Proteins were precipitated from UOK262/UOK262WT lysates with TCA, then denatured, reduced, and alkylated before in-soultion trypsin digestion. LCLC-MSMS was performed using standard MudPIT protocols on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer coupled to an agilent 1200 series HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data was analyzed by the SEQUEST algorithm. Static modification of cysteine residues (+57.0215 m/z, iodoacetamide alkylation) was assumed, and differential modifications on cysteine of +456.2849 (light) or +462.2987 (heavy) were allowed. MS2 spectra matches were assembled into protein identifications and filtered using DTASelect2.0. Quantification of L/H ratios were calculated using the cimage quantification package described previously.

### Publication Abstract
Hereditary cancer disorders often provide an important window into novel mechanisms supporting tumor growth. Understanding these mechanisms thus represents a vital goal. Toward this goal, here we report a chemoproteomic map of fumarate, a covalent oncometabolite whose accumulation marks the genetic cancer syndrome hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC). We applied a fumarate-competitive chemoproteomic probe in concert with LC-MS/MS to discover new cysteines sensitive to fumarate hydratase (FH) mutation in HLRCC cell models. Analysis of this dataset revealed an unexpected influence of local environment and pH on fumarate reactivity, and enabled the characterization of a novel FH-regulated cysteine residue that lies at a key protein-protein interface in the SWI-SNF tumor-suppressor complex. Our studies provide a powerful resource for understanding the covalent imprint of fumarate on the proteome and lay the foundation for future efforts to exploit this distinct aspect of oncometabolism for cancer diagnosis and therapy.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Uok262, Fumarate, Cysteine reactivity, Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (hlrcc), Fumarate hydratase (fh), Succination

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA
Boston College

### Submitter
Daniel Bak

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA


