### Accession
PXD016727

### Title
In-parallel proteomics and glycopeptidomics: Novel diagnostic glycopeptide biomarkers in serum identify patients with early-stage oropharyngeal squamous cell carcioma

### Description
This is the proteomics part of the above project. Purpose: No blood-based biomarkers to detect OPSCC early before symptoms develop or before clinically visible. Diagnosis is solely based on histology of a visible tumour. Most OPSCC patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage, which leads to significant morbidity and poor survival. If high-risk patients were identified with blood-based biomarkers before clear clinical manifestations, tumours could be detected and treated at an earlier stage. Causes of OPSCC include smoking, alcohol misuse, and human papillomavirus (HPV). Tumours are separated according to WHO recommendations into HPV+ OPSCC and HPV- OPSCC using the proxy histological marker p16. We additionally separated our patients into these groups to determine whether the serum glycopeptides would differ between HPV+ and HPV- tumours, as these are distinct clinical entities.   Patients and Methods: Pre-treatment sera from 74 patients with OPSCC (including 26 p16- tumours and 48 p16+ tumours) and 12 controls were used, collected between the years 2012 and 2015 at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Samples were grouped as follows: early stage p16+ OPSCC (stage I only), early stage p16- OPSCC (stage I-II), p16+ (any stage), p16- (any stage), controls. In-parallel quantitative bulk serum proteomics and serum glycopeptidomics were performed.   Results: We identified 78 bulk proteins in the serum, of which 33 significantly differed between early-stage p16- OPSCC and controls, 22 between  early-stage p16+ OPSCC and controls, 1 between early-stage p16+ and early-stage p16- OPSCCs, and 30 between all p16+ and p16- OPSCCs. We identified glycopeptides from proteins including but not limited to alpha-1-antitrypsin, haptoglobin, and Immunoglobulin heavy constant alpha 1, and compared these with the protein expression levels in each comparison.   Conclusions: We have identified novel serum glycopeptide biomarkers detect early-stage OPSCCs, to be evaluated further as a diagnostic panel to detect preclinical OPSCC in at-risk patients.

### Sample Protocol
Workflow and study design We used a case-control retrospective study design to compare the serum proteins and glycopeptides of healthy controls with patients with OPSCC, as well as between patients with HPV-driven OPSCC with non-HPV-driven OPSCC. Albumin-depleted, trypsin-digested serum samples were separated into peptide- and glycopeptide-enriched samples. MS was used to determine the abundances of the serum proteins.  We performed the following comparisons at both protein and glycopeptides levels to identify the significant serum glycopeptide features in our groups and how their corresponding serum proteins changed: Comparison 1: Early-stage p16- OPSCC vs control Comparison 2: Early-stage p16+ OPSCC vs control Comparison 3: Early-stage p16- OPSCC vs early-stage p16+ OSPCC Comparison 4: All p16- OPSCC vs all p16+ OPSCC  Patients and sera samples Pre-treatment serum samples were collected from patients diagnosed with non-metastatic OPSCC.   Serum processing Samples were desalted using desalting plates prior to 50µL serum samples being depleted of excess albumin using the albumin depletion kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. The remaining protein concentration was determined using Bradford reagent. The samples were then dried using the Speed Vac. The pellets were dissolved in 35µL of 6M urea, reduced by adding 1.8µL DTT and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 60 mins. Alkylation was performed by adding 7µL IAA, and incubated in the dark at RT for 60 mins. An additional 7µL DTT was added to consume excess IAA, and was again incubated for 60 mins. The samples were diluted 1:10 with 300mM Tris solution to reduce the urea concentration, before adding trypsin at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) before overnight incubation at 37ºC. These samples, now containing tryptic peptides, were then dried and frozen at -72ºC until further use.  Size exclusion chromatography The dried samples containing tryptic peptides were resuspended in 55µL 0.1% FA, before being centrifuged to pellet any precipitated molecules. 50µL of pooled test samples were loaded into the size exclusion column, with 0.1% FA at a flow-rate of 0.05ml/minute for isocratic elution. 1--minute fractions from minutes 17-41 were collected and screened using ultra-performance liquid-chromatography- ultra-definition mass spectrometry (UPLC-MSE) in sensitivity mode, to identify the fractions that contained peptides and N-glycopeptides – fractions 20-32 and 30-39 respectively. Further N-glycopeptide test samples were diluted to different concentrations and screened using UPLC-MSE to guide the resuspension of the N-glycopeptide samples for optimal abundance. The N-glycopeptide-enriched fractions were made up to final concentration of 2.5% ACN, 0.1% FA according to peptide concentrations measured using the Bradford reagent, before being transferred to total recovery Waters mass spectrometry vials. The peptide fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA 5% ACN. Their protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay Kit and made up to a concentration of 0.5ug protein/uL in 2.5%ACN, 0.1% FA, and 0.0125pmol/µL E.coli Hi3 peptide standard in UPLC-grade water. Peptides and glycopeptides were then run on a mass spectrometer using parameters optimized for peptides and glycopeptides, respectively, described below.  Mass spectrometry The nanoAcquity UPLC system, joined to the Synapt G2-Si HDMS was used, and the TRIZAIC nanotile was used as separating device prior to mass spectrometry of both N-glycopeptide- and peptide-enriched fractions.  Sample management: Samples were kept at -20°C until being placed in the sample manager at 4°C for up to 24 hours. Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) was used for all sample acquisitions. For liquid chromatography, we used Buffer A: (0.1% FA in UPLC-grade water) and Buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN).  Calibration was performed with sodium iodide clusters over mass range of 50-2500m/z by infusing 2µg/µl sodium iodide solution in 50 2-propanol/water to the mass spectrometer.   MS protocols For protein quantification and identification, we used UDMSE. 1uL of pepide-enriched fractions, equivalent to 500ng of protein, were injected. The following parameters were used: acquisition time 0-90 min; polarity: positive; analyser mode: resolution; Da range: 50-2000Da; Scan time 1s; IMS wave velocity: 650m/s; collision energy was from look up tables (reference). 10 percent of the samples were run in triplicate. The LC was as follows: trapping at 4uL/min for 4 mins with 2.5% Buffer B (and thus 97.5% Buffer A); the gradient was from 0-100 mins at a flow rate of 0.45uL/min, with 97.5% B at 0min, 99% B at 1min, 95% B at 5min, 70% B at 65min, 50% B at 78min, 15% B at 80min, 15% B at 85 min, 97.5% B at 86min, 97.5% B at 90 min, 97.5%B at 100min. The Trizaic separation device was kept at 55°C.

### Data Protocol
MS Data processing and statistical analysis  Both peptide quantification/identification and glycopeptides quantification raw files were imported to Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, NC, USA). Post-acquisition mass correction was done when raw data was imported to Progenesis with lock mass ion of M+H+ 556.2771 m/z. Leucine enkephalin (C25H37O7, 1ng/µl in 50:50 acetonitrile:water +0.1% formic acid) was infused into the reference sprayer 300nl/min for this purpose.  For the proteomics part, peptides were aligned and normalised with Hi3 E.coli peptides (Silva et al.). For peptide identification, ion account was used, against the UP000005640_9606_24042018_Hi3 database. Search parameters were: cleaved by trypsin; 2 missed cleavages allowed; maximum protein was 250kDa; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl cystine; variable modification: oxidation methionine; automatic tolerance parameters for peptide and fragment tolerance; maximal FDR 1%; default parameters for ion matching requirements. Quantification using non-conflicting peptides was applied. The parsimony principle was used for protein grouping in the case of shared peptides. Only proteins with 2 or more unique peptides were included.  PCAs were created for each comparison using Progenesis QI for Proteomics on the proteins identified and on the glycopeptides identified. To identify significantly different proteins between the groups, the unpaired t-test was used for parametric data and for non-parametric data, the Mann-Whitney U test was used. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was performed as a multiple-testing correction, with a cut-off of 0.05.   References Silva, J. C., Gorenstein, M. V., Li, G. Z., Vissers, J. P. & Geromanos, S. J. Absolute quantification of proteins by LCMSE: a virtue of parallel MS acquisition. Mol. Cell Proteom. 5, 144–156 (2006).

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation responds sensitively to disease states. It is implicated in every hallmark of cancer and has recently started to be considered as a hallmark itself. Changes in N-glycosylation microheterogeneity are more dramatic than those of protein expression due to the non-template nature of protein glycosylation. This enables their potential use in serum-based diagnostics. Here, we perform glycopeptidomics on serum from patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC), compared to controls and comparing between cancers based on etiology (human papilloma virus- positive or negative). Using MS2, we then targeted glycoforms, significantly different between the groups, to identify their glycopeptide compositions. Simultaneously we investigate the same serum proteins, comparing whether N-glycosylation changes reflect protein-level changes. Significant glycoforms were identified from proteins such as alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1), haptoglobin, and different immunoglobulins. SERPINA1 had glycovariance at 2 N-glycosylation sites, that were up to 35 times more abundant in even early-stage OPSCCs, despite minimal differences between SERPINA1 protein levels between groups. Some identified glycoforms' fold changes (FCs) were in line with serum protein level FCs, others were less abundant in early-stage cancers but with great variance in higher-stage cancers, such as on immunoglobulin heavy constant gamma 2, despite no change in protein levels. Such findings indicate that glycovariant analysis might be more beneficial than proteomic analysis, which is yet to be fruitful in the search for biomarkers. Highly sensitive glycopeptide changes could potentially be used in the future for cancer screening. Additionally, characterizing the glycopeptide changes in OPSCC is valuable in the search for potential therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Glycopeptidomics, Head and neck cancer, Serum, Mass spectrometry, Opscc

### Affiliations
1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and HUS Helsinki University Hospital, P.O.Box 263, FI-00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland 2 Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. 3 Research Program in Systems Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Helsinki University

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Suvi Silén
1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and HUS Helsinki University Hospital, P.O.Box 263, FI-00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland 2 Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. 3 Research Program in Systems Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.


