### Accession
PXD019928

### Title
Profiling thimet oligopeptidase-mediated proteolysis in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Plant stress caused by pathogens or though abiotic means (e.g. drought or temperature) reduces agricultural yields, causing substantial economic losses while reducing food security at the global level. It is critical to recognize how plants perceive stress signals to elicit responses for survival. Endogenous plant peptidases and their peptide products play an important role in the signaling of plant immune processes. Thimet oligopeptidases (TOPs) are zinc-dependent peptide hydrolases with a conserved HEXXH active site motif. These metallopeptidases are critical components in plant response to oxidative stress triggered by pathogens or abiotic factors and are required for a fully functioning immune response to certain pathogens. Further characterization of plant TOPs and their peptide substrates would provide insights into their contribution to defense signaling, stress perception, and plant adaptation pathways. Herein, a quantitative mass spectrometry-based peptidomics approach was implemented to characterize the Arabidopsis thaliana plant peptidome and in the context TOPs (Fig. 1). A comparison between wild type (Col-0) and top1top2 null mutant revealed putative direct and indirect TOPs substrates in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds for Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) ecotype Columbia were obtained from the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (Columbus, OH). To generate a top1top2 double knockout mutant line, Col-0 lines with T-DNA insertions in TOP1 (top1-3 and top1-4) or TOP2 (top2-1 and top2-7) were obtained [64], selfed to achieve homozygosity, and crossed. Seeds were sown individually in 32-hole plug trays containing soil. After stratification for 2 weeks with a 14/10 h day/night photoperiod at 20 °C, plants were cultivated in a growth chamber for 6 weeks with a 8/16 h day/night photoperiod at 22 °C and 75% relative humidity with 140 µmol/m2s photon flux density. Leaves from 6 week old plants were excised and immediately frozen under liquid nitrogen before storage at -80 oC.  Three biological replicates were used for each genotype (e.g. Col-0 and top1top2 mutants). Leaf tissue (4 g) was ground under liquid N2 to a fine powder before homogenization in 4 mL of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone. The homogenate was incubated at -20° for 30 min before centrifugation at 15,000 g for 5 min at 4 oC. The supernatant was collected, and an additional 4 mL of 10% TCA in acetone was added to the ground leaves before homogenization via vortexing, centrifugation at 15,000 g for 5 min at 4 oC, and combination of the supernatants. Extracted peptides were dried under N2 and resuspended in 1 mL of 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.7 with 20% acetonitrile.   The isolation of peptides from small molecules was performed using 100 mg/1.0 mL Hypersep SCX cartridges (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) held in an SPE 24-position vacuum manifold (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) at a flow rate of 1 drop/s. Resin was first pre-eluted using 1 mL of 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 3 with 20% acetonitrile before equilibration with 1 mL of 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.7 with 20% acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the cartridges in two passes and then washed using 2 mL of 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.7 with 20% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted using 1 mL of 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 3 with 20% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 1 mL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Desalting of samples was performed using 50 mg/1.0 mL Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) held in an SPE 24-position vacuum manifold (Phenomenex) at a flow rate of 1 drop/s. Resin was first pre-eluted using 1 mL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA before equilibration with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Samples were acidified to pH 3 using 10% TFA, loaded onto the cartridges in two passes, and then washed using 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted using 1 mL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and dried under vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were resuspended in 200 μL of 5% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, and a 20 μL aliquot for peptide quantitation was dried under vacuum centrifugation. These dried aliquots were resuspended in 20 μL of 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 before peptide concentrations were estimated using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Based on these results, peptide concentrations in each experiment were normalized across replicates with additional 5% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA.  Samples were analyzed using an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  Injections (2 μL) were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5μm, 180μm x 20 mm;  Waters) with a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8μm, 75μm x 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B increased from 5% to 40% in 90 min before ramping to 85% in 5 min, where it was held for 10 min before returning to 5% in 2 min and re-equilibrating for 13 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity and the Nanospray Flex source had spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, capillary temperature at 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition was used where HCD fragmentation of precursor ions having +2 to +7 charge state was performed using a normalized collision energy setting of 28. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for precursor m/z was set to a 10 s window.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectral files (*.raw) were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters, version 2.0). Peak picking sensitivity was set to the maximum of five and a reference spectrum was automatically assigned. Total ion chromatograms (TICs) were then aligned to minimize run-to-run differences in peak retention time. Each sample received a unique factor to normalize all peak abundance values resulting from systematic experimental variation. Alignment was validated (>80% score) and a combined peak list (*.mgf) was exported for peptide sequence determination by Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1; Boston, MA). Database searching was performed against the Arabidopsis thaliana UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548, 39,359 canonical entries) with sequences for common laboratory contaminants (https://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/, 116 entries) appended. Target-decoy searches of MS/MS data used “None” as the enzyme specificity, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm/0.02 Da, and variable modifications of N-terminus acetylation, C-terminus amidation, and methionine oxidation. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to less than 1% peptide FDR using the embedded Percolator algorithm [65] and imported to Progenesis for peak matching. Identifications with a Mascot score less than 13 were removed from consideration in Progenesis before exporting both “Peptide Measurements” and “Protein Measurements” from the “Review Proteins” stage.

### Publication Abstract
Protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is crucial for proper cellular function, including the production of peptides with biological functions through controlled proteolysis. Proteostasis has roles in maintenance of cellular functions and plant interactions with the environment under physiological conditions. Plant stress continues to reduce agricultural yields causing substantial economic losses; thus, it is critical to understand how plants perceive stress signals to elicit responses for survival. As previously shown in Arabidopsis thaliana, thimet oligopeptidases (TOPs) TOP1 (also referred to as organellar oligopeptidase) and TOP2 (also referred to as cytosolic oligopeptidase) are essential components in plant response to pathogens, but further characterization of TOPs and their peptide substrates is required to understand their contributions to stress perception and defense signaling. Herein, label-free peptidomics via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was used to differentially quantify 1111 peptides, originating from 369 proteins, between the Arabidopsis Col-0 wild type and top1top2 knock-out mutant. This revealed 350 peptides as significantly more abundant in the mutant, representing accumulation of these potential TOP substrates. Ten direct substrates were validated using in vitro enzyme assays with recombinant TOPs and synthetic candidate peptides. These TOP substrates are derived from proteins involved in photosynthesis, glycolysis, protein folding, biogenesis, and antioxidant defense, implicating TOP involvement in processes aside from defense signaling. Sequence motif analysis revealed TOP cleavage preference for non-polar residues in the positions surrounding the cleavage site. Identification of these substrates provides a framework for TOP signaling networks, through which the interplay between proteolytic pathways and defense signaling can be further characterized.

### Keywords
Thimet oligopeptidases, Arabidopsis, Tops, Peptidome

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Department of Chemistry, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Hicks
Department of Chemistry, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC


