### Accession
PXD041766

### Title
Remodeling of the focal adhesion complex by hydrogen-peroxide- induced senescence

### Description
Cellular senescence is a phenotype characterized by cessation of cell division, which can be caused by exhaustive replication or environmental stress. It is involved in age-related pathophysiological conditions and affects both the cellular cytoskeleton and the prime cellular mechanosensors, focal adhesion complexes. While the size of focal adhesions increases during senescence, it is unknown if and how this is accompanied by a remodeling of the internal focal adhesion structure. Our study uses metal-induced energy transfer to study the axial dimension of focal adhesion proteins from oxidative-stress-induced senescent cells with nanometer precision, and compares these to unstressed cells. We influenced cytoskeletal tension and the functioning of mechanosensitive ion channels using drugs and studied the combined effect of senescence and drug intervention on the focal adhesion structure. We find that H 2 O 2 induced restructuring of the focal adhesion complex indicates a loss of tension and altered talin complexation. Mass spectroscopy-based proteomics confirmed the differential regulation of several cytoskeletal proteins induced by H 2 O 2 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates of the cells from three biological replicates were prepared using RIPA Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). In-gel digestion of the proteins was performed by loading the protein lysates onto a gel and separating them at 75 V for 15-30 min. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) and the band was cut out. Excised gel bands were prepared for in-gel digestion of proteins, according to a previously described protocol. Gel bands were destained with 1mL of buffer containing 50% 25mM Tris HCl pH 8 (“Tris Solution”) and 50% ACN (HPLC-grade) for 15 min at 50°C under agitation, repeated 3-4 times until all samples were fully destained. The liquid was discarded and the gels were resuspended in 0.5 mL ACN 100%, vortexed, and incubated for 5 min at room temperature before being discarded. The gels were incubated with Tris Solution containing 10mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C under agitation. Gel samples were then washed once with DDW (0.5 mL) before a 5-minute incubation with 100% ACN (after vortexing). The gels were then incubated in the dark in 400 μL of Tris Solution with iodoacetamide (IAM) at a final concentration of 55mM for 30 min at 37°C under agitation. The liquid was again removed and the gels were washed with DDW and 100% ACN for 5 min. Gels were then incubated overnight at 37°C in 400 μL Tris Solution with 0.5 μg Trypsin (Promega) with end-over-end rotation. The next morning, samples were diluted with 400 μL ACN 100% with formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 2.5% and incubated for 30 min at 50°C under agitation. Liquid was collected and samples were concentrated using SpeedVac (30 min at 45°C), cleared of gel fragments (centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min), loaded onto prepared C18 Stage Tips, washed, and eluted (as described in [85] ). Eluted peptides were then injected into a 100 μm i.d. x2 cm Nano Trap Column packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18 5μm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific) for 8 min at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Peptides were then separated on a C18 reverse-phase column coupled to a EASY-spray Nano electrospray column (PepMap, 75 mm x 25 cm, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a Dionex Nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) online coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed through a linear gradient of ACN buffer (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) applied to the column at 300 nL/min, beginning with 1% ACN for 35 min. Samples were then injected and the flow rate was applied at 37 min: from 1% to 4% at 40 min at 300 nL/min, then 200 nL/min for 45 min, 4% to 28% at 150 nL/min at 135 min, 28% to 50% at 150 nL/min at 152 min, 50% at 200 nL/min at 157 min, 50% to 80% at 167 min, and held at 80% 200 nL/min until 179 min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode. The survey scan range was to 300 to 1650 m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The isolation window was 1.6 m/z, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. The maximum injection time was set to 20 ms with an AGC target of 3 × 106 for full MS, while MS/MS was set at 25 ms and 10 5 , respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). The columns were washed with 80% ACN and 0.1% FA for 55 min between each sample. Data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) and Perseus [86,87] , using default settings and an FDR &lt;0.05. Only proteins with three valid LFQ values (from three replicates) in at least one group were considered for statistical analysis. If needed, missing values (in the other group) were replaced by imputation with a fixed value of 22 after log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. Missing values were replaced by imputation with a fixed value of 22 after log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. Functional enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID server [88,89] . GO terms were identified using the UniProt server.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is a phenotype characterized by cessation of cell division, which can be caused by exhaustive replication or environmental stress. It is involved in age-related pathophysiological conditions and affects both the cellular cytoskeleton and the prime cellular mechanosensors, focal adhesion complexes. While the size of focal adhesions increases during senescence, it is unknown if and how this is accompanied by a remodeling of the internal focal adhesion structure. Our study uses metal-induced energy transfer to study the axial dimension of focal adhesion proteins from oxidative-stress-induced senescent cells with nanometer precision, and compares these to unstressed cells. We influenced cytoskeletal tension and the functioning of mechanosensitive ion channels using drugs and studied the combined effect of senescence and drug intervention on the focal adhesion structure. We found that H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-induced restructuring of the focal adhesion complex indicates a loss of tension and altered talin complexation. Mass spectroscopy-based proteomics confirmed the differential regulation of several cytoskeletal proteins induced by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> treatment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Senescence, 3t3 cell line, Oxidation

### Affiliations
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Ulm University, Institute of Experimental Physics, Ulm, Baden-Württemberg, 89081, Germany

### Submitter
Meytal Radzinski

### Lab Head
Dr Kay-Eberhard Gottschalk
Ulm University, Institute of Experimental Physics, Ulm, Baden-Württemberg, 89081, Germany


