### Accession
PXD004536

### Title
Proteomics of Candidatus Thiodiazotropha endoloripes, the chemosynthetic symbiont of the lucinid clam Loripes lucinalis from the Bay of Fetovaia

### Description
The Lucinidae is a large family of marine bivalves. They occur in diverse habitats from shallow-water seagrass sediments to deep-sea hydrothermal vents. All members of this family so far investigated host intracellular sulfur-oxidizing symbionts that belong to the Gammaproteobacteria. We recently discovered the capability for nitrogen fixation in draft genomes of the symbionts of Loripes lucinalis from the Bay of Fetovaia, Elba, Italy. With proteomics, we investigated whether the genes for nitrogen fixation are expressed by the symbionts.

### Sample Protocol
We prepared tryptic digests from six biological replicates following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Samples were heated for lysis to 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. For each sample a technical replicate was run. Two blank runs were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each run 2000 ng of peptide were loaded onto a 2 cm, 75 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) set up in 2-column mode. The pre-column was connected to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 35° C via the integrated heating module. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nl/min using a 460 min gradient going from buffer A (0.2% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) to 20% buffer B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 354 min, then from 20 to 35% B in 71 min and ending with 35 min at 100% B. Eluting peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization (ESI) and analyzed in the Q Exactive Plus. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution. MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap at 17,500 resolution. The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass as described by Olsen et al. (Mol Cell Proteomics 2005, 4:2010-2021) with the modification that lock mass was detected in the full scan rather than by separate SIM scan injection. Lock mass use was set to “best”. Ions with charge state +1 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. Roughly 500,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample (2 technical replicates combined).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences predicted from the Candidatus Thiodiazotropha endoloripes genomes available in genbank. CD-HIT was used to remove redundant sequences from the database (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/). The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. The final database contained 6816 protein sequences. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following parameters: Trypsin (Full), max. 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.1 Da fragment mass tolerance and max. 3 equal dynamic modifications per peptide. The following three dynamic modifications were considered: oxidation on M (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethyl on C (+57.021 Da) and acetyl on protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered using the Percolator Node in Proteome Discoverer. The Percolator algorithm “uses semi-supervised learning and a decoy database search strategy to learn to distinguish between correct and incorrect PSMs” (Spivak et al. 2009 J Proteome Res. 8(7)). Percolator was run with the following settings: Maximum Delta Cn 0.05, a strict target FDR of 0.01, a relaxed target FDR of 0.05 and validation based on q-value. The Protein FDR Validator Node in Proteome Discoverer was used to classify protein identifications based on q-value. Proteins with a q-value of <0.01 were classified as high confidence identifications and proteins with a q-value of 0.01-0.05 were classified as medium confidence identifications. Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained resulting in an overall FDR of 5%. Based on these filtering criteria between 892 and 1377 proteins were identified per sample. The sample reports were then exported as a tab-delimited file for further processing. For protein quantification normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs) were calculated based on number of PSMs per protein using the method described by Florens et al. [6] and multiplied by 100. The NSAFx100 gives the relative abundance of a protein in a sample in %.

### Publication Abstract
Chemosynthetic symbioses are partnerships between invertebrate animals and chemosynthetic bacteria. The latter are the primary producers, providing most of the organic carbon needed for the animal host's nutrition. We sequenced genomes of the chemosynthetic symbionts from the lucinid bivalve Loripes lucinalis and the stilbonematid nematode Laxus oneistus. The symbionts of both host species encoded nitrogen fixation genes. This is remarkable as no marine chemosynthetic symbiont was previously known to be capable of nitrogen fixation. We detected nitrogenase expression by the symbionts of lucinid clams at the transcriptomic and proteomic level. Mean stable nitrogen isotope values of Loripes lucinalis were within the range expected for fixed atmospheric nitrogen, further suggesting active nitrogen fixation by the symbionts. The ability to fix nitrogen may be widespread among chemosynthetic symbioses in oligotrophic habitats, where nitrogen availability often limits primary productivity.

### Keywords
1d-lc, Metaproteomics, Chemosynthetic symbiosis, Nitrogenase, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
University of Vienna, Division of Microbial Ecology

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Jillian Petersen
University of Vienna, Division of Microbial Ecology


