### Accession
PXD013872

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of TNBC

### Description
Quantitative proteomics of triple negative breast cancer patient derived cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from cell pellets was extracted using the SIMPLEX method as described by Coman et al. with some minor modifications (DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M115.053702). Briefly, 225 µL of pre-chilled (-20°C) methanol was added to the cell pellets. The samples were then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for 1 minute and subsequently thawed on ice prior to three sonication cycles using a Fisherbrand Model 505 Sonic Dismembrator at 25% amplitude for 5 seconds followed by 25 seconds on ice. Freezing, thawing, and sonication steps were repeated 2 additional times. 750 µL of methyl-tert-butyl-ether (MTBE) was then added and mixed at 4°C for 1 hour using an Eppendorf Thermomixer. Phase separation was induced by the addition of 188 uL of water with 0.1% ammonium acetate followed by centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 5 minutes. The upper lipid-containing phase was collected and stored for future analysis. Un-precipitated proteins were extracted from the lower aqueous phase by addition of 750 uL of pre-chilled (-20°C) methanol and incubated at -20°C for 1 hour. Samples were then centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 10 minutes. The remaining liquid phase (metabolite containing fraction) was transferred and stored at -80°C for future study. Protein concentrations were assessed by BCA assay followed by tryptic digestion using the filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) with minor modifications (DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1322). Briefly the protein pellet was reconstituted protein extraction buffer (50 mM TRIS pH 7.8, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 30 minutes at 56°C. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 30 mM and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Alkylation was quenched by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM at incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. The equivalent volume for 100 µg of total protein was loaded onto 30 kDa centrifugal filters (Microcon-30 kDa, Millipore) and diluted to 500 µL total volume with 8M Urea/Tris buffer prior to centrifugation at 13,500 x g for 25 minutes. The sample was sequential washed in triplicate by the addition of 100 µL of 8M urea/Tris buffer and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate – each time centrifuging the sample at 13,500 x g for 15 minutes and discarding the flow through. Finally the filter was transferred to a new collection tube and 100 µL of lysis buffer (5µg of Worthington trypsin in 100 µL of 200 mM guanidine hydrochloride GuHCL, 2 mM calcium chloride, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8) was added prior to overnight (16 hours) digestion at 37°C. After digestion 50 µL of ABC was added and the filter was briefly vortexed prior to centrifugation at 13,500 x g for 15 minutes. This step was repeated an additional time with 50 µL of LC-MS grade water prior to vacuum concentration. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Peptide samples were separated by liquid chromatography (LC) (Shimadzu Nexera XR) over a 135 minute reversed phase gradient using an Agilent Zorbax Eclipse Plus C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 1.8 µM particle size) and analyzed using an AB Sciex 6600 Triple-ToF mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode. Peptides separation was conducted as follows (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in MS grade water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in MS grade acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 300 µL/min. The gradient was increased linearly from 2% to 30% B over 110 min, followed by an increase to 80% B from 110 to 120 min, which was maintained until 125 min prior to re-equilibration at the starting conditions for 10 min. MS data was acquired using a top-15 data dependent acquisition method in high sensitivity mode. Survey scans acquired the mass range between 300 – 1500 m/z with an accumulation time of 250 ms. Dependent fragment ion spectra (MS/MS) were acquired using an accumulation time of 100 ms with the following selection criteria: intensity > 100 cps, mass tolerance of 50 ppm, and with a charge state between +2 and +4. Dynamic accumulation, dynamic background subtraction, and rolling collision energy were activated in the MS method. Triggered precursors were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 10 seconds.    Data analysis The raw files were processed using MaxQuant (12) using the following search criteria (AB Sciex Q-TOF default instrument settings) against a human Uniprot database (26,254 target sequences, downloaded February 2018): (i) Trypsin as enyzme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. (ii) Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as fixed modification. (iii) Mass tolerances of 0.006 Da for MS and 40 ppm for MS/MS. (iv) Label free quantification (LFQ) with normalization, re-quantification and match between runs. Results were filtered at <1% protein false discovery rate. Only proteins with at least 2 unique quantified peptides were considered. A protein was considered as upregulated in the resistant cell lines if it was (i) only present in one or two of the Dox resistant cell lines (**) with at least 3 and 2 unique peptides, respectively, or (ii) at least 1.5-fold upregulated in both cell lines with a maximum relative standard deviation (RSD) of 31% across control replicates and 25% RSD across resistant cell line replicates. Accordingly, a protein was considered as down-regulated if it was (iii) only present in the control cell line (**) with at least 2 unique peptides, or (iv) at least 1.5-fold downregulated in both cell lines with a maximum relative standard deviation (RSD) of 31% across control replicates and 25% RSD across resistant cell line replicates. Thus, from 2044 quantified proteins a total of 102 and 58 proteins were up- and down-regulated, respectively

### Publication Abstract
The major obstacle in successfully treating triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy, the mainstay of treatment in this disease. Previous preclinical models of chemoresistance in TNBC have suffered from a lack of clinical relevance. Using a single high dose chemotherapy treatment, we developed a novel MDA-MB-436 cell-based model of chemoresistance characterized by a unique and complex morphologic phenotype, which consists of polyploid giant cancer cells giving rise to neuron-like mononuclear daughter cells filled with smaller but functional mitochondria and numerous lipid droplets. This resistant phenotype is associated with metabolic reprogramming with a shift to a greater dependence on fatty acids and oxidative phosphorylation. We validated both the molecular and histologic features of this model in a clinical cohort of primary chemoresistant TNBCs and identified several metabolic vulnerabilities including a dependence on PLIN4, a perilipin coating the observed lipid droplets, expressed both in the TNBC-resistant cells and clinical chemoresistant tumors treated with neoadjuvant doxorubicin-based chemotherapy. These findings thus reveal a novel mechanism of chemotherapy resistance that has therapeutic implications in the treatment of drug-resistant cancer. IMPLICATIONS: These findings underlie the importance of a novel morphologic-metabolic phenotype associated with chemotherapy resistance in TNBC, and bring to light novel therapeutic targets resulting from vulnerabilities in this phenotype, including the expression of PLIN4 essential for stabilizing lipid droplets in resistant cells.

### Keywords
Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr Rene Zahedi
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre


