### Accession
PXD034537

### Title
Convergence of distinct RNA-silencing pathways on GW182/Tnrc6

### Description
The RNA-binding protein Trim71/Lin41  is a phylogenetically conserved developmental regulator that functions in mammalian stem cell reprogramming, brain development and cancer. Trim71 recognizes target mRNAs through hairpin motifs and silences them through molecular mechanisms that await identification. Deposited data are mass spectrometry data from immunoprecipitation experiments with endogenously tagged Trim71, Ago2, and Tnrc6a. Experiments are carried out in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) and uncover reciprocal interactions of Trim71, Ago2, and Tnrc6a. Trim71 protein interactions are largely independent of Ago2 levels, but strongly depend on the presence of RNA. A second set of experiments is mass spectrometry data from immunoprecipitation experiments in mESCs overexpressing a tagged peptide derived from Homo sapiens TNRC6B (‘FLAG-HA::T6BWT::Cherry’), that is known to block the Tnrc6-Ago2 interaction. We show that a wild-type version strongly binds Ago1 and Ago2, but not Trim71, while a mutant version binds neither Ago1, 2, nor Trim71.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry.  The generated peptides were acidified with 0.8% TFA (final) and analyzed by LC–MS/MS on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a two-column set-up. The peptides were applied onto a peptide μPACᵀᴹ trapping column in 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in H2O at a constant flow rate of 5 μl/min. Using a flow rate of 500 nl/min, peptides were separated at RT with a linear gradient of 3%–6% buffer B in buffer A in 4 min followed by a linear increase from 6 to 22% in 55 min, 22%–40% in 4 min, 40%–80% in 1 min, and the column was finally washed for 13 min at 80% buffer B in buffer A (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a 50 cm μPACᵀᴹ column (PharmaFluidics) mounted on an EASY-Spray™ source (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS (Thermo Scientific). The data were acquired using 120,000 resolution for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap and a top T (3 s) method with HCD fragmentation for each precursor and fragment measurement in the ion trap according the recommendation of the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was performed with MaxQuant v.1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine (Cox et al., 2011), and label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014; Hubner et al., 2010). The mouse subset of the UniProt v.2019_04 combined with the contaminant database from MaxQuant was searched and the protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01.    Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805. doi: 10.1021/pr101065j. Epub 2011 Feb 22. Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.031591. Epub 2014 Jun 17. Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions.J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200911091.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA-binding protein TRIM71/LIN-41 is a phylogenetically conserved developmental regulator that functions in mammalian stem cell reprogramming, brain development, and cancer. TRIM71 recognizes target mRNAs through hairpin motifs and silences them through molecular mechanisms that await identification. Here, we uncover that TRIM71 represses its targets through RNA-supported interaction with TNRC6/GW182, a core component of the miRNA-induced silencing complex (miRISC). We demonstrate that AGO2, TRIM71, and UPF1 each recruit TNRC6 to specific sets of transcripts to silence them. As cellular TNRC6 levels are limiting, competition occurs among the silencing pathways, such that the loss of AGO proteins or of AGO binding to TNRC6 enhances the activities of the other pathways. We conclude that a miRNA-like silencing activity is shared among different mRNA silencing pathways and that the use of TNRC6 as a central hub provides a means to integrate their activities.

### Keywords
Trim71; lin41; rna-binding protein; stem cell; mirna; ago2; gw182; mirisc; tnrc6; post-transcriptional gene regulation

### Affiliations
Multicellular Systems Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Daniel Hess

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Grosshans
Multicellular Systems Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research


