### Accession
PXD018373

### Title
Conserved protein Pir2ARS2 mediates gene repression through cryptic introns in lncRNAs

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are components of epigenetic control mechanisms that ensure appropriate and timely gene expression.  The functions of lncRNAs are often mediated through associated gene regulatory activities, but how lncRNAs are distinguished from other RNAs and recruit effector complexes is unclear. Here we utilize the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe to investigate how lncRNAs engage silencing activities to regulate gene expression in cis.  We find that invasion of lncRNA transcription into the downstream gene body incorporates a cryptic intron required for repression of that gene.  Our analyses show that lncRNAs containing cryptic introns are targeted by the conserved Pir2ARS2 protein in association with splicing factors, which recruit RNA processing and chromatin modifying activities involved in gene silencing.  Pir2 and splicing machinery are broadly required for gene repression.  Our finding that human ARS2 also interacts with splicing factors suggests a conserved mechanism mediates gene repression through cryptic introns within lncRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
Rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins technique was performed as described. Monolayers of HepG2 cells were crosslinked with formaldehyde, cell nuclei were isolated, and lysed. Sonication was used to yield DNA gradments of 200-500 bp. After centriguation, the resulting supernatant was incubated with either anti-ARS2 antibody or rabbit IgG mock bound to protein A magnetic beads. The resin was washed and the protein-antibody complexes trypsinized overnight. For mass spectrometry analysis, tryptic peptides were trapped on a trapping column and separated on a 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm  Acclaim PepMap reverse phase column (Thermo Scientific) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min followed by online analysis by tandem mass spectrometry using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.  Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient from 96% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 210 minutes. Parent full-scan mass spectra were collected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set to acquire data at 120,000 FWHM resolution; ions were then isolated in the quadrupole mass filter, fragmented within the HCD cell (HCD normalized energy 32%, stepped ± 3%), and the product ions analyzed in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) was used to search the data against human proteins from the UniProt database (downloaded January 2017) using SequestHT v1.17. The search was limited to tryptic peptides, with maximally two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation set as a variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. The Percolator node was used to score and rank peptide matches using a 1% false discovery rate. Protein false discovery rate was set at 1% and a minimum of 1 unique peptide required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are components of epigenetic control mechanisms that ensure appropriate and timely gene expression. The functions of lncRNAs are often mediated through associated gene regulatory activities, but how lncRNAs are distinguished from other RNAs and recruit effector complexes is unclear. Here, we utilize the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe to investigate how lncRNAs engage silencing activities to regulate gene expression in cis. We find that invasion of lncRNA transcription into the downstream gene body incorporates a cryptic intron required for repression of that gene. Our analyses show that lncRNAs containing cryptic introns are targeted by the conserved Pir2<sup>ARS2</sup> protein in association with splicing factors, which recruit RNA processing and chromatin-modifying activities involved in gene silencing. Pir2 and splicing machinery are broadly required for gene repression. Our finding that human ARS2 also interacts with splicing factors suggests a conserved mechanism mediates gene repression through cryptic introns within lncRNAs.

### Keywords
Rime, Lncrna, Ars2

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH
National Cancer Institute, NIH

### Submitter
Lisa Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa M. Jenkins
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH


