### Accession
PXD039999

### Title
Sulfide promotes tolerance to drought through protein persulfidation in Arabidopsis

### Description
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a signaling molecule that regulates essential plant processes, such as autophagy and responses to abiotic stresses. Although there is much information about the processes in which H2S is involved, the mechanism of action of H2S is still unclear. However, the posttranslational modification of cysteine residues, named persulfidation, is the main proposed mechanism. In this study, the role of H2S during drought that allows plant stress adaptation has been analyzed, with the focus on the underlying mechanism. H2S pretreatment before imposing drought on plants significantly improved phenotypic traits and decreased the content of biochemical and molecular drought stress markers. In addition, H2S regulated amino acid metabolism and repressed drought-induced degradation pathways, such as bulk autophagy and protein ubiquitination. The label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of plants growing under control and drought stress identified 887 proteins significantly different persulfidated between both conditions. Bioinformatic analyses revealed that the biological processes most enriched containing the proteins more persulfidated in drought corresponded to cellular response to oxidative stress, and hydrogen peroxide catabolism. In addition, protein degradation, abiotic stress responses, anthocyanin-containing compound biosynthetic process, and flavonoid biosynthesis were highlighted. On the contrary, the most enriched biological process containing proteins with lower levels of persulfidation in drought corresponded to the biosynthetic processes of glucosinolates and chlorophyll. Therefore, our findings emphasize the role of H2S as a promoter of enhanced tolerance to drought, enabling plants to respond more rapidly and efficiently after exposure to drought. Furthermore, the proteomic analysis supports the main role of protein persulfidation as the molecular mechanism of H2S to alleviate ROS accumulation and balance redox homeostasis under drought stress.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis leaves were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen, resuspended in cold PBS lysis buffer (PBS 1x pH 7.4, 2% SDS, and 1 mM EDTA), together with 5 mM 4-chloro-7- nitrobenzofurazan (Cl-NBF, SigmaAldrich) and 1% protease inhibitor, incubated at 37 ºC for 30 min, protect from light. A methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed, and protein pellets were washed with cold methanol and dried. The dried proteins were dissolved in 50 mM PBS with 2% SDS, incubated with 100 µM DCP-Bio1 (Kerafast) at 37 ºC for 1.5 h, precipitated and finally dissolved in 50 mM PBS with 0.1% SDS. Proteins were incubated with Sera-Mag Magnetic Streptavidin beads (Cytiva) at 4 ºC overnight with agitation. The microtubes containing the magnetic beads were located in a magnet and the beads separated from the supernatant washed with PBS 1x supplemented with 0.001% Tween-20 several times. After washing, the beads were incubated with 2.25 M ammonium hydroxide overnight at room temperature, and the final supernatants transferred to fresh microtubes, and the beads discarded. Samples then were neutralized with formic acid and protein concentration was determined. A total of 50 µg of proteins were trypsinized and analyzed by LCMS/MS

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using PEAKS Studio (BSI, Canada). The search settings were: precursor Δm tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment Δm tolerance = 0.2 Da, missed cleavages = 2, modifications of lysine: NBF (mass shift:163.0012), and modifications of cysteines hydrolized DCP-Bio1 (mass shift:168.0786) or NBF (mass shift:163.0012).

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a signaling molecule that regulates essential plant processes. In this study, the role of H2S during drought was analysed, focusing on the underlying mechanism. Pretreatments with H2S before imposing drought on plants substantially improved the characteristic stressed phenotypes under drought and decreased the levels of typical biochemical stress markers such as anthocyanin, proline, and hydrogen peroxide. H2S also regulated drought-responsive genes and amino acid metabolism, and repressed drought-induced bulk autophagy and protein ubiquitination, demonstrating the protective effects of H2S pretreatment. Quantitative proteomic analysis identified 887 significantly different persulfidated proteins between control and drought stress plants. Bioinformatic analyses of the proteins more persulfidated in drought revealed that the most enriched biological processes were cellular response to oxidative stress and hydrogen peroxide catabolism. Protein degradation, abiotic stress responses, and the phenylpropanoid pathway were also highlighted, suggesting the importance of persulfidation in coping with drought-induced stress. Our findings emphasize the role of H2S as a promoter of enhanced tolerance to drought, enabling plants to respond more rapidly and efficiently. Furthermore, the main role of protein persulfidation in alleviating reactive oxygen species accumulation and balancing redox homeostasis under drought stress is highlighted.

### Keywords
Persulfidation, Arabidopsis, Abiotic stress, Ros, Abscisic acid, Amino acids, Dimedone switch, Drought, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, Avenida Américo Vespucio, 49, 41092 Sevilla, Spain
CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Ibon Iloro

### Lab Head
Dr Luis C. Romero
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, Avenida Américo Vespucio, 49, 41092 Sevilla, Spain


