### Accession
PXD011872

### Title
Human Arthritic Synovial Fluid LC-MS/MS

### Description
In the present study, synovial fluid (SF) samples from inflammatory arthritis (IA) patients were subjected to a label-free, mass spectrometry-based approach for the identification and quantification of IA-specific proteins and peptides. The discovery-phase project generated a warehouse of proteomic and peptidomic data providing a basis for the identification of candidates with the greatest potential to serve as novel biomarkers specific to inflammatory arthritides. A total of 11 protein candidates and 15 peptide candidates, originating from 4 proteins, were selected for follow-up studies.

### Sample Protocol
SF samples for the study were obtained, retrospectively, from 10 cases with RA, 10 cases with PsA and 10 cadaveric controls. RA patients were classified according to the 1987 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) classification criteria. PsA patients satisfied the Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR). Ten cadaveric control SF from joints were obtained through the Southern Alberta Tissue Donation Program. IA SF samples (RA or PsA) were obtained by needle aspiration of knee joints for when clinically indicated kept on ice. Samples were transferred to centrifuge tubes and spun at 1400 RPM for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a sterile 1.5 mL centrifuge tube and spun at 2000 RCF for another 10 minutes at 4°C. Samples were immediately stored at -80°C until further processing. SF samples from cadavers were collected without the use of lavage. Samples were centrifuged at 3000g for 15 minutes and stored at -80°C until further processing. At the time of analysis, samples were blinded and randomized, thawed on ice and their respective total protein concentrations were measured with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) total protein assay. For proteomic investigations, SF samples were first adjusted to 300 µg total protein in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Protein concentration was conducted using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units (10 kDa molecular weight cut-off; MilliporeSigma) which were pre-equilibrated with 400 uL of 50 mM ABC. Samples were loaded and spun at 10,000 RPM for 35 minutes at 4°C and transferred to a new tube by spinning upside at 5,000 RPM for 2 minutes.  Concentrates were collected and brought to a total volume of 100 µL with 50 mM ABC. Proteins were denatured with powdered urea to a final concentration of 8 M. Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each concentrate sample to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated at 60°C for 45 minutes. This was followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes. Samples were diluted 5-fold with 50 mM ABC to prevent inhibition of trypsin activity by high concentrations of urea. Concentrate samples were digested with trypsin in a 1:50 (trypsin to total protein) ratio for 20 hours at 37°C and then dropwise acidified to a pH of 2 with formic acid (FA) to inhibit trypsin activity. Samples were reduced to 300 µL via speed vacuum concentration and stored at -20°C until subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptides were isolated based on a protocol described by Kamphorst et al.16 Fifty microliters of SF were diluted in 235 µL of 50 mM ABC and 15 µL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for peptidomic analysis. Peptide concentration was conducted using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units (10 kDa MWCO; MilliporeSigma) which were pre-equilibrated with 250 µL of 50 mM ABC. Peptidomic samples were spun at 10 000 RPM for 60 minutes at 4°C then washed with 100 uL of 50 mM of ABC and spun for another 10 minutes. Filtrates were acidified with 5 uL of FA.  Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced reverse-phase cartridge (Oasis HLB). The cartridge [1 mL (30 mg); Waters cat# WAT094225] was first pre-equilibrated with 1 mL of 90% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA and 0.02% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then washed with 3 mL of buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA, 0.02% TFA). The sample was passed through the cartridge and then washed a second time with 3 mL of buffer A. Peptides were eluted with 700 µL of 60% ACN, 0.1% FA and 0.02% TFA. Eluted fractions were reduced to a volume of less than 300 µL and stored at -20°C until subjected to LC-MS/MS. Samples were desalted using C-18 OMIX Pipette Tips (Agilent Technologies, Germany) and eluted in 3 µL of MS buffer B (65% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O). The samples were then diluted with 57 µL of MS buffer A (0.1% FA in H2O) and 28 µL were injected onto a 2 cm C18 trap column, packed with Varian Pursuit (5 µm C18), with an 8 µm tip (New Objective). The LC setup was coupled online to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Proxeon Biosystems). Each fraction underwent a 60-minute linear gradient using MS buffer A and MS buffer B. Eluted peptides were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry in positive ion mode. Data acquisition was conducted via Thermo XCalibur v.3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
The resulting proteomic and peptidomic raw data files were uploaded into MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 (www.coxdocs.org) with the integrated Andromeda search engine. MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against a reverted version of the SwissProt human protein database (version July 2017) for protein identification and a randomized version of the SwissProt human protein database for peptide identification. Search parameters for proteomic analysis included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin was the chosen digestion enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Search parameters for peptidomic analysis included oxidized methionine and oxidized proline as variable modifications. An unspecific enzyme search was the chosen digestion method. Both proteomic and peptidomic data were initially searched against a smaller “human first search” database with a peptide tolerance of 20 ppm for mass recalibration. The main search was performed using the Swissprot human protein database (version July 2017) with a peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm. Data was analyzed using label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum ratio count of 1 and the “Match between runs” interval set to 2 minutes. The peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 1%.   Pathway analysis of dysregulated proteins identified by LC-MS/MS was conducted using functional-analysis tool Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; http://www.ingenuity.com). To determine the specificity of identified proteins at the tissue and biological fluid level, proteomic datasets were searched against ProteomicsDB (http://www.ProteomicsDB.org), a web-based database of mass spectrometry-generated proteomics data. Functional annotation of IA-specific precursor proteins of the SF peptidome was executed using the publicly available Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) pertaining to biological process, molecular function and subcellular localization. Pathway analysis of SF peptides was conducted through DAVID with reference to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Annotations with q-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Identification of known AMPs in the SF peptidome was determined by comparison with experimentally validated human AMPs taken from the Collection of Anti-Microbial Peptides (CAMPR3) (http://www.camp.bicnirrh.res.in/) database. AMP prediction of the identified peptides was performed using the support vector machine (SVM) algorithm developed for the CAMPR3 database. Peptides with an SVM score of 0.8 or higher were predicted to be antimicrobial. Statistical analyses and data visualizations were completed with R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing). The Mann-Whitney U test coupled to the Benjamini-Hochberg correction to control for multiple hypothesis testing was performed for comparisons between two independent groups. Adjusted p-values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Differential expression of proteins and peptides were computed with the myTAI package in R, generating a ratio of log-transformed expression values in one group against the second group, considered to be the reference group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Synovial fluid, Lc-ms/ms, Arthritis

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada Centre for Prognosis Studies in Rheumatic Diseases, Krembil Research Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 11Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Shalini Mahendran

### Lab Head
Dr Vinod Chandran
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada Centre for Prognosis Studies in Rheumatic Diseases, Krembil Research Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 11Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada


