### Accession
PXD041819

### Title
Beyond Pattern Recognition: TLR2 Promotes Chemotaxis, Cell Adhesion and Migration in THP-1 Cells

### Description
The interaction between monocytes and endothelial cells in inflammation is central to chemoattraction, adhesion, and transendothelial migration. Key players such as selectins and their ligands, integrins and other adhesion molecules and their function in these processes are well studied. Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), expressed on monocytes, is critical for sensing invading pathogens and initiating a rapid and effective immune response. However, the extended role of TLR2 in monocyte adhesion and migration has only been partially elucidated. To address this question, we performed several functional cell-based assays using monocyte-like wild type (WT), TLR2-knock-out (KO) and, TLR2-knock-in (KI) THP-1 cells. We found that TLR2 promotes faster and stronger adhesion of monocytes to the endothelium and a more intense endothelial barrier disruption after endothelial activation. In addition, we performed quantitative mass-spectrometry, STRING protein analysis, and RT-qPCR, which revealed the association of TLR2 with specific integrins, but also uncovered novel proteins affected by TLR2. In conclusion, we could show that unstimulated TLR2 affects cell adhesion, endothelial barrier disruption, migration, and actin polymerization.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative mass-spectrometry, THP-1 KO, WT, and KI cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 106 cells per well in a 12-well plate and incubated for 3 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were then collected and washed with PBS twice.  For sample preparation and digestion, the cell pellets were dissolved in 40 µL lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM NH₄HCO₃, and sonicated for 10 min. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, the supernatants were transferred to new tubes to remove most of the DNA and stored at -20°C until further use.  After protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria), 20 µg of protein per sample was used for digestion. Samples were reduced and alkylated with TCEP and IAA, and sequentially digested with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. Corporation, Richmond, VA) for 1 h and trypsin (Promega, Wall-dorf, Germany) for 16 h. Peptides were purified using Sep-Pak tC18 1 cc Vac cartridges (Waters, Vienna, Austria), dried, and stored at -20 °C until analysis.  Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled with an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). Dried samples were suspended in 40 µL of mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 2 µL were injected onto a PepMap 100 (C18 0.3 x 5mm) TRAP column and analyzed using a PepMap RSLC EASY-spray column (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). Separation was performed at 300 nL·min-1 with a flow gradient of 2-35% mobile phase B (2% H2O, 98% ACN, 0.1% FA) within 60 min, resulting in a total method time of 80 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in DIA mode in positive ionization mode with the FAIMS Pro system on set to CV-45. MS1 scans were acquired in the scan range of 350-1400 m·z -1 with a resolution of 120,000 @200 m·z-1. For DIA scans, the precursor mass range was set to 400-1000 m·z -1 with a 14 m·z -1 isolation window and 1 m·z -1 window overlap for a total of 43 independent scans. HCD fragmentation was per-formed at 30 % NCE and fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 @200 m·z -1.   To deepen the analysis, a pool of all samples was created and used for gas phase fractionation (GPF) [30].  Sample pool was analyzed 6 times consecutively with smaller precursor mass ranges of 100 m·z -1 (400-500, 500-600, 600-700, 700-800, 800-900, 900-1000 m·z -1) and isolation windows of 4 m·z -1 with 2 m·z -1 window overlap.

### Data Protocol
DIA-NN (version 18.1.1) was used for protein identification and quantification. The GPF samples were first searched against the human protein database (Uniprot, version 10.2021, 20386 entries) and a spectral library was created using the identified pep-tides. The main samples were searched using the spectral library together with the human FASTA database to maximize the number of identified proteins. Perseus (version 2.0.6.0) was used for statistical evaluation. Protein groups were filtered according to their treatment, requiring at least three out of three values to be valid in at least one group. Remaining missing values were replaced with a downward shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3 to allow statistical testing for all remaining protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
The interaction between monocytes and endothelial cells in inflammation is central to chemoattraction, adhesion, and transendothelial migration. Key players, such as selectins and their ligands, integrins, and other adhesion molecules, and their functions in these processes are well studied. Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), expressed in monocytes, is critical for sensing invading pathogens and initiating a rapid and effective immune response. However, the extended role of TLR2 in monocyte adhesion and migration has only been partially elucidated. To address this question, we performed several functional cell-based assays using monocyte-like wild type (WT), TLR2 knock-out (KO), and TLR2 knock-in (KI) THP-1 cells. We found that TLR2 promotes the faster and stronger adhesion of monocytes to the endothelium and a more intense endothelial barrier disruption after endothelial activation. In addition, we performed quantitative mass spectrometry, STRING protein analysis, and RT-qPCR, which not only revealed the association of TLR2 with specific integrins but also uncovered novel proteins affected by TLR2. In conclusion, we show that unstimulated TLR2 influences cell adhesion, endothelial barrier disruption, migration, and actin polymerization.

### Keywords
Thp-1, Toll-like receptor 2; chemotaxis, Cell adhesion; cell migration

### Affiliations
Institute Krems Bioanalytics, IMC University of Applied Sciences Krems, 3500 Krems, Austria
Institute Krems Bioanalytics, IMC University of Applied Sciences, 3500 Krems, Austria

### Submitter
Benjamin Neuditschko

### Lab Head
Dr Franz Herzog
Institute Krems Bioanalytics, IMC University of Applied Sciences, 3500 Krems, Austria


