### Accession
PXD028339

### Title
Characterization of proteome-size scaling by integrative omics reveals mechanisms of proliferation control in cancer

### Description
Many cell types exhibit remarkable size homogeneity through successive divisions. In both yeast and humans, size homogeneity during division cycles is a result of tight control on the concentration of cell-cycle inhibitors such as WHI5 or RB1 (Retinoblastoma 1) proteins respectively. However, size control is often lost during oncogenesis, correlating with aggression. How size control is affected by mutations which drive proliferation, such as those of the RAS-ERK pathway, or even loss of RB1 itself, is poorly understood. Using quantitative single cell imaging of different melanoma cell lines, we show that melanoma cells exhibit both inter- and intra-line size variability. Integration of imaging with multi-omic data demonstrates that the translation machinery, G2 regulators, inflammatory mediators and growth-regulatory proteins are key determinants of size in melanoma. Theoretical modelling suggests that the cell size of daughter cells is determined by biosynthetic processes and engagement of stress responses in the mother. Biosynthesis and stress in mother cells impacts the synthesis of heritable prodivision factors like Cyclin D1 (CCND1) which control cell progression by inhibiting RB1 in concentration dependent fashions Small cell sizes and uniform populations are driven by robust DNA repair and increased levels of biosynthetic factors which promote CCDN1 accumulation. We propose that increased size and size-heterogeneity in BRAF and NRAS mutated cells is determined by stress or DNA damage in mother’s division cycle that slows cycle progression in the daughters. Such events lead to increased size and senescent-like states. Taken together our data suggest that oncogenic events, such as the dysregulation of MAPK signalling, provide a means to circumvent normal mechanisms of size regulation and increase cell-to-cell variations in size which may drive disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 150 μL lysis buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) on ice with pulsed probe sonication for 15 sec. Samples were boiled at 90 °C for 5 min and sonicated for another 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Quick Start™ Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots containing 100 μg of protein were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark. Proteins were then digested overnight by adding trypsin at final concentration 75 ng/μL (Pierce). The resultant peptides were labelled with the TMT-11plex reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions and were combined in equal amounts into a single tube. The combined sample was then dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Two technical replicate TMT batches from the same protein extracts were prepared to assess reproducibility. One TMT batch was fractionated offline with high-pH Reversed-Phase (RP) chromatography using the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide (v/v) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide (v/v). The TMT labelled peptide mixture was reconstituted in 100 uL mobile phase A and fractionated with a gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min as follows: for 5 min isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec and vacuum dried. The second TMT replicate batch was fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions.   Phosphopeptide enrichment Peptide fractions from the first TMT batch were reconstituted in 10 μL of 20% isopropanol, 0.5% formic acid binding solution and were loaded on 10 μL of phosphopeptide enrichment IMAC resin (PHOS-Select™ Iron Affinity Gel, Sigma) already washed and conditioned with binding solution in custom made filter tips fitted on Eppendorf tubes caps. After 2 h of binding at room temperature, the resin was washed three times with 40 μL of binding solution at 300 g and the flow-through solutions were collected for total proteome analysis. Phosphopeptides were eluted three times with 70 μL of 40% acetonitrile, 400 mM ammonium hydroxide solution. Eluents and flow-through samples were vacuum dried and stored at -20 °C until the LC-MS analysis.     LC-MS Analysis LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate UHPLC 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap  RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 90 min (or 150 min for the replicate batch) gradient from 10% to 38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 10% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 10% B. Precursors between 375-1,500 m/z were selected with mass resolution of 120 K, AGC 4×105 and IT 50 ms with the top speed mode in 3 sec and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy (CE) was 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 50 ms. MS3 quantification was obtained with HCD fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was 0.7 Th, CE 65%, AGC 1×105 and 105 ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the mass range 100-500 with 50K resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance. Phosphopeptide samples were analysed with an HCD method at the MS2 level with CE 38%, AGC 1×105 and max IT 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
The SequestHT search engine was used to analyse the acquired mass spectra in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for the CID and 0.02 Da for the HCD spectra. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Dynamic phosphorylation of S/T/Y was included for the phospho-enriched samples. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. Spectra were searched against reviewed UniProt mouse protein entries. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT 11plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 or MS2 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise >3 were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Melanoma, Phosphopeptides, Tmt, Ms/ms, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


