### Accession
PXD009519

### Title
FlashPack: Fast and simple preparation of ultra-high performance capillary columns for LC-MS

### Description
High-resolution capillary chromatography is essential for in-depth characterization of complex biomolecule mixtures by LC-MS. We report a simple and low-cost FlashPack protocol for preparation of ultra-high performance capillary columns of > 50 cm length in less than 1 h using low-pressure equipment. Flashpack LC columns enable robust identification of >35,000 unique peptides and 5,800 human proteins in a single LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cell pellet or differentiating human myoblasts (- 80oC) were thawed at +4oC in solubilization buffer containing 50 mM TEAB, 1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, pH 8.5, supplemented with a cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Cells were lysed using an ultrasonic homogenizer Bioruptor® in ice-water slurry. Protein concentration was measured by Trp fluorescence [3] and adjusted to 1 mg/ml with solubilization buffer. Samples were aliquoted into portions (100 g of protein) and heated at 80oC for 10 min. Nine volumes of acetone (-20oC) was added and the samples were incubated overnight at -20oC and centrifuged at 15,000 g. The pellet was washed twice with acetone (-20oC) and air-dried for 10 min. 100 l of 1% SDC in 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 8.5 was added and the sample was heated for 5 min at 80oC to resolubilize the proteins. Protein digestion was carried out using 1 µg of trypsin per 100 µg of protein for 5 h at 37oC, subsequently an additional portion of trypsin (1 µg per 100 µg of protein) was added and the sample was incubated overnight at 37oC. The reaction was stopped using 10 l of 10% TFA (final concentration ~1%). Precipitated SDC was removed by ethyl-acetate extraction [4]. Peptide concentration was measured using Trp fluorescence [3]. Samples were stored frozen at -20oC. Prior LC-MS analysis, peptide samples were thawed and sonicated for 1 min and centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000 g. Samples were loaded on PepMap 100 C18 5 µm 0.3 x 5 mm Trap Cartridge (ThermoScientific) inloading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated with a linear gradient of 99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer A) from 4 to 32% of buffer B in 2 h (for HeLa samples or myoblast samples) or from 2 to 25% B in 15 min (for BSA samples) at 0.25 l/min flow. Separation was carried out either with a FlashPack columns packed with Inertsil sorbent, or with a commercially available EasySpray 75 m* 50 cm PepMap 100 2 m column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Both the precolumn and the column were thermostated at 45oC (for 50 cm columns) or at 55oC (for 70 cm columns). An in-house developed micro column-oven was used for FlashPack columns.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using SkyLine (MacCossLab) and FreeStyle (ThermoScientific). Peptide and protein identification was carried out using MaxQuant 1.5.7.0 (MQ) and PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). In both programs the data was searched against Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens database (2016 Sep 29, 20211 entries).

### Publication Abstract
Capillary ultrahigh-pressure liquid chromatography (cUHPLC) is essential for in-depth characterization of complex biomolecule mixtures by LC-MS. We developed a simple and fast method called <i>FlashPack</i> for custom packing of capillary columns of 50-100 cm length with sub- 2 &#x3bc;m sorbent particles. <i>FlashPack</i> uses high sorbent concentrations of 500-1,000 mg/ml for packing at relatively low pressure of 100 bar. Column blocking by sorbent aggregation is avoided during the packing by gentle mechanical tapping of the capillary proximal end by a slowly rotating magnet bar. Utilizing a standard 100-bar pressure bomb, <i>Flashpack</i> allows for production of 15-25 cm cUHPLC columns within a few minutes and of 50 cm cUHPLC columns in less than an hour. Columns exhibit excellent reproducibility of back-pressure, retention time, and resolution (CV 8.7%). <i>FlashPack</i> cUHPLC columns are inexpensive, robust and deliver performance comparable to commercially available cUHPLC columns. The FlashPack method is versatile and enables production of cUHPLC columns using a variety of sorbent materials.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Chromatography, Capillary collumn packing

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
BMB, University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska
BMB, University of Southern Denmark


