### Accession
PXD006541

### Title
LC-MSMS of cell secretome for MAP1LC3B interactors

### Description
Growing evidence implicates autophagy in cell secretion.  Identifying the repertoire of proteins involved with autophagy dependent secretions is key for understanding the underlying mechanism.  We use a proximity-dependent biotinylation proteomics strategy to label protein that engage the autophagy regulator MAP1LC3B (LC3/ATG8) in cells; the labeled proteins are then secreted, captured with neutravidin, tryptically digested, and identified by LC-MS/MS.  Cells stably expressing BirA* alone serves as control for non-specific cytosolic labeling.  SILAC is employed to quantify the degree of LC3B interaction over the background.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing either biotin ligase (BirA*) fused to MAP1LC3B or BirA* alone is cultured in heavy SILAC media or light SILAC media, separately.  Biotin-labeling was performed via BioID procedures and conditioned media was collected 24 hours after biotin addition, precipitated with trichloroacetic acid and incubated for 1 h.  Precipitated protein was separated by ultracentrifugation twice (200,000g for 18h and 1h), solubilized and denatured in 8 M guanidine hydrochloride, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 1 h.   Re-solubilized protein BirA* alone and BirA*-LC3B, with different SILAC labels, were pooled separately, their concentrations quantified by BCA protein quantification tool.  Equivalent amounts of each pool (i.e. 5 mg BirA* SILAC light + 5 mg BirA*-LC3B SILAC heavy, or vice-versa for swapped channel SILAC sample) were combined and diluted to 2.5 mM Guanidine, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0.  Biotin labeled proteins were captured neutravidin sepharose, overnight at 4 C.  The beads were washed extensively and the proteins were mildly denatured in 1M guanidine hydrochloride, 1 mM calcium chloride and 0.1 M Tris buffer pH 8.0.  Disulfide bonds were reduced with 4 TCEP, and the free thiols were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide.   Captured proteins were digested on-bead by adding 10 ug trypsin in 10 uL 50mM acetic acid at 37 C for 18 - 22 hours.  The eluate was acidified with TCA, then desalted by C18 cartridge.  ~1 ug of SILAC labeled peptides was submitted for LC-MSMS.  A 195 min reversed phase (2.4% - 32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) buffer gradient was run on each sample on a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column, using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano pump, in-line with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.  A data dependent acquisition method with a MS1 resolution of 70,000, top12 or top15 method was set-up with HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27.  Dynamic exclusion was activated for 20s after initial parent ion selection.

### Data Protocol
5 replicates of data were searched and quantified together via Maxquant (v1.5.1.2).  Search parameters for peptide search tolerance was 4.5 ppm, for centroided MS2 tolerance was 7.5 ppm, and allowed for 2 missed tryptic cleavages.  Constant modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were allowed.  Peptide spectrum match FDR and protein FDR was set at 1%.  Match between runs was enabled to increase peptide identifications, and protein level SILAC ratio quantification was performed by Maxquant.   Statistical analysis (one-sample T-test) was applied on the Maxquant calculated protein ratios for three replicates in the bioinformatics analysis package, Perseus (v1.5.6).  Significance threshold was set at a p-value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Traditionally viewed as an autodigestive pathway, autophagy also facilitates cellular secretion; however, the mechanisms underlying these processes remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that components of the autophagy machinery specify secretion within extracellular vesicles (EVs). Using a proximity-dependent biotinylation proteomics strategy, we identify 200 putative targets of LC3-dependent secretion. This secretome consists of a highly interconnected network enriched in RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and EV cargoes. Proteomic and RNA profiling of EVs identifies diverse RBPs and small non-coding RNAs requiring the LC3-conjugation machinery for packaging and secretion. Focusing on two RBPs, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK) and scaffold-attachment factor B (SAFB), we demonstrate that these proteins interact with LC3 and are secreted within EVs enriched with lipidated LC3. Furthermore, their secretion requires the LC3-conjugation machinery, neutral sphingomyelinase 2 (nSMase2) and LC3-dependent recruitment of factor associated with nSMase2 activity (FAN). Hence, the LC3-conjugation pathway controls EV cargo loading and secretion.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Map1lc3b, Lc-msms, Silac, Secretome, Autophagy

### Affiliations
UCSF
Wiita Lab, Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Hector Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Paul Wiita
Wiita Lab, Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA


