### Accession
PXD027529

### Title
Kinase-catalyzed Biotinylation to Map Cell Signaling Pathways (K-BMAPS): Application to Epidermal Growth Factor Signaling

### Description
Cell signaling involves a network of protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications that govern cellular responses to environmental cues. To understand and ultimately modulate these signaling pathways to confront disease, the complex web of proteins that becomes phosphorylated after extracellular stimulation has been studied using mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods. To complement prior work and fully characterize all phosphorylated proteins after stimulation of cell signaling, we developed K-BMAPS (Kinase-catalyzed Biotinylation to MAP Signaling), which utilizes ATP-biotin as a kinase cosubstrate to biotin label substrates. As a first application of K-BMAPS, the well-characterized epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase signaling pathway was monitored by treating EGF-stimulated HeLa lysates with ATP-biotin, following by streptavidin enrichment and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. Based on the dynamic phosphoproteins identified, a pathway map was developed considering functional categories and known interactors of EGFR. Remarkably, 94% of K-BMAPS hit proteins were included in the EGFR pathway map. With many proteins involved in transcription, translation, cell adhesion, and GTPase signaling, K-BMAPS identified phosphoproteins associated with late and continuous signaling events. In summary, K-BMAPS is a powerful tool to map the dynamic phosphorylation governing cell signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from untreated or EGF-treated cells (500 µg total protein) were incubated with ATP-biotin (2 mM) at 31 °C for 2 hours for LC-MS/MS analysis and 1 hour for validation experiments. A negative control was performed by incubating inhibitor-treated lysates (500 µg total protein), prepared as described above, with ATP-biotin (2 mM). To account for non-specific proteins bound to beads, unstimulated lysates (500 µg total protein) were incubated without ATP-biotin. The total volume of each reaction was 60 µL. After kinase reaction, 50 µg of each sample was saved as “input”. The remaining samples were diluted with phosphate binding buffer (up to 400 µL; 0.1 M phosphate, pH 7.2, 0.15 M NaCl) and excess ATP-biotin was removed by filtering through 3 KDa centriprep spin columns (EMD Millipore, UFC500396) at 14,200 rcf for 30 min twice. After filtration, samples were diluted with phosphate binding buffer to a total volume of 300 µL and then incubated with pre-washed streptavidin resin beads (200 µL, Genscript) for 1 hour at room temperature with rotation. Before use, streptavidin resin was washed twice with phosphate binding buffer (400 µL) to remove the storage solution. After the 1 hour incubation, the bound resin was washed ten times with phosphate binding buffer (400 µL) and then five times with water (400 µL) to remove nonspecifically bound proteins. The avidin bound proteins were eluted by boiling the resin in 2% SDS in water (200 µL) for 7 minutes at 95 °C. The eluate was concentrated using a speedvac (Thermo scientific), boiled in Laemmli sample buffer at 95°C for 1 min, and desalted using 12% SDS-PAGE by running the proteins ~1 cm in the gel before staining by Sypro Ruby and in gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis, as described in supporting information. Separately, to assess EGFR activation, “input” samples (50 µg) were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE. Total protein levels in the samples were detected by Sypro Ruby, whereas EGF-stimulation of input samples was assessed using immunoblot analysis with anti-phospho-EGFR and EGFR antibodies, according to the manufacturer’s protocols. In-gel tryptic digestion: In-gel tryptic digestion was performed by following a previously published protocol.20 First, the Sypro Ruby stained gel generated after K-BMAPS, as described, was incubated in destaining solution buffer (100 mL; 10% methanol and 7% acetic acid) before washing with distilled water (100 mL) three times. Then, all protein-containing lanes from the Sypro Ruby gel were excised, cut into 1 mm3 sized cubes, and transferred to separate 1.5 mL lobind tubes (Fisher Scientific). Gel pieces were covered in a 1:1 mixture of 50 mM NH4HCO3: acetonitrile (200 µL) for 15 minutes and the solution was removed. Then, 200 µL of pure acetonitrile was added to gel pieces and incubated for 5 minutes until the gel pieces were white and dehydrated. The acetonitrile was removed and NH4HCO3 (50 mM in water, 200 µL) was added and incubated at room temperature for 2 minutes until the gel pieces rehydrated. Then acetonitrile (200 µL) was added to the same solution and incubated for 15 minutes. After incubation, the solution was removed, and acetonitrile (200 µL) was added and incubated for 5 minutes until the gel pieces were white and shrunk. The acetonitrile was aspirated, and gel samples were dried using speedvac. Freshly prepared TCEP (25 mM, tris (2 carboxyethyl) phosphine) in NH4HCO3 (50 mM in water, 100 µL) was added to the dried gel pieces and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. The solution was aspirated and freshly prepared iodoacetamide (55 mM) in NH4HCO3 (50 mM in water, 100 µL) was added and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes with mild rocking. The solution was discarded, and gel pieces were washed with a 1:1 mixture of 50 mM NH4HCO3: acetonitrile (200 µL) twice for 15 minutes each and the solution was removed. Acetonitrile (200 µL) was added to the gel pieces and incubated for 5 minutes until the gel pieces were white and dehydrated. The acetonitrile was removed, and gel samples were dried using the speedvac. The trypsin solution (20 µg/mL) was prepared by dissolving trypsin (20 ug, Sigma) in aqueous HCl (1 mM, 100 µL), followed by subsequent addition of a solution of 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 9% acetonitrile in water (900 µL). The trypsin solution was added to cover the gel pieces (200 µL) and incubated in a humid 370 C incubator for 16 hours or overnight. The next day, 0.1% formic acid (5 µL) was added to the trypsin solution and sonicated at 37 °C for 10 minutes. The solution was then transferred to low binding protein tubes. To the remaining gel pieces, a solution of 0.5% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile (100 µL) was added and the solution transferred to the same low bind tubes. The digested peptides were dried using the speed vac.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures after protein digestion were resuspended in 1% trifluoroacetic acid (10 µl), desalted using C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #87782), followed by drying using the speed vac. Dried samples were resuspended in a solution of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.005% trifluoroacetic acid (15 µL). Each sample (7.5 µL) was separated by reverse phase ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography (RP-UHPLC) with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher) and C18 columns. Abundant ions were analyzed with a Fusion Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). MS1 spectra were scanned from 375-1600 m/z at 240,000 resolution. MS2 scans were analyzed in the ion trap and peptides with +2 or +3 charge were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID), whereas peptides with +3 to +7 charge were fragmented by electron transfer dissociation (ETD). A human protein database from UniProt was used (04/07/2016). Searches allowed 2 missed tryptic cleavages. The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerances for parent ions were 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the second search and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Minimum protein and peptide identification probabilities were specified at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) as determined by a reversed database search, and proteins required 1 unique peptide. All other parameters were used at their default settings. Raw MaxQuant intensities are shown in Table S1. To identify enriched phosphoproteins in the EGF-treated samples, fold enrichments were calculated by dividing the MaxQuant intensities of the EGF-stimulated sample by each negative control. Hit proteins enriched by >1.0-fold in the EGF-stimulated sample, compared to the bead control without ATP-biotin and the inhibitor control were required in all hit lists. As the low stringency hit list, proteins enriched by >1.5-fold in the EGF-stimulated sample compared to the unstimulated sample in at least two out of four independent trials were selected. A medium stringency list was generated by considering >1.5-fold enrichment at least in three out of four trials. The fold change threshold of >1.5 in all four trials were selected for the highest stringency hit proteins (Table S2).

### Publication Abstract
Cell signaling involves a network of protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications that govern cellular responses to environmental cues. To understand and ultimately modulate these signaling pathways to confront disease, the complex web of proteins that becomes phosphorylated after extracellular stimulation has been studied using mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods. To complement prior work and fully characterize all phosphorylated proteins after the stimulation of cell signaling, we developed K-BMAPS (kinase-catalyzed biotinylation to map signaling), which utilizes ATP-biotin as a kinase cosubstrate to biotin label substrates. As a first application of the K-BMAPS method, the well-characterized epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase signaling pathway was monitored by treating epidermal growth factor (EGF)-stimulated HeLa lysates with ATP-biotin, followed by streptavidin enrichment and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. On the basis of the dynamic phosphoproteins identified, a pathway map was developed considering functional categories and known interactors of EGFR. Remarkably, 94% of the K-BMAPS hit proteins were included in the EGFR pathway map. With many proteins involved in transcription, translation, cell adhesion, and GTPase signaling, K-BMAPS identified phosphoproteins were associated with late and continuous signaling events. In summary, the K-BMAPS method is a powerful tool to map the dynamic phosphorylation governing cell signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Cell signaling; kinase; atp analog; atp-biotin; proteomics; interactome

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Wayne State University
Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, United States

### Submitter
Jordan Burton

### Lab Head
Dr Mary Kay Pflum
Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, United States


