### Accession
PXD041325

### Title
Metabolic enhancement of developmental pausing (embryos)

### Description
Embryonic stem (ES) cells and embryos reversibly pause via chemical mTOR inhibition. In this study, we investigate the tissue-specific response to mTORi-induced pausing in ES and trophoblast stem (TS) cells. To resolve the sequential rewiring of the proteome, we conducted a time-series proteomics experiment at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours upon induction of pausing, and at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours upon release of pausing in ES and TS cells. We find that ES, but not TS cells pause reversibly. To optimise developmental pausing conditions, we reasoned that by understanding the difference in pausing response of ES and TS cells, we could identify which pathways are essential for pausing. We found that KEGG pathways related to amino acid degradation, fatty acid degradation, and DNA repair are upregulated in ES cells, but downregulated in TS cells during entry into pausing. Moreover, by targeted metabolomics, we found a depletion of short chain carnitines in the paused ES cells. To extend the length of developmental pausing, we supplemented paused embryos with L-carnitine. The L-carnitine supplementation facilitates lipid usage and prolongs the pausing length by 19 days through the establishment of a more dormant state.

### Sample Protocol
66 mouse embryos were isolated and transferred individually in low protein binding 96 well plates, containing 5 µL lysis buffer (PreOmics, Planegg, Germany). The plate was incubated at 95°C for 2 minutes and centrifuged at 100 g for 1 minute. Lysed proteins were digested with 5 ng trypsin (1 ng/µL in ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, Roche, Basel, Switzerland) at 37°C for 3 hours. Samples were acidified by adding 15 µL 1% formic acid in water and then put on a rocking platform at 300 rpm for 1 minute to mix and centrifuged at 100 g for another minute.  The digests were loaded onto Evotip Pure (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) tips according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptide separation was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Evosep One, Evosep) using the Aurora Elite column (15 cm x 75 µm ID, C18 1.7 µm beads, IonOpticks, Victoria, Australia) with the 40 samples a day method (Whisper_100_40SPD). The LC system was online coupled to a timsTOF SCP mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) applying the data-independent acquisition (DIA) with parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) method.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed with Dia-NN (v1.8.1) and searched against an in silico predicted mouse spectra library. The “match between run” feature was used, the mass search range set to m/z 400 to 1000.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryonic stem cells, Pluripotency, Embryonic diapause, Mtor inhibition

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Genetik Aydan Bulut-Karslioglu, PhD Ihnestraße 63-73 14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Aydan Bulut-Karslioglu
Max-Planck-Institut für molekulare Genetik Aydan Bulut-Karslioglu, PhD Ihnestraße 63-73 14195 Berlin, Germany


