### Accession
PXD015062

### Title
FICD activity and AMPylation remodelling modulate human neurogenesis

### Description
The AMPylation is novel protein post-translation modification. In consist of attachment of the adenosine monophosphate onto the serine, threonine or tyrosine amino acid residues of the protein. This process is catalysed by bacterial effectors or in human by protein FICD (also called HYPE) which contain conserved fic domain. In our study we have focused on identification of the unknown AMPylated proteins and their function in human cells (HeLa, A549, SH-SY5Y, iPSCs, NPCs and neurons) and cerebral organoids (COs). For this purpose we designed and synthesized the small molecule N6-propargyl phosphoramidate adenosine (pro-N6pA) which was used for in situ labelling of the AMPylation in cells and COs. Subsequnetly the the propargyl tag was employed for preparation of chemical-proteomic samples which were measured by LC-MS/MS. This approach confirmed the known AMPylation of heat shock protein HSPA5 and found diverse group of novel AMPylation targets. Several cathepsins found as AMPylation targets were further characterized by identification of AMP binding site. Based on our chemical proteomic data we found out that neurons and neuronal like cells contain distinct AMPylatino pattern from other studied cell types. This also suggested the importance of the AMPylation in these cell types which were then studied in cerebral organoids by overexpressing the FICD wt and E234G highly active mutant. This led to the accelerated differentiation of progenitors into the neurons. Overall our approach is suitable for identification of the AMPylated proteins in living cells and led to characterization of FICD function.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical-proteomics. Enriched proteins were on beads digested in 200 μL digestion buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea). Proteins were reduced (0.2 μL 1 M DTT, 45 min, 25 °C) and alkylated (2 μL 550mM IAA, 30 min, 25 °C, in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 0.8 μL 1M DTT and incubation for 30 min at 25 °C. Proteins were pre-digested with 1 μL LysC (Wako) at 25 °C for 4 h. 600 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and the proteins were digested overnight with 1.5 μL sequencing grade trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) at 37 °C. The following day the beads were settled and the supernatant was acidified with 10 μL formic acid to a pH of 2 – 3. Peptides were desalted. For dimethyl labelling (DiMe) peptides were labelled with either labelling buffer “light” (90 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5, 30 mM NaBH3CN, 0.2% (v/v) CH2O) or labelling buffer “heavy” (90 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5, 30 mM NaBD3CN, 0.2% (v/v) 13CDO). For label-free quantification (LFQ) the labelling step was omitted. For DiMe DMSO and probe-treated samples were combined and dried by lyophilization. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 μL 1% (v/v) formic acid, prepared for mass spectrometry by filtering through a membrane filter.  Site identification using TEV-cleavable linker. HeLa or SH-SY5Y cells or COs lysates (HeLa 3.6 and 16 mg, SH-SY5Y 6 mg, COs 8 mg of total protein amount) in total volume of 2 mL 0.2% (w/v) SDS in PBS were supplemented with 20 μL azide-TEV-biotin (10 mM in DMSO, gift from B. F. Cravatt laboratory), 20 μL TCEP (53 mM in ddH2O) and 2.5 μL TBTA (83.5 mM in DMSO). Samples were gently vortexed and the click reaction was initiated by the addition of 40 μL CuSO4 solution (50 mM in ddH2O). The mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 1.5 h. Afterwards, proteins were precipitated in acetone at -20 °C overnight. Protein pellet washing, enrichment and on-beads trypsin digest was done as described above using 100 uL of avidin-beads slurry and digestion buffer without the thiourea. After the overnight incubation with trypsin, the beads were transferred onto the membrane filter (Ultrafree-MC and –LC, Durapore PVDF-0.22 μm, Merck Millipore) and spun down at 1,000 g for 1 min. The flow through was processed as described above for trypsin digest. Beads loaded on a membrane filter were washed and beads were resuspended in 150 μL of TEV buffer and incubated with agitation at 29 °C with 5 μL of AcTEV protease (10 U/μL, Invitrogen) overnight. Supernatnt was collected and after addition of 4 μL of formic acid it was desalted on stage tips (double C18 layer, Empore disc-C18, 47MM, Agilent Technologies).  Mass Spectrometry. MS analysis was either performed on an Orbitrap Fusion or an Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% TFA and separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) constantly heated at 50 °C. The gradient was run from 5-32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid during a 152 min method (7 min 5%, 105 min to 22%, 10 min to 32%, 10 min to 90%, 10 min wash at 90%, 10 min equilibration at 5%) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For measurements of chemical-proteomic samples on the fusion instrument survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (target value 2e5). Most intense ions of charge states 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation at a collision energy of 30%. The instrument was operated in top speed mode and spectra acquired in the ion trap with the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (target value 1e4). The option to inject ions for all available parallelizable time was enabled. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 60 s. Real-time mass calibration was based on internally generated fluoranthene ions. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.0sp2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Binding site identifications of ampylated peptides were performed on the fusion instrument. The scan range for survey scans in the orbitrap was changed to 300-1,700 with an AGC target value of 4e5. HCD fragmentation was performed at a collision energy of 27% and spectra first acquired in the ion trap with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and an AGC target value of 2e4. Peptides with targeted masses of m/z 501.28, 251.14 and 167.76 (adenine_TEV singly, doubly and triply charged), as well as m/z 615.31, 308.16 and 205.77 (adenosine_TEV singly, doubly and triply charged) were further selected for ETD fragmentation while highest charge states were prioritized. ETD fragmentation scans were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 1,000 and an AGC target value of 2e5.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant. Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software with the Andromeda search engine. Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, 7th July 2015, including isoforms). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1 % FDR both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. LFQ quantification or DiMe was used as described for each sample. For AMPylation site identification spectra were searched for AMP conjugated with TEV tag (+694.2700).  Perseus. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant result table proteinGroups.txt was done with Perseus 1.5.1.6. Putative contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Dimethyl-labelling ratios or normalized LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, hits with less than 3 valid values in each group were removed and -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two-sided one sample Student’s t-test over replicates with the initial significance level of p = 0.05 adjustment by the multiple testing correction method of Benjamini and Hochberg (FDR = 0.05) for DiMe or using the volcano plot function for LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational modification (PTM) of proteins represents an important cellular mechanism for controlling diverse functions such as signalling, localisation or protein-protein interactions. AMPylation (also termed adenylylation) has recently been discovered as a prevalent PTM for regulating protein activity. In human cells AMPylation has been exclusively studied with the FICD protein. Here we investigate the role of AMPylation in human neurogenesis by introducing a cell-permeable propargyl adenosine pronucleotide probe to infiltrate cellular AMPylation pathways and report distinct modifications in intact cancer cell lines, human-derived stem cells, neural progenitor cells (NPCs), neurons and cerebral organoids (COs) via LC-MS/MS as well as imaging methods. A total of 162 AMP modified proteins were identified. FICD-dependent AMPylation remodelling accelerates differentiation of neural progenitor cells into mature neurons in COs, demonstrating a so far unknown trigger of human neurogenesis.

### Keywords
Cerebral organoids., Ficd, Neuronal development, Phosphoramidate prodrugs, Ampylation, Chemical-proteomics

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Technical University of Munich Lichtenbergstraße 4 D-85748 Garching Germany

### Submitter
Pavel Kielkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Technical University of Munich Lichtenbergstraße 4 D-85748 Garching Germany


