### Accession
PXD024674

### Title
The Trans-omics Landscape of COVID-19

### Description
System-wide molecular characteristics of COVID-19, especially in those patients without comorbidities, have not been fully investigated. We compared extensive molecular profiles of blood samples from 231 COVID-19 patients, ranging from asymptomatic to critically ill, importantly excluding those with any comorbidities. Amongst the major findings, asymptomatic patients were characterized by highly activated anti-virus interferon, T/natural killer (NK) cell activation, and transcriptional upregulation of inflammatory cytokine mRNAs. However, given very abundant RNA binding proteins (RBPs), these cytokine mRNAs could be effectively destabilized hence preserving normal cytokine levels. In contrast, in critically ill patients, cytokine storm due to RBPs inhibition and tryptophan metabolites accumulation contributed to T/NK cell dysfunction. A machine-learning model was constructed which accurately stratified the COVID-19 severities based on their multi-omics features. Overall, our analysis provides insights into COVID-19 pathogenesis and identifies targets for intervening in treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The sera samples were inactivated at 56°C water bath for 30min and followed by processing with the Cleanert PEP 96-well plate (Agela, China). According to the manufacturer’s instructions, high-abundance proteins under a denaturing condition were removed (Lin et al., 2020). The Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, USA) was used to determine the final protein concentration. The proteins were extracted by the 8M urea and subsequently reduced by a final concentration of 10mM Dithiothreitol at 37°C water bath for 30min and alkylated to a final concentration of 55mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30min in the darkroom. The extracted proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega, USA) in 10 KD FASP filter (Sartorious, U.K.) with a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1 and eluded with 70% acetonitrile (ACN), dried in the freeze dryer.

### Data Protocol
DIA (Data Independent Acquisition) strategy was performed by Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) coupled with an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA). The 1μg peptides mixed with iRT (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were injected into the liquid chromatography (LC) and enriched and desalted in trap column. Then peptides were separated by self-packed analytical column (150μm internal diameter, 1.8μm particle size, 35cm column length) at the flowrate of 500 nL/min. The mobile phases consisted of (A) H2O/ACN (98/2,v/v) (0.1% formic acid); and (B) ACN/H2O (98/2,v/v) (0.1% formic acid) with 120 min elution gradient (min, %B): 0, 5; 5, 5; 45, 25; 50, 35; 52, 80; 55, 80; 55.5, 5; 65, 5. For HF settings, the ion source voltage was 1.9kV; MS1 range was 400-1250m/z at the resolution of 120,000 with the 50 ms max injection time(MIT). 400-1250 m/z was equally divided into 45 continuous windows MS2 scans at 30,000 resolution with the automatic MIT and automatic gain control (AGC) of 1E6. MS2 normalized collision energy was distributed to 22.5, 25, 27.5. The raw data was analyzed by Spectronaut software (12.0.20491.14.21367) with the default settings against the self-built plasma spectral library which achieved deeper proteome quantification. The FDR cutoff for both peptide and protein level were set as 1%. Next, the R package 738 MSstats (Choi et al., 2014) finished log2 transformation, normalization, and p-value calculation.

### Publication Abstract
The outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a global health emergency. Various omics results have been reported for COVID-19, but the molecular hallmarks of COVID-19, especially in those patients without comorbidities, have not been fully investigated. Here we collect blood samples from 231 COVID-19 patients, prefiltered to exclude those with selected comorbidities, yet with symptoms ranging from asymptomatic to critically ill. Using integrative analysis of genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic and lipidomic profiles, we report a trans-omics landscape for COVID-19. Our analyses find neutrophils heterogeneity between asymptomatic and critically ill patients. Meanwhile, neutrophils over-activation, arginine depletion and tryptophan metabolites accumulation correlate with T cell dysfunction in critical patients. Our multi-omics data and characterization of peripheral blood from COVID-19 patients may thus help provide clues regarding pathophysiology of and potential therapeutic strategies for COVID-19.

### Keywords
Covid-19

### Affiliations
Doctor at Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
BGI

### Submitter
Panhong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ding Ma
Doctor at Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China


