### Accession
PXD019101

### Title
CX-MS of DSSO-cross-linked A2M - Structural investigations of human α2-macroglobulin elucidate its native conformation and inhibitory mechanism

### Description
Human A2M was cross-linked with DSSO in its native, methylamine-treated, and trypsin-cleaved conformations. The monomer, dimer, and tetramer SDS-PAGE gel bands of native A2M were analyzed by in-gel digest. Total protein digests of all three conformations were analyzed and compared.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare cross-linked peptides for mass spectrometry, an in-gel digest approach was used. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE and the relevant bands were excised. The bands were shrunk in acetonitrile, reduced using DTT and alkylated using iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with 1:40 w/w MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, at 37o. Peptides were extracted from the gel bands and deglycosylated using PNGase F (New England Biolabs) for 1 hour at 37o. At this point, a third of the sample was set aside (as the trypsin-digested sample) and the other two thirds were additionally digested using 1:30 w/w bovine pancreatic α-chymotrypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or endoproteinase GluC (New England Biolabs) for 3 hours at 37o. Prior to MS analysis, peptides were purified using homemade C18 stage tips.  LC-MS3 peptide analysis was performed using online reverse phase separation of peptides on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a homemade C18 column and an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running an MS2_MS3 method. At the MS2 level, peptides were fragmented by 20% energy collision-induced dissociation (CID); if the characteristic mass difference of DSSO fragment doublets was detected, these fragments were isolated for MS3 using 35% energy CID. Each sample was analyzed over two sets of 5 replicates each; the first set of replicates used data-dependent selection of precursors for MS2, while the second set used a targeted inclusion list of all cross-linked peptides identified for A2M using the same protease mix as the sample.

### Data Protocol
Cross-linked peptides were identified in the MS data files with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4 for samples digested with trypsin and GluC or trypsin alone, and version 2.3 for samples digested with both trypsin and chymotrypsin, as 2.4 cannot handle 4< substrate residues) and the XlinkX node, using established processing and consensus workflows for analysis of MS2_MS3 spectra with MS-cleavable cross-links (20). The false discovery rate was set to 0.01, 3 missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic samples and 5 missed cleavages were allowed for the combination digests, and methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation (to account for removed N-glycans) were included as variable modifications. A2M’s original N-terminal at position 24 and neo-N-termini in the bait region after tryptic cleavage (positions 705, 716, and 720) were included as possible cross-linking sites.

### Publication Abstract
Human &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin (A2M) is the most characterized protease inhibitor in the alpha-macroglobulin (&#x3b1;M) superfamily, but the structure of its native conformation has not been determined. Here, we combined negative stain electron microscopy (EM), small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), and cross-linking-mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to investigate native A2M and its collapsed conformations that are obtained through aminolysis of its thiol ester by methylamine or cleavage of its bait region by trypsin. The combined interpretation of these data resulted in a model of the native A2M tetramer and its conformational changes. Native A2M consists of two crescent-shaped disulfide-bridged subunit dimers, which face toward each other and surround a central hollow space. In native A2M, interactions across the disulfide-bridged dimers are minimal, with a single major interface between the linker (LNK) regions of oppositely positioned subunits. Bait region cleavage induces both intrasubunit domain repositioning and an altered configuration of the disulfide-bridged dimer. These changes collapse the tetramer into a more compact conformation, which encloses an interior protease-trapping cavity. A recombinant A2M with a modified bait region was used to map the bait region's position in native A2M by XL-MS. A second recombinant A2M introduced an intersubunit disulfide into the LNK region, demonstrating the predicted interactions between these regions in native A2M. Altogether, our native A2M model provides a structural foundation for understanding A2M's protease-trapping mechanism, its conformation-dependent receptor interactions, and the dissociation of native A2M into dimers due to inflammatory oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Human a2m dsso

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Seandean Harwood

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark


