### Accession
PXD028744

### Title
Halofuginone, a tRNA-synthetase inhibitor, decreases bulk protein synthesis independently of the integrated stress response

### Description
The integrated stress response (ISR), a vital homeostatic pathway, is an emerging therapeutic target for a broad range of clinical indications. Halofuginone (HF) is a phase 2 clinical compound that induces the ISR by inhibiting the glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase (EPRS). Here we report that although HF induces the predicted canonical ISR adaptations consisting of attenuation of protein synthesis and gene expression reprogramming, the former surprisingly occurs independently of GCN2 and eIF2 phosphorylation. Proline supplementation rescues the observed HF-induced changes indicating that they result from an on-target effect due to inhibition of EPRS. We find that attenuation of translation initiation through GCN2-to-eIF2 signaling is not robust enough to prevent translation elongation defects caused by HF. Exploiting this vulnerability, we show that cancer cells presenting an increased proline dependency are sensitized to HF. This work provides novel insights on ISR signaling and a molecular framework to guide the targeted development of HF.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown on 150 x 20 mm plates and were treated with indicated concentrations of HF one day after plating. After the treatment, cells were washed and scraped in ice cold PBS and spun at 4°C for 10 min at 12,000 rpm. Cell pellet was resuspended in urea buffer (8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4) and then sonicated. The lysate was centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 12,000 rpm. Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (#23250, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to measure protein concentration in the supernatant. Protein samples in urea buffer were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The samples were then diluted to 4 M urea and digested with Lys-C (Promega) for 4 h at 25°C. Next, the samples were further diluted to 1.6 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) over night, at 30°C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Any precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 8 min. The supernatants were desalted using home-made C18 stage tips (3M Empore) filled with poros R3 (Applied Biosystems) resin. The stage tips were equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile (MeCN)/0.5% FA followed by 0.5% FA. Bound peptides were eluted with 30-80% MeCN/0.5% FA and lyophilized. Dried peptide mixtures from each condition were resuspended in 200 mM Hepes, pH 8.3. TMT 10plex/16plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), reconstituted according to manufacturer’s instruction, was added and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The labeling reaction was then terminated by incubation with 5% hydroxylamine for 0.5 h. The labeled peptides were pooled into a single sample and desalted using the same stage tips method as above. About 200 μg of the labeled peptides were separated on an off-line, high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) using XBridge BEH130 C18, 5 µm, 2.1 x 150 mm (Waters) column with XBridge BEH C18 5 µm Van Guard Cartridge, connected to an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). Peptides were separated with a gradient of 1-90% B (A: 5% MeCN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8; B: MeCN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, [9:1]) in 1 h at a flow rate of 250 µl/min. A total of 54 fractions were collected, combined into 18 fractions and lyophilised. Dried peptides were resuspended in 1% MeCN/0.5% FA and desalted using C18 stage tips and ready for mass spectrometry analysis. The fractionated peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75μm×25 cm, nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (Waters). Peptides were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% FA). Eluted peptides were introduced directly via a nanospray ion source into a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quardrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent mode, performed survey full-scan (MS, m/z = 380-1600) with a resolution of 70,000, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35,000 and NCE of 33% for TMT10plex (29% for TMTpro 16plex). MS target values of 3e6 and MS2 target values of 1e5 were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40s. The acquired raw files from LC-MS/MS were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.6.6.0). MS/MS spectra were quantified with reporter ion MS2 from TMT 10plex and TMTpro 16plex experiments and searched against Human Reviewed and Mus musculus (downloaded in 2019), UniProt Fasta databases, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and STY phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Protein quantification requirements were set at 1 unique and razor peptide. In the identification tap, second peptides and match between runs were not selected. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant output file, proteinGroups.txt and the Phospho (STY) sites.txt were then processed with Perseus software (v 1.6.6.0). After uploading the matrix, the data was filtered, to remove identifications from reverse database, identifications with modified peptide only, and common contaminants. The localization probability of phospho (STY) .txt was also filtered to greater or equal to 0.75. Both sets of data with the reporter intensities of ‘0’ were converted to NAN and exported as text file for further data analysis. For proteomics data analysis, the reporter ion intensities were multiplied by global scaling factor in order to correct for sample loading differences between conditions. Differential protein abundance between groups was then assessed using the Bioconductor package edgeR (Robinson et al., 2010). The gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using online tool DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) (Huang et al., 2009a, 2009b).

### Publication Abstract
Halofuginone (HF) is a phase 2 clinical compound that inhibits the glutamyl-prolyl-tRNA synthetase (EPRS) thereby inducing the integrated stress response (ISR). Here, we report that halofuginone indeed triggers the predicted canonical ISR adaptations, consisting of attenuation of protein synthesis and gene expression reprogramming. However, the former is surprisingly atypical and occurs to a similar magnitude in wild-type cells, cells lacking GCN2 and those incapable of phosphorylating eIF2&#x3b1;. Proline supplementation rescues the observed HF-induced changes indicating that they result from inhibition of EPRS. The failure of the GCN2-to-eIF2&#x3b1; pathway to elicit a measurable protective attenuation of translation initiation allows translation elongation defects to prevail upon HF treatment. Exploiting this vulnerability of the ISR, we show that cancer cells with increased proline dependency are more sensitive to halofuginone. This work reveals that the consequences of EPRS inhibition are more complex than anticipated and provides novel insights into ISR signaling, as well as a molecular framework to guide the targeted development of halofuginone as a therapeutic.

### Keywords
Gcn2, Translation, Integrated stress response, Stress responses, Trna synthetase

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC_Laboratory of Molecular Biology Neurobiology Division

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Bertolotti
MRC_Laboratory of Molecular Biology Neurobiology Division


