### Accession
PXD028283

### Title
¬Single cell transcriptomics of human iPSC differentiation dynamics reveal a core network of Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second-most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons (mDA) in the midbrain. The underlying mechanisms are only partly understood and there is no treatment to reverse PD progression. Here, we investigated the disease mechanism using mDA neurons obtained through differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) carrying the ILE368ASN mutation within the PINK1 gene. Single-cell RNA sequencing (RNAseq) and gene expression analysis of a PINK1 and a control cell line identified genes differentially expressed during mDA neuron differentiation. Network analysis revealed that these genes form a core network, members of which interact with all known 19 protein-coding Parkinson’s disease-associated genes. This core network encompasses key PD-associated pathways, including ubiquitination, mitochondrial, protein processing, RNA metabolism, and vesicular transport. Proteomics analysis showed a consistent alteration in proteins of dopamine metabolism, validating the manifestation of the affected neuronal phenotype. Our findings suggest the existence of a network onto which pathways associated with PD pathology converge, and offers new interpretation of the phenotypic heterogeneity of PD.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate in 50mM sodium bicarbonate pH8. After sonication, samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min at 16000 g. Supernatants were recovered and quantified using PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (23225, Thermo Scientific).  Protein extracts (10g) were reduced with 10mM DTT for 45 min at 37°C, incubated 15 min at room temperature, then alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. Proteins were futher digested overnight at 37°C with 0.2g of trypsin/Lys-C Mix (V507A, Promega). Samples were acidified in 1% formic acid and centrifuged for 10 min at 12000 g. Supernatants were recovered and peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak tC18 Elution Plates (Waters, 186002318), dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 25 L of 1 % Acetonitrile / 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid.  Following quantification by nanodrop, each sample (200ng) was analysed by mass spectrometry. The LCMS setup consisted of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC chromatography system configured in column switching mode. The mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The loading phase consisted in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water. The LC system was operated with a Thermo pepmap100 C18 (2µm particles) 75µm×15cm analytical column (loading 5ul/min; analytical 300nl/min). The loading column consisted of Thermo pepmap100 C18 (3µm particles) 75µm×2cm. Samples were separated by a linear gradient ranging from 2% B to 35% B 66 min and sprayed into the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex (Thermo Scientific) ion source. MS acquisition was performed on Q Exactive-HF (Thermo Scientific) operated in data dependent acquisition mode. MS cycle (AGC MS1 3e6; AGC MS2 1e5) consisted of a high resolution survey scan (60 000 at 200 m/z) followed by the fragmentation of the top 12 most intense peptides at a resolution of 15 000 at 200 m/z. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented peptide ions was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed with the MaxQuant software package version 1.6.17.0129. The minimum ratio for LFQ was set to 2. An FDR <1% was applied for peptides and proteins. A human Uniprot database (July 2018) was used to perform the Andromeda search130. Oxidized methionine and acetylated N-termini were set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Peptide tolerance was 20 ppm. MS intensities were normalized by the MaxLFQ algorithm131 implemented in MaxQuant while using the match-between-runs feature.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second-most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons (mDA) in the midbrain. The underlying mechanisms are only partly understood and there is no treatment to reverse PD progression. Here, we investigated the disease mechanism using mDA neurons differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) carrying the ILE368ASN mutation within the PINK1 gene, which is strongly associated with PD. Single-cell RNA sequencing (RNAseq) and gene expression analysis of a PINK1-ILE368ASN and a control cell line identified genes differentially expressed during mDA neuron differentiation. Network analysis revealed that these genes form a core network, members of which interact with all known 19 protein-coding Parkinson's disease-associated genes. This core network encompasses key PD-associated pathways, including ubiquitination, mitochondrial function, protein processing, RNA metabolism, and vesicular transport. Proteomics analysis showed a consistent alteration in proteins of dopamine metabolism, indicating a defect of dopaminergic metabolism in PINK1-ILE368ASN neurons. Our findings suggest the existence of a network onto which pathways associated with PD pathology converge, and offers an inclusive interpretation of the phenotypic heterogeneity of PD.

### Keywords
Parkinson’s disease; ipscs, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Institute of Health
LIH

### Submitter
Gunnar Dittmar

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Luxembourg Institute of Health


