### Accession
PXD026646

### Title
LFQ-proteomic on bbs1 zebrafish photoreceptor outer segments

### Description
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a ciliopathy characterized by retinal dystrophy, intellectual disability, polydactyly, obesity and renal anomalies. In photoreceptors (PR), light sensation occurs in outer segments (OSs), which are specialized primary cilia. BBS1, the major BBS gene, is part of a protein complex called “BBSome”, which is involved in intracellular protein transport. However, the precise function of BBS1/BBSome in controlling trafficking of ciliary proteins in PRs remains unclear.  To investigate the role of the BBSome in photoreceptors, we conducted a label free quantitative proteomic investigation on the protein contend of isolated adult mutant and control outer segments. We revealed that a Bbs1 KO results in the loss of the entire BBSome from OSs. Besides the loss of the BBSome we found an overall accumulation of non-outer segment proteins in the OS. A majority of these proteins were membrane-associated, supporting the role of BBS1/the BBSome in controlling ciliary transport of membrane-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: The retina of adult bbs1 mutant and control zebrafish was dissected and photoreceptor outer segment were isolated and enriched using sucrose gradient centrifugation. Samples were prepared for MS analysis by using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany) with an updated version of the protocol. Briefly, the provided samples were solubilized in ‘Lyse’ buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 30 s setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 85%. Then the samples were transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 µl of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60 min of incubation at 37°C the digestion was stopped with 100 µl of Stop solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. 1 µl of iRT peptides (Biognosys) at 1:100 dilution were added to each samples. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis: Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 3 μl of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1’400 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15’000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 250’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot zebrafish reference proteome (taxonomy 7955, canonical version from 2019-07-01), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled, and a 2-minute window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on peptide intensity values reported in the MaxQuant generated peptides.txt file, using linear mixed-effects models. Pre-processing of the peptide intensities reported in the peptides.txt file was performed as follows: intensities equal zero are removed, non-zero intensities were log2 transformed and modified using robust z-score transformation to remove systematic differences between samples. For each protein, a mixed-effects model was fitted to the peptide intensities using the R-package lme4 [lme4]. We used the following model formula: transformedIntensity ~ Background_ * Knockout_ + (1 | peptide_Id), to model the factors Background and Knockout as well as their interactions, and modelling the peptide measurements as random effects. Fold changes and p-values were estimated based on this model using the R-packge lmerTest [lmerTest]. Next, p-values are adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure to obtain the false discovery rates (FDR). In order to estimate fold-changes of proteins for which mixed-effects model could not be fitted because of an excess of missing measurements, the following procedure was applied: The mean intensity of a peptide over all samples in a condition was computed. For the proteins with no observation in one condition, we imputed the peptide intensities using the mean of the 10% smallest average peptide intensities determined in step one. Then the fold changes between conditions were estimated for each peptide, and the median of the peptide fold change estimates was used to provide a per protein fold change. No p-values were estimated in this case.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bbs, Outer segment, Lfq-p, Photoreceptor, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Genetics, Bachmann-Lab, University of Zurich
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Markus Masek

### Lab Head
Dr Ruxandra Bachmann- Gagescu
Institute of Medical Genetics, Bachmann-Lab, University of Zurich


