### Accession
PXD003398

### Title
Global quantitative proteomes of PrP-deficient mouse models

### Description
A popular method for studying the function of a given protein is to generate and characterize a suitable model deficient for its expression. Most researchers select mouse models for this purpose and investigate proteins of interest in the tissue they are most associated with. For the prion protein (PrP), best known for its role in several invariably fatal neurodegenerative diseases of humans and animals, a natural choice, therefore, would be to undertake such studies with mouse brain samples. We recently documented the surprising observation that PrP deficiency caused a loss or enhancement of NCAM1 polysialylation, dependent on the cell model used. To identify possible causes for this disparity, we set out to systematically investigate the consequence of PrP deficiency on the global proteome in brain tissue and in four distinct cell models. Here we report that PrP deficiency has no discernible impact on the global brain proteome but causes robust but surprisingly divergent changes to the global proteomes of cell models. Our data suggest that careful investigations in cell models, rather than mouse tissue, are the way forward for elucidating the molecular function of PrP.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were euthanized and their brains rapidly dissected from the skull. Brains or cells were homogenized in SDS-containing Lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 62.5 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 8.0; preheated to 90°C), with the aid of 1.0 mm zirconia beads and the Mini-BeadBeater-8 (Biospec Products Inc., Oklahoma, USA). Following three cycles of 1 minute bead beading, the lysates were further incubated at 90°C to deactivate residual enzymatic activities in the extracts. Protein levels were adjusted by BCA colorimetric assay (Thermo Scientific, Nepean, Ontario, Canada) before sample preparation for global proteome analyses. Protein precipitation, denaturation, alkylation and digestion was performed as previously described (Mehrabian et al., 2014, PLoS One, PMID: 25490046).  MS grade trypsin was from Thermo Scientific. Tryptic peptides were covalently modified with the TMTsixplex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo Scientific) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer. Following C18 and SCX (zip tip) purification, TMT labeled tryptic digests were separated on an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and simultaneously analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.  Samples were loaded directly onto the analytical column by the integrated autosampler.  Peptide separation was conducted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 240 minute acetonitrile gradient on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 micrometer internal diameter, 25 cm long, 2 micrometer particle size with 100 Å pores). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water or in acetonitrile containing 5% (v/v) water respectively.  In each separation the mobile phase B content of the eluent was brought from 0 to 30% over a 180 minute period then to 100% over 60 minutes.  The column was washed for 20 minutes with 100% mobile phase B after each separation. All mass spectra were collected in positive ion mode with the nanoflow electrospray ionization source held at a potential of 1850 V, an S-Lens RF value of 60% and an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 degrees Celsius.  The data acquisition cycle time was fixed at 3 seconds and consisted of a single 120,000 resolution precursor ion scan from m/z 400 to 2,000 on the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by MS/MS scans on the linear ion trap and Orbitrap MS3 scans from m/z 100 to 500 at 60,000 resolution.  Only ions with charge states between 2 and 7 having intensities over 5,000 counts were selected for MS/MS.  Dynamic exclusion was applied for 6,000 seconds to precursor ions having been analyzed by MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences, post-translational modifications and protein identities were determined from LC-MS data using both the Mascot server (version 2.4.1) and Sequest HT search engines operated in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288).  All MS/MS data was searched against version 3.87 of the Mus musculus IPI database, which contained 26627161 amino acid residues within 59534 protein entries (release date September 27, 2011).  False discovery rate estimation was conducted using the Proteome Discoverer Percolator algorithm with validation based on q-value.  Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Dynamic modifications considered were asparagine and glutamine deamidation, methionine oxidation, cysteine pyridylethylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine.  The TMT tag (229.163 Da) was set as a fixed modification at lysine and amino-terminal residues.  Only tryptic peptides between 400 and 6,000 Da in mass, with up to one missed cleavage site, were considered in the search.  Peptide assignments were restricted to sequences of 6 to 144 residues.  Peak areas from the six TMT reporter ions in MS3 data were used for peptide quantification.  Isotopic purity correction factors for each reporter ion were used in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Global proteome, Mouse, Prion protein, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, Ontario M5T2S8, Canada.  Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S1A8, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Gerold Schmitt-Ulms

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, Ontario M5T2S8, Canada.  Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S1A8, Canada


