### Accession
PXD016318

### Title
Profiling of Subclass-Specific IgG Glycosylation in Colorectal Cancer

### Description
Changes in IgG glycosylation have been reported to be associated with colorectal cancer (CRC), but the alteration in specific subclass of IgG is unknown. Herein, we optimized five common IgG glycopeptides enrichment methods to acquire comprehensive profiling of IgG glycoproteomics in CRC. Notably, incomplete tryptic digestion of IgG occurred when using ordinary ratio of protease to protein, which significantly impacted the final statistical analysis of association between IgG glycosylation and CRC. We introduced a method based on two-step enzymatic digestion, enabling the complete digestion of IgG glycopeptides and further improving the detection intensity of the target glycopeptides. By this approach, total 47 IgG glycopeptides can be identified by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. Following rapid and automatic data processing through the self-developed program, we observed that IgG1_H3N4F1 and IgG1_H3N4 were substantially increased in CRC, while IgG1_H5N5F1, IgG1_H5N4F1S1and IgG2_H5N4F1 were markedly decreased. Strikingly, these four glycopeptides were continually significantly changed in early and late stages of CRC. Further evaluation of the diagnostic performance showed they all obtained a fair performance in discriminating the patients from the normal. In terms of the glycan features, it demonstrated that CRC progression associates with the increased agalactosylation, and the decreased digalactosylation and galactosylation per antenna on diantennay glycans of IgG1 and IgG2. Concurrently, the decreased sialylation of IgG1 was strongly correlated with CRC. Moreover, tumor-specific glycosylation analysis showed that the alterations of subclass-specific IgG glycosylation were more significant in colon cancer, and no obvious difference between colon and rectal cancer was found. More importantly, all these findings were validated in an independent cohort. This two-step enzymatic approach is crucial to explore the relationship between the disease progression and IgG glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Study populations, IgG purification, Tryptic digestion, Glycopeptide enrichment, MALDI-MS analysis, LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For the quantitation of IgG-Fc glycopeptides by LC-MS/MS, not only IgG1 and IgG2 but also IgG4 glycopeptide signals were detected through MS/MS identification. Peak list was exported as text including observed retention time (Tr), peak area, height and width. All txt files were directly imported in MATLAB (MathWorks, USA) followed by batch processing resulting in a txt file of summary list, including sample name, area of XIC and corresponding percentage of each glycoform in each subclass. Notably, it takes less than 10 seconds to finish the processing of one dataset, such as the cancer group (N=46) in validation set. The file of MATLAB code, AreaProportion_simple, was available in supplementary material. The abundance of each glycopeptide was normalized by summing all peak area to 100% in the specific IgG subclass. Glycoproteomic characterization of CRC was conducted by relative quantitation of individual IgG glycopeptide and glycan structural features.The glycan features were calculated by grouping together glycopeptides with similar glycan structure, including bisecting GlcNAc (N), core-fucosylation (F), galactosylation (G) and sialylation (S).  Statistical analysis was performed using Prism software (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA) and are exported as the mean and standard deviation (SD). A two-tailed, Mann-Whitney U test was used to assess the statistical significance between normal controls and colorectal disease patients，including patients with benign, cancer, early stages or late stages. P value less than 0.05 was set as significant. The accuracy of the variables for diagnosis of CRC patients in different stages was evaluated by ROC curve where AUC score less than 0.3 or more than 0.7 was considered to be clinical significance.

### Publication Abstract
Esophageal cancer (EC), gastric cancer (GC), and colorectal cancer (CRC) are three major digestive tract tumors with higher morbidity and mortality due to significant molecular heterogeneity. Altered IgG glycosylation has been observed in inflammatory activities and disease progression, and the IgG glycome profile could be used for disease stratification. However, IgG <i>N</i>-glycome profiles in these three cancers have not been systematically investigated. Herein, subclass-specific IgG glycosylation in CRC, GC, and EC was comprehensively characterized by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. It was found that IgG1 sialylation was decreased in all three cancers, and the alterations in CRC and EC may be subclass-specific. IgG4 mono-galactosylation was increased in all three cancers, which was a subclass-specific change in all of them. Additionally, glycopeptides of IgG1-H5N5, IgG2-H4N3F1, and IgG4-H4N4F1 could distinguish all three cancer groups from controls with fair diagnostic performance. Furthermore, bioinformatics verified the differential expression of relevant glycosyltransferase genes in cancer progression. Significantly, those three gastrointestinal cancers could be distinguished from each other using subclass-specific IgG glycans. These findings demonstrated the spatial and temporal diversity of IgG <i>N</i>-glycome among digestive cancers, increasing our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of EC, GC, and CRC pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Colorectal, Serum igg, Lc-ms/ms, Complete tryptic digestion

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, N0. 1037 Luoyudong Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan 430074
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Si Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Liu
Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, N0. 1037 Luoyudong Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan 430074


