### Accession
PXD035941

### Title
Cryo-electron microscopy unravels microtubule inner protein networks reinforcing mammalian sperm flagella

### Description
To find and fuse with the egg, mammalian sperm must complete an arduous voyage through the female reproductive tract. This odyssey is powered by the sperm tail, a specialized motile cilium. Mammalian sperm tails are reinforced at the molecular scale with sperm-specific microtubule inner proteins (sperm-MIPs), but the identities of these sperm-MIPs are unknown. Here, we report high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy structures of bovine sperm doublet microtubules (DMTs), allowing us to identify many sperm-MIPs. We also resolve structures of singlet MTs in the endpiece, revealing MIPs shared between singlet and doublet MTs. We demonstrate that at least two sperm-MIPs bind and stabilize MTs in vitro. Our structures shed light on ciliary diversity across cell types and provide structural frameworks for understanding molecular underpinnings of male infertility

### Sample Protocol
Cross-Linking, Lysis, Digestion, and Peptide Fractionation. All proteomics and XL-MS experiments were performed on Percoll-washed bovine sperm prepared as in article from Leung et al (https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110996118). Each biological replicate contained ∼300×106 cells, each deriving from a different animal. The sperm cells were resuspended in 540 μL of PBS and supplemented with DSSO (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 1 mM. The reaction was incubated for 30 min at 25°C with 700rpm shaking in a ThemoMixer C (Eppendorf) and subsequently quenched for 20 min by adding Tris-HCl (final concentration 50 mM). Cells were centrifuged at 13800×g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was replaced with lysis buffer. Cells were then lysed using the same buffer as in Leung et al (https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110996118) with the help of sonication (2 minutes with UP100H from Hielscher at 80% amplitude). The proteins were then precipitated and resuspended in digestion buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate [Sigma-Aldrich], 5 mM TCEP, and 30 mM CAA). Trypsin and Lys-C proteases were added to a 1:25 and 1:100 ratio (weight/weight), respectively, and protein digestion performed overnight at 37°C shaking at 1300rpm on ThemoMixer C. Peptides were then desalted with Oasis HLB plates (Waters) and fractionated with an Agilent 1200 HPLC pump system (Agilent) coupled to a strong cation exchange (SCX) separation column (Luna SCX 5 μm to 100 Å particles, 50×2 mm, Phenomenex), resulting in 24 fractions. Each fraction was then desalted with OASIS HLB plate. Liquid Chromatography with MS. Before injecting each SCX fraction, 1,000 ng of peptides from each biological replicate were first injected onto an using an Ultimate3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For this classical bottom-up analysis, we used the following parameters as in Krstic et al (DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abh2635): Buffer A consisted of water acidified with 0.1% formic acid, while buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 20% water with 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were first trapped for 1 min at 30 μl/min with 100% buffer A on a trap (0.3 mm by 5 mm with PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific); after trapping, the peptides were separated by a 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm; Agilent Technologies). The gradient was 9 to 40% B in 105 min at 400 nl/min. Buffer B was then raised to 55% in 5 min and increased to 99% for the cleaning step. Peptides were ionized using a spray voltage of 1.9 kV and a capillary heated at 275°C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (350 to 1400 mass/charge ratio) for a maximum injection time of 120 ms at a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106. Up to 25 of the most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. HCD fragmentation was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 15,000 (isolation window of 1.4 Th) and an AGC target value of 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a normalized collision energy of 27%.  The SCX fractions were analysed with same Ultimate HPLC and the same nano-column coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For these runs, we used a gradient from 6 to 39% buffer B over 100 min with specific MS settings for DSSO cross-links: survey MS1 Orbitrap scan at 60,000 resolution from 375 to 1,500, AGC target of 4×105ions and maximum inject time of50 ms and MS2 Orbitrap scan at 30,000 resolution, AGC target of 5×104ions, and maximum inject time of 100 ms for detection of DSSO signature peaks (difference in mass of 37.972 Da). The four ions with this specific difference were analysed with a MS3 Ion Trap scans at AGC target of 2×104ions, maximum inject time of 150 ms for sequencing selected signature peaks (representing the individual peptides).

### Data Protocol
The three raw files obtained with classical bottom-up approach were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17 with all the automatic settings adding Deamidation (N) as dynamic modification against the Bos Taurus reference proteome (Uniprot version of 02/2021 with 37,512 entries). With this search, we were able to calculate intensity-based absolute quantification values and created a smaller FASTA file to use for analysis of cross-linking experiments. Raw files for cross-linked cells were analysed with Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the incorporated XlinkX node for analysis of cross-linked peptides as described by Klykov et al (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41596-018-0074-x ). Data were searched against the smaller FASTA created in house with “MS2_MS3 acquisition strategy”. For the XlinkX search, we selected full tryptic digestion with three maximum missed cleavages, 10 ppm error for MS1, 20ppm for MS2, and 0.5 Da for MS3 in Ion Trap. For modifications, we used static Carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N), and Met-loss (protein N-term). The crosslinked peptides were accepted with a minimum score of 40, minimum score difference of 4, and maximum false discovery rate set to 5%; further standard settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm motility is crucial to reproductive success in sexually reproducing organisms. Impaired sperm movement causes male infertility, which is increasing globally. Sperm are powered by a microtubule-based molecular machine-the axoneme-but it is unclear how axonemal microtubules are ornamented to support motility in diverse fertilization environments. Here, we present high-resolution structures of native axonemal doublet microtubules (DMTs) from sea urchin and bovine sperm, representing external and internal fertilizers. We identify &gt;60 proteins decorating sperm DMTs; at least 15 are sperm associated and 16 are linked to infertility. By comparing DMTs across species and cell types, we define core microtubule inner proteins (MIPs) and analyze evolution of the tektin bundle. We identify conserved axonemal microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) with unique tubulin-binding modes. Additionally, we identify a testis-specific serine/threonine kinase that links DMTs to outer dense fibers in mammalian sperm. Our study provides structural foundations for understanding sperm evolution, motility, and dysfunction at a molecular level.

### Keywords
Crosslinking ms, Tubulin, Sperm, Proteomics, Dsso

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584CH Utrecht, Netherlands. Netherlands Proteomics Center, 3584CH Utrecht, Netherlands.
UCL Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584CH Utrecht, Netherlands. Netherlands Proteomics Center, 3584CH Utrecht, Netherlands.


