### Accession
PXD038939

### Title
DECODING PROTEIN METHYLATION FUNCTION WITH THERMAL STABILITY ANALYSIS

### Description
Protein methylation is emerging as an important modification beyond epigenetics. However, systems-wide analyses of protein methylation function lag behind compared to other modifications. Recently, thermal stability analyses have been developed which provide a proxy of a protein functional status. Here, we show that diverse molecular and functional events closely linked to protein methylation can be revealed by the analysis of thermal stability. Using mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) as a model system, we show that Prmt5 regulates numerous mRNA binding proteins that are enriched in intrinsically disordered regions and involved in liquid-liquid phase separation mechanisms. Our data show for instance that methylation of Prmt5 substrates promotes the formation of stress granules. Moreover, we reveal a novel non-canonical function of Ezh2 in mitotic chromosomes and the organization of the perichromosomal layer and identify Mki67 as a putative novel Ezh2 substrate involved in this process. Our approach provides an opportunity to systematically explore protein methylation function and represents a rich resource for understanding the role of this modification in pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
For full proteome analysis and analysis of methylated peptides, samples were lysed in 5% SDC and digested with Lys-C/trypsin. Methylated peptides were enriched using pan-specific antibodies for each modification. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For the analysis of methyl-transferases and de-methylases by PRM, samples were lysed in 7M urea and digested with Lys-C/trypsin. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For proteome integral solubility analysis, samples were lysed in 0.5% NP-40, treated to different temperatures and centrifuged. To measure total protein abundance, an additional aliquot was lysed with 5% SDS. Proteins were digested with trypsin and peptides were labelled using the TMTpro (Thermo) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The in vitro methylation assays were quenched with 7 M urea in 50 mM HEPES, proteins were trypsin-digested. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the immunoprecipitation assay, samples were lysed in 1% NP40 lysis buffer. Protein were incubated with IgG or Ezh2 antibody overnight at 4oC and then, incubated with Protein A dynabeads. Proteins were on-bead digested with trypsin. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data were analyzed by MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 and DIA-NN respectively, using the standard settings against Mus musculus database.  PRM data were analyzed with Skyline v20.2.0.343. The mProphet model was trained on all the samples based on the second-best peak model and peptides were filtered with q-value <0.01. The intensity values from each peptide were normalized by monitoring 16 additional peptides from housekeeping proteins.  Data were loaded into Prostar (v1.18.5) for further statistical analysis. Missing values were imputed using the algorithms SLSA for partially observed values and DetQuantile for values missing on an entire condition. Differential analysis was done using the empirical Bayes statistics Limma. The FDR was estimated by Benjamini-Hochberg to be below 5%. Enrichment analyses of different proteins subsets were performed using PANTHER database and adjusted by FDR. Alternatively, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was also employed using the pre-ranked algorithm and the log2 ratios as input files. GSEA were adjusted by FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prmt5, Pisa, Protein methylation, Thermal stability, Mouse embryonic stem cells, Ezh2

### Affiliations
Cell Signaling and Clinical Proteomics Group, Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, 48903 Barakaldo (Spain)
CNIO

### Submitter
Cristina Sayago Ferreira

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
Cell Signaling and Clinical Proteomics Group, Biocruces Bizkaia Health Research Institute, 48903 Barakaldo (Spain)


