### Accession
PXD003164

### Title
Cross-species proteomics in analysis of mammalian sperm proteins C4PR_LIV

### Description
Many proteomics studies are conducted in ‘model’ organisms for which a fully annotated and detailed, high quality proteome is available. By contrast, many studies in ecology and evolution lack a high quality proteome data set that can be used for protein discovery and quantification. This is particularly true of proteins in the reproductive system that have an immune function or drive sexual conflict, sperm competition and secondary sexual characteristics, as these are anticipated to have a high rate of evolution. This can compromise the potential for cross-species proteomics to yield confident identification. Here, we analysed the sperm proteome from a range of ungulates and rodents and explored the potential of proteomics, using routine data workflows, to be able to yield characterisation and quantification. We report that database searching is robust to cross-species matching for a core proteome, but that classes of proteins, notably those involved in sperm-egg interaction, are not readily analysed by this approach. Using iBAQ label free quantitative proteomics, we were also able to define a ‘core sperm proteome’ that was consistent across the ungulate and rodent groups, and which could be used as a reference for quantitative analysis of species-specific protein characterisation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of testicular tissue were collected following castration or death of wild ungulates from zoological collections, domestic ungulates from abattoirs and farms. Rodent samples were dissected immediately after death, with the exception of red squirrels that had died of natural causes. Each sample was protein assayed and tryptic digests were performed overnight on 50 µg protein per sample, following protein denaturation using 0.05 % (w/v) RapiGest SF Surfactant. Diluted aliquots of each digest were resolved over a 90 minute linear organic gradient using ultra performance liquid chromatography (using a Waters nanoAcquity system) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher) for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MSMS peak list files from each experimental sample were searched against a Uniprot validated database for all mammalian species using the Andromeda search engine or against species-specific databases within the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.8.3). The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids and a single missed cleavage was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. The initial precursor and fragment ion maximum mass deviations were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The custom-built UniProt all_mammalian_species (“all mammals”) FASTA database contained 66,323 entries across 1,878 species. The results of the database search were further processed and statistically evaluated by MaxQuant. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. For protein quantification, intensity-based label-free quantification ()iBAQ) was used. Multiple iterations of Andromeda-MaxQuant processing against a variety of UniProt databases were carried out in this study, to address the question of cross-species proteomics in our experimental system. Included here is the initial “no fractions”, individual file-by-file run against the “all mammals” database. Statistical analyses and visualisation of data-sets were carried out  amultitude of software tools and packages in R (version 3.2.2) and Bioconductor (version 3.2). Functional analyses were carried out using Bioconductor tools and Cytoscape (version 3.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteins, Ungulates, Sperm, Rodents, Cross-species

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research Institute of Intergrative Biology University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Dean Hammond

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research Institute of Intergrative Biology University of Liverpool


