### Accession
PXD001299

### Title
A proteomic map of human iris tissue

### Description
The human iris tissue is a thin, circular structure in the eye and it is made up of a pigmented epithelial structure. It is a protected internal organ of the eye, located behind the cornea and the aqueous humour. Iris serves main function to control the diameter, size of the pupil and regulation of light exposure to the internal eye structures. Damage or absent iris always results in allowing excess amount of light into the eye which causes medical problem for the patient and also a psychological problem due to strange eye with black hole. A damaged or congenitally defective iris does not function well which results in poor quality of vision. Although different efforts have been made to elucidate the different parts of the human eye proteome in depth, the protein composition of the human iris tissue remains largely unexplored. We have performed a comprehensive analysis of the human iris tissue employing protein and peptide fractionation methods followed by LC-MS/MS identifying 4918 proteins. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that protein components of the iris tissue participated in a plethora of biological process highlighting cell signal transduction, communication, metabolism, energy pathways protein metabolism cell growth and maintenance, transport and immune response activities. We also compared the proteins of iris tissue with high throughput studies on other parts of eye and plasma proteome, which resulted in identifying proteins unique to iris. To our knowledge, this study is the first attempt to profile the global proteome of the human iris tissue. Taken together, these results increase our knowledge about the molecular composition of the human iris tissue and may be useful to understand the molecular basis of the iris and the baseline proteome described in this study should serve as a resource for future research in iris tissue

### Sample Protocol
The iris tissues obtained from 3 individuals were lysed in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100mM DTT and 100 mM Tris pH7.5. The tissue lysates were then homogenized sonicated in lysis buffer followed by heating for 10-15 min at 75oC. The lysates were cooled to room temperature and centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay and equal amounts from each of the donor was pooled for further fractionation. 450 µg proteins were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion using FASP method (Jacek, et al, 2009). Briefly, the pooled samples were buffer exchanged with 8 M urea to reduce the SDS concentration using a 30 kDa MWCO spin filters (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA), alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide and digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI. Cat#: V5111) overnight at 37ºC. The peptide digest were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and lyophilized. The lyophilized samples were reconstituted in bRPLC solvent A (10mM TEABC, pH 8.5), loaded on XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. The peptide digest was resolved using a gradient of 0 to 100% solvent B (10mM TEABC in Acetonitrile, pH 8.5) in 50 minutes. The total fractionation time was 60 minutes. 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated to 24 fractions, vacuum dried and stored at -800C until further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry derived data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq 50 database (containing 33,947 entries along with common contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters used for data analysis included trypsin as protease with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm, whereas for fragment ions it was set to 0.05 Da. The data were searched against decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brplc, Human iris, Vision, Eye proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


