### Accession
PXD008263

### Title
Induction by Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens of different catabolic pathways for growth in D-mannitol or L-arabinose leading to pronounced differences in CO2 fixation, O2 consumption, and lateral-flagellum production

### Description
Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens, the soybean N2-fixing symbiont, uses mannitol or arabinose as carbon and energy source, among other substances. In this bacterium, growth with mannitol led to higher biomass production, and inhibited the synthesis of its secondary (lateral) flagellar system, regarding growth with arabinose. A proteomic comparison of bacteria grown in mannitol or arabinose suggested that mannitol may be degraded by the Calvin-Benson-Bassham pathway, while arabinose seems degraded by the L-2-keto-3-deoxyarabonate pathway, both pathways sharing only the reactions from pyruvate to CO2. Despite these differences, the stoichiometric balances resulted in similar O2 consumption and ATP production per C-mole of substrate. The poly-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis pathway was stimulated in mannitol, while in arabinose there was a consistent increase in enzymes for the synthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide from aspartate, suggesting a surplus of reducing power in mannitol. This may agree to previous reports showing higher O2 consumption rate in arabinose, which taking into account the similarity in O2 consumption balance, suggests higher maintenance energy demand in this carbon and energy source. Since lateral flagella are produced only in arabinose, we wondered whether their energy demand might explain this difference. Hence, we compared the O2 consumption rates in mannitol and arabinose of the wild-type and a lafR::Km mutant devoid of lateral flagella. We observed that, while there was a three-fold higher O2 consumption rate in the wild-type in arabinose with respect to mannitol, there was no difference in the mutant, suggesting that lateral flagella behave as parasitic structures in this medium.

### Sample Protocol
We studied the differential proteomes in B. diazoefficiens USDA 110 with protein samples obtained from bacteria at exponential phase of growth (OD500 = 1.0) in HMY-Mtl or HMY-Ara. We obtained the rhizobia samples from three independent cultures per condition by centrifugation at 7,150 x g, followed by two washes of the pellets with low salting washing buffer (3 mM KCl, 1.5 mM KH2PO4, 68 mM NaCl, 9 mM NaH2PO4; (Pérez Giménez et al., 2012). We resuspended the pellets in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH = 8.5 up to an OD500 = 10, and added 1 μl of phenyl methyl sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) in Tris-HCl per ml. Then we broke the cells with a Sonifier 150 (Branson) sonicator with six pulses of 3 min at 38 % power in an ice bath, and centrifuged the lysate at 13,520 x g for 30 min to remove unbroken cells and cell debris. Then we centrifuged the supernatant again at 66,226 x g for 2 h to obtain the microsomal fraction in the pellets, and retained also the supernatant fraction. To collect the membrane-enriched proteins fraction, we resuspended the pellets in 250 μl of rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10% isopropanol, 2% triton X-100). In parallel, we precipitated the supernatants, which constituted the cytoplasmic-enriched proteins fraction, with 4 volumes of acetone for at least 12 h at –20 °C, centrifuged them at 13,520 x g for 20 min and resuspended them in 400 μl of rehydration solution containing 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea. We quantified the proteins according to the method of Bradford (Bradford, 1976) and assessed the quality of the samples by one- and two-dimension SDS-PAGE.    We reduced the protein samples in rehydration buffer with dithiotreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 10 mM (45 min, 56 °C) and alkylated them with iodoacetamide in the same solvent at a final concentration of 20 mM (40 min, RT, in darkness). We precipitated the protein solution with 0.2 volumes of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at -20 °C from at least 2 h and centrifuged the samples 14,000 x g for 10 min (4 °C). We washed the pellet twice with cool acetone and dried it at RT. In the CEQUIBIEM facility (Center of Chemical and Biochemical Studies by Mass Spectrometry – Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina) we resuspended the proteins to a final concentration of 2 mg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH=8, and digested them with trypsin (Promega V5111). After that, we purified and desalted the peptides with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). We performed nano HPLC separation coupled to MS on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific) using an Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high degree of resolution using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 50 µm x 150 mm). The flow rate used for the nano column was 300 nl/min with the solvents A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1 formic acid in acetonitrile), ranging from 93% A : 7% B (5 min) to 65% A : 35% B (120 min). We used an injection volume of 2 μl. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Thermo Scientific, Q-Exactive).  For data acquisition we used the XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) software with an equipment configuration that allows peptides identification simultaneously with their chromatographic separation. The equipment made a full MS (resolution: 70,000) and a MS/MS to the 15-best signal-to-noise ratio peaks in each cycle (resolution: 17,500), with a dynamic exclusion range to avoid that the same peak was fragmented more than once in the same elution peak of the chromatogram. The method used allowed us the largest quantity of cycles per time-unit. We used a voltage of 3.5 kV for electro spray ionization (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY).

### Data Protocol
We calculated the areas under the peaks according to the algorithms used by the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, 1.4 version). The program was set up to search against the B. diazoefficiens USDA 110 data base UP000002526 (Uniprot) considering trypsin digestion. We performed Proteome Discoverer searches with a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. We specified oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation as static modification. We set up the peptides level of confidence in “high” (1% false discovery rate). Finally, we processed the obtained data of the areas with the Perseus software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 1.5.5.3 version, freely available) that allows making a deeper statistical analysis. We replaced the missing values with 0 when proteins are present in two cases (Mtl and Ara) and with 1 when proteins are absent in one case (either Mtl or Ara). In this way, we were able to identify 3,334 proteins. We constructed volcano plots to compare the samples using the logarithmic values of areas. For each couple we plotted –log p value (-log Student’s t-test p-value Mtl_Ara) on the y axis versus log2 (Mtl /Ara) (Student’s t-test Difference Mtl_Ara) on the x axis. We considered proteins differentially expressed as those with fold-change values higher than 2 (less than -1 or greater than 1 on the x axis of the graph) and with a p value lower than 0.05 (higher than 1.3 on the y axis of the graph). We considered the same p value threshold to determine the proteins present only in one condition (either Mtl or Ara).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens</i>, a soybean N<sub>2</sub>-fixing symbiont, constitutes the basic input in one of the most prominent inoculant industries worldwide. This bacterium may be cultured with D-mannitol or L-arabinose as carbon-plus-energy source (C-source) with similar specific growth rates, but with higher biomass production with D-mannitol. To better understand the bacterium's carbon metabolism, we analyzed, by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (MS), the whole set of proteins obtained from cells grown on each C-source. Among 3,334 proteins identified, 266 were overproduced in D-mannitol and 237 in L-arabinose, but among these, only 22% from D-mannitol cultures and 35% from L-arabinose cultures were annotated with well defined functions. In the D-mannitol-differential pool we found 19 enzymes of the pentose-phosphate and Calvin-Benson-Bassham pathways and accordingly observed increased extracellular-polysaccharide production by D-mannitol grown bacteria in a CO<sub>2</sub>-enriched atmosphere. Moreover, poly-3-hydroxybutyrate biosynthesis was increased, suggesting a surplus of reducing power. In contrast, the L-arabinose-differential pool contained 11 enzymes of the L-2-keto-3-deoxyarabonate pathway, 4 enzymes for the synthesis of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide from aspartate, with those cultures having a threefold higher O<sub>2</sub>-consumption rate than the D-mannitol cultures. The stoichiometric balances deduced from the modeled pathways, however, resulted in similar O<sub>2</sub> consumptions and ATP productions per C-mole of substrate. These results suggested higher maintenance-energy demands in L-arabinose, which energy may be used partly for flagella-driven motility. Since <i>B. diazoefficiens</i> produces the lateral-flagella system in only L-arabinose, we calculated the O<sub>2</sub>-consumption rates of a <i>lafR</i>::Km mutant devoid of lateral flagella cultured in L-arabinose or D-mannitol. Contrary to that of the wild-type, the O<sub>2</sub>-consumption rate of this mutant was similar on both C-sources, and accordingly outcompeted the wild-type in coculture, suggesting that the lateral flagella behaved as parasitic structures under these conditions. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008263.

### Keywords
O2 consumption, Pp pathway, Flagella, Cbb pathway, L-kda pathway

### Affiliations
1-Instituto de Biotecnología y 
Biología Molecular (IBBM). Facultad de Ciencias Exactas-UNLP y CCT La Plata-CONICET.
2-Departamento de Ciencias Básicas, Facultad de Ingeniería-UNLP
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular (IBBM). Facultad de Ciencias Exactas-UNLP y CCT La Plata-CONICET

### Submitter
Carolina Cogo

### Lab Head
Dr Anibal Roberto Lodeiro
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular (IBBM). Facultad de Ciencias Exactas-UNLP y CCT La Plata-CONICET


