### Accession
PXD007897

### Title
phospho HMMR Co-Immunoprecipitation

### Description
Phosphorylated HMMR was immunoprecipitated from syncronized M or G2 phase HELA cells to identify interacting proteins specific to the phosphorylated HMMR form.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed at 0.5 - 1.0 x 107 cells/ml in immunoprecipitation buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 X g for 10 min at 4°C and protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). For immunoprecipitation, lysates were precleared with protein G or A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (Santa Cruz). Protein complexes were isolated by incubation with the indicated antibodies at 4°C on rotation, and then with protein G or A/G PLUS-Agarose beads for 6 hr at 4°C on rotation. Isolated complexes were washed four times with lysis buffer.   Following IP, protein samples on beads were eluted twice with 50 µL of 100 mM citric acid, pH 2.6 at 50°C for 10 min shaking at 1300 rpm, followed by centrifugation, collection of the supernatant and neutralization with 125 µL of 1 M HEPES, pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced by adding 5 µL of 200 mM DTT and incubating at 37 °C for 60 min, followed by alkylation by adding 10 µL of 400 mM IAA and incubation at room temperature for 60 min in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 µL of 200 mM DTT. Proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 at 37 °C for 16 hours. For stable isotope labelling by reductive dimethylation formaldehyde and heavy formaldehyde (C13D2O) was added to 40 mM final concentration to IgG control and HMMR IP samples, respectively. Sodium cyanoborohydride was added to a final concentration of 20 mM immediately after to both samples and incubated at 21°C for 60 min. Both conditions were combined, acidified to pH 2.5 with TFA, and the peptides purified with C18-STAGE tips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed with the Easy nLC ultra-high-pressure LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) couple to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with an EASY-Spray source. An EASY-Spray C18 column (Thermo-Fisher, 50 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter) heated to a temperature of 50 °C was used for separation. Dried Stage-tip eluates were resuspended in 10 µL buffer A (0.1% FA) and 2µL was used for injection. The peptides were loaded at a back pressure of 550 bar and separated with a gradient of 3-25% buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) over 105 min followed by 25-40% buffer B over 20 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatography method ends with a ramp from 40-100% buffer B over 3 min then a hold at 100% buffer B for 12 min. A column equilibration step using 11 µL buffer A was included prior to the next sample loading step.  MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 12 method with a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds. MS1 was performed at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 3E6 and a maximum ion injection time of 75 ms over the m/z range 400 to 1800. HCD fragmentation of peptides was performed with an isolation range of 1.4 m/z and normalized collision energy set to 28. A resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, an AGC target of 5E4 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms was set for fragment spectra acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra from 2 separate experiments and multiple injections were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoScientific). Database search was performed against the homo sapiens reference proteome including isoforms downloaded from UniProt in June 2016. Main search parameters: enzyme: Trypsin (full); missed cleavages: 2; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; static modifications: +57.021 Da on C; variable modifications: +15.995 Da on M, +28.031 or +34.063 on K and peptide N terminus, +42.011 Da on protein N terminus. Identifications were filtered for 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Differential abundance of proteins between pHMMR and control IP was calculated based on the area of heavy and light dimethyl precursor peaks. Common contaminants and decoy identifications were filtered out. To identify proteins commonly identified in affinity purification experiments the identified proteins were searched against the CRAPOME database (www.crapome.org, version 1.1, H. sapiens). Proteins that were found in less than 30% of reported experiments were classified as ‘rare’, the reminder as ‘common’. Proteins not matched in the CRAPOME database were classified as ‘unknown’.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Interaction, Ppi, Hmmr

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Universtity of British Columbia and BC Children's Hospital Research Institute
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Philipp Lange

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp F Lange
Department of Pathology, Universtity of British Columbia and BC Children's Hospital Research Institute


