### Accession
PXD002460

### Title
Context-dependent regulatory mechanisms control site-specific information processing within the MEK/ERK module

### Description
The impact of the cellular context and receptor type on the dynamics of phosphorylation cycles in signaling pathways are unclear. We employ an unbiased approach to identify network alterations that explain phosphorylation dynamics of the MEK/ERK module in response to hepatocyte growth factor or interleukin-6, comparing primary hepatocytes with the immortalized cell line HaCaT. By combining quantitative mass spectrometry with dynamic modeling, we elucidate the network structure in primary hepatocytes. For HaCaT, our model predicts additional dual feedback regulation, which we experimentally identify as DUSP6 and paxillin. Model analyses reveal switch-like ERK phospho-form distribution profiles in primary hepatocytes that are severely altered in HaCaT, explaining threshold, sensitivity and saturation behavior. We apply our approach to human hepatocellular carcinoma samples and identify, as predicted, elevated threonine-phosphorylated ERK levels in the tumor. This suggests that the prevalence of the mono-phosphorylated ERK rather than the doubly phosphorylated ERK is indicative for dysregulated proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
For accurate and site-specific quantification of pT and pY of ERK1/2, mass spectrometry in combination with a targeted and label-based approach was applied. Isotopically labelled peptide / phosphopeptide one-source ratio standards (one-source standards) were produced and applied as described in detail previously. These peptide standards were analogous to the activation motif-containing tryptic ERK1 and ERK2 peptides and were spiked into the tryptic in-gel digests following 37°C overnight incubation. Gel cutting, reduction and alkylation, digestion and peptide extraction were performed as described previously. Following peptide extraction from gel pieces, samples were purified for peptides by applying the STAGE-Tip method and finally reduced to a volume of 3-6µl by vacuum centrifugation. Analyte peptide/standard mixtures derived from cell culture experiments were measured by nanoUPLC (nanoAcquity®, Waters®) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™).

### Data Protocol
To ensure a high number of survey scans (survey resolution = 60.000/70.000) the data dependent aquisition (DDA) methods were set to Top3 for the Orbitrap-XL and to Top10 for the Q Exactive. ERK1 and ERK2 degrees of phosphorylation were analyzed by manual peak integration of analyte and standard peptides using Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser Version 3.0.63.

### Publication Abstract
The same pathway, such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, can produce different cellular responses, depending on stimulus or cell type. We examined the phosphorylation dynamics of the MAPK kinase MEK and its targets extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) in primary hepatocytes and the transformed keratinocyte cell line HaCaT A5 exposed to either hepatocyte growth factor or interleukin-6. By combining quantitative mass spectrometry with dynamic modeling, we elucidated network structures for the reversible threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation of ERK in both cell types. In addition to differences in the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions, the HaCaT network model required two feedback mechanisms, which, as the experimental data suggested, involved the induction of the dual-specificity phosphatase DUSP6 and the scaffold paxillin. We assayed and modeled the accumulation of the double-phosphorylated and active form of ERK1/2, as well as the dynamics of the changes in the monophosphorylated forms of ERK1/2. Modeling the differences in the dynamics of the changes in the distributions of the phosphorylated forms of ERK1/2 suggested that different amounts of MEK activity triggered context-specific responses, with primary hepatocytes favoring the formation of double-phosphorylated ERK1/2 and HaCaT A5 cells that produce both the threonine-phosphorylated and the double-phosphorylated form. These differences in phosphorylation distributions explained the threshold, sensitivity, and saturation of the ERK response. We extended the findings of differential ERK phosphorylation profiles to five additional cultured cell systems and matched liver tumor and normal tissue, which revealed context-specific patterns of the various forms of phosphorylated ERK.

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Phosphorylation, Systems biology, Cellular information processing, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Systems Biology of Signal Transduction Im Neuenheimer Feld 280 69120 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Schilling
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Systems Biology of Signal Transduction Im Neuenheimer Feld 280 69120 Heidelberg Germany


