### Accession
PXD013728

### Title
Honey bee heat-shock proteomics

### Description
Honey bee colonies were maintained in an apiary at the University of British Columbia. During the summer of 2018, 40 queens were reared from a single colony and half were allowed to open mate, while the other half were kept as virgins in plastic queen cages. Two weeks after emergence, the virgin queens were given two, eight-minute carbon dioxide treatments on 2 sequential days, then re-introduced to their nucleus colonies. This process stimulates virgin queens to begin laying71, and we conducted these treatments in order to minimize the physiological differences between virgin and mated queens. Virgin and mated queens were retrieved from their nucleus colonies and half of each (10) were subjected to heat-shock (42   ͦC, 2 h), and then maintained at 30   ͦC for 2 d. The other half were held only at 30   ͦC for 2 d. Four to six weeks after mating, the queens were anesthetized with carbon dioxide, beheaded, then their spermathecae (including the tracheal net) were removed with fine forceps. Both ovaries were also removed and weighed. During the same summer, 200 drones from a different colony in the same apiary were collected and maintained in the laboratory overnight at ambient temperature with excess syrup (50% sucrose). The next day, semen was harvested with glass capillaries according to the methods described above. Because many drones were not sexually mature, 60 semen samples (out of the 200 drones) were collected. Capillaries were placed in petri dishes and half (30) were heat-shocked as described above, then kept at 25   ͦC for 2 d. The other half were only kept at 25   ͦC for 2 d. Ten samples from each experimental group were used for sperm viability assays as described above.

### Sample Protocol
Semen and spermatheca samples were homogenized in 2 ml screw-cap tubes containing 100 µl of lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5) and four ceramic beads. The homogenizer (Precellys 24, Bertin Instruments) was set to 6,500 s-1 for 30 s, then samples were centrifuged (16,000 rcf, 10 min, 4   ͦC) to remove debris. Supernatants were transferred to a new tube and diluted 1:1 with dH2O. Protein was precipitated by adding four volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at -20   ͦC. The precipitated protein was pelleted and washed twice with 500 µl of 80% acetone, then the pellet was allowed to air dry (ca. 5 min) prior to solubilization in 50 µl of digestion buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea). Approximately 25 micrograms of protein were reduced (0.5 µg dithiothreitol, 20 min), alkylated (2.5 µg iodoacetamide, 30 min, dark), and digested (0.5 µg Lys-C for 3 h, then 0.5 µg trypsin overnight). Digested peptides were acidified with one volume of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with high-capacity STAGE tips as previously described72. Eluted samples were dried (SpeedVac, Eppendorf, 45 min) and resuspended in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Peptide concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop (Thermo, 280 nm) and sample orders were randomized for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Peptides (0.5 µg for each sample) were injected on an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo) coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker), essentially as previously described73. The LC system included a fused-silica (5 μm Aqua C18 particles (Phenomenex)) fritted 2 cm trap column connected to a 50 cm analytical column packed with ReproSil C18 (3 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch)). The separation gradient ran from 5% to 35% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, followed by a 15 min wash at 95% Buffer B (flow rate: 250 μL/min). The instrument parameters were: scan from 150 to 2200 m/z, 100 μs transient time, 10 μs prepulse storage, 7 eV collision energy, 1500 Vpp Collision RF, a +2 default charge state, 18 Hz spectral acquisition rate, 3.0 s cycle time, and the intensity threshold was 250 counts.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) using default parameters, except “match between runs” was enabled. Peptide spectral matches, peptide identifications and protein identifications were controlled at 1% false discovery rates (FDRs). The protein search database was the NCBI Identical Protein Groups database for Apis mellifera (downloaded Nov. 1st, 2018; 21,425 entries) plus all honey bee viral proteins contained within NCBI (a further 508 entries). Data were analyzed in Perseus (v1.6.1.1) as previously described73. Proteins differentially expressed between heat-shocked and non-heat-shocked samples, as well as among tissues (semen, virgin spermathecae, and mated spermathecae), were identified using t-tests and significant results were corrected to 10% FDR (permutation-based method).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovary, Semen, Queen, Drone, Honey bee, Spermatheca

### Affiliations
NCSU
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Alison McAfee

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard Foster
University of British Columbia


