### Accession
PXD047075

### Title
Comprehensive secretome and proteome analysis for human fetal brain self-organized organoids

### Description
To understand whether the intrinsic capacity of the fetal brain in vitro self-organizes into organoids (FeBOs) to secrete a tissue-like “matrisome” is linked to the maintenance of cell-to-cell organization and integrity, we compared the secretome of intact FeBOs and FeBO-derived neurospheres. We also performed side-by-side comparative proteomic analysis of FeBOs and human fetal brain tissue to investigate if the extracellular matrix (ECM) production in the FeBOs resembled a proper tissue-like ECM niche. Moreover, we also included proteomic analysis of unguided pluripotent stem cell (PSC)-cerebral organoids and PSC-cortical spheroids to understand how the human brain tissue ECM-niche compared not only to the FeBOs but also to PSC-derived 3D brain models.

### Sample Protocol
The conditioned media were centrifuged to remove any possible cell debris, and supernatant was collected. Samples were denatured with urea (pH 8.0). Proteins were then reduced and alkylated, followed by sequentially digested with Lys C and Trypsin, respectively. Desalted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resolved with a 175 min gradient from 10 to 40% Solvent B on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher). Proteome analysis was applied the same digestion method as well as MS settings and LC-gradient.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.0) was used to process spectral files, searching against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database (version April 22, 2021) with FDR restricted to 1%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm and the match-between-run feature were enabled for protein identification against an in-house ECM protein library.

### Publication Abstract
Human brain development involves an orchestrated, massive neural progenitor expansion while a multi-cellular tissue architecture is established. Continuously expanding organoids can be grown directly from multiple somatic tissues, yet to date, brain organoids can solely be established from pluripotent stem cells. Here, we show that healthy human fetal brain in&#xa0;vitro self-organizes into organoids (FeBOs), phenocopying aspects of in&#xa0;vivo cellular heterogeneity and complex organization. FeBOs can be expanded over long time periods. FeBO growth requires maintenance of tissue integrity, which ensures production of a tissue-like extracellular matrix (ECM) niche, ultimately endowing FeBO expansion. FeBO lines derived from different areas of the central nervous system (CNS), including dorsal and ventral forebrain, preserve their regional identity and allow to probe aspects of positional identity. Using CRISPR-Cas9, we showcase the generation of syngeneic mutant FeBO lines for the study of brain cancer. Taken together, FeBOs constitute a complementary CNS organoid platform.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Human fetal brain, Tissue-derived organoids, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138648 Singapore, Singapore. Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore, Singapore.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Ziliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr wei wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138648 Singapore, Singapore. Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore, Singapore.


