### Accession
PXD004366

### Title
N-glycoproteomics of induced pluripotent stem cells, embryonic stem cells, and parental cells

### Description
We tried to understand the N-glycoproteom molecular differences between induced pluripotent stem cells and embryonic stem cells. This is important to improve the reprograming process and induced pluripotency in the context of post translational protein N-glycosylation

### Sample Protocol
Hydrazide chemistry has been used to enrich the N-glycopeptides.

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant tool for dataprocssesing. We used enzyme trypsin, two missed cleavages, peptide length of seven amino acids, false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, variable modifications of oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-terminal), and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) as search parameters. In addition, we set the variable modification deamidation (NQ) for the N-glycopeptides identification.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular-level differences ranging from genomes to proteomes, but not N-glycoproteomes, between human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have been assessed to gain insights into cell reprogramming and induced pluripotency. Our multiplexed quantitative N-glycoproteomics study identified altered N-glycoproteins that significantly regulate cell adhesion processes in hiPSCs compared to hESCs. The integrative proteomics and functional network analyses of the altered N-glycoproteins revealed their significant interactions with known PluriNet (pluripotency-associated network) proteins. We found that these interactions potentially regulate various signaling pathways including focal adhesion, PI3K-Akt signaling, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, and spliceosome. Furthermore, the integrative transcriptomics analysis revealed that imperfectly reprogrammed subunits of the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) and dolichol-phosphate-mannose synthase (DPM) complexes were potential candidate regulatory events for the altered N-glycoprotein levels. Together, the results of our study suggest that imperfect reprogramming of the protein complexes linked with the N-glycosylation process may result in N-glycoprotein alterations that affect induced pluripotency through their functional protein interactions.

### Keywords
Human, Ltq-orbitrap

### Affiliations
Distinguished Research Fellow & Director  Genomics Research Center  Academia Sinica  Taipei 115, Taiwan
GRC

### Submitter
Putty-Reddy Sudhir

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Chung-Hsuan Chen
Distinguished Research Fellow & Director  Genomics Research Center  Academia Sinica  Taipei 115, Taiwan


