### Accession
PXD023530

### Title
Proteomic characterization of bacteriophage peptides from mastitis producer Staphylococcus aureus by LC-ESI-MS/MS and their bacteriophage phylogenomic analysis

### Description
The present work describes LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses of tryptic digestion peptides from phages that infect Staphylococcus aureus-causing mastitis, and isolated from dairy products. A total of 1935 non-redundant peptides belonging to 1282 proteins were identified and analyzed. Among them, 80 staphylococcal peptides from phages were confirmed. These peptides belong to proteins such as phage repressors, structural phage proteins, uncharacterized phage proteins and complement inhibitors. Moreover, of the phage origin peptides found, eighteen of them were specific to S. aureus strains. These diagnostic peptides could be useful for the identification and characterization of S. aureus strains that cause mastitis. Furthermore, a study of bacteriophage phylogeny and the relationship among the identified phage peptides and the bacteria they infect was also performed. The results show the specific peptides which are present in closely related phages, and the existing links between bacteriophage phylogeny and the respective Staphylococcus spp. infected.

### Sample Protocol
- 20 different S. aureus strains - Protein extraction and tryptic digestion - LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using a Proxeon EASY-nLC II Nanoflow system coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. The peptide separation (2 μg) was performed on a reverse-phase (RP) column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 10 mm precolumn (Accucore XL C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a linear 120 min gradient from 5 to 35% solvent B (solvent A: 98% water, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B: 98% ACN, 2% water, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For ionization, a spray voltage of 1.95 kV and a capillary temperature of 230 °C were used. Peptides were analyzed in positive mode from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), which was followedby 10 data-dependent collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 3 amu and a normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragmented masses were set in dynamic exclusion for 30 s after the second fragmentation event, and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS analysis. -

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST-HT (Proteome Discoverer 2.4) against the S. aureus UniProt/TrEMBL database (208,158 protein sequence entries in July 2020). The following parameters were used: semitryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavage sites and tolerance windows were set at 10ppm for precursor ions and 0.06 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. The variable modifications that were allowed were as follows: (M*) methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da), (C*) carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.02 Da) and acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein (+42.0106 Da). To validate the peptide assignments, the results were subjected to statistical analysis with the Percolator algorithm [39]. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pathogen detection; lc-esi-ms/ms; proteomics; mass spectrometry; phage peptide biomarker

### Affiliations
CSIC

### Submitter
Mónica Carrera

### Lab Head
Dr Mónica Carrera
CSIC


