### Accession
PXD015351

### Title
Proteome analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in the peripheral blood of systemic lupus erythematosus patients

### Description
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease that affects multiple organs. Protein lysine modifications play important roles in gene regulation, transcription, metabolism and other biological processes. The lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation(Khib) histone mark has recently been discovered as a novel protein modification. Utilizing antibody-based affinity enrichment and nano-HPLC/MS/MS analyses of Khib peptides, we identified 156 upregulated proteins(fold change>1.5),124 downregulated proteins(fold change<1/1.5), including 220 Khib sites that were upregulated and 187 Khib sites that were downregulated. Our data demonstrate that proteins with Khib sites were localized in the cytoplasm. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that proteins with Khib sites are broadly involved in a wide range of biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions. The 03010 Ribosome pathways may exert important influence on the SLE pathogenic mechanism, according to a KEGG analysis. The functional analysis of Khib is of value for important future investigations of SLE pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, the inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g., 50 mM NAM and 3 μM TSA for acetylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g and 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected after centrifugation and the protein concentration was determined by a BCA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. Trypsin Digestion The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (56 °C for 30 min) and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature in darkness, 15 min). The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration that was less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion, which was completed overnight, and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second digestion, which lasted 4 h. Antibody-based PTM enrichment: To enrich the Khib-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5% NP-40 at pH 8.0) were incubated with prewashed antibody beads at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum dried. For the LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
1) We used WoLFPSORT, subcellular localization predication software, to predict the subcellular localization. WoLFPSORT is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II that is used for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. 2) The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Through the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), the proteomics level is reported as GO analysis comments. First, the system converts the protein ID into the UniProt ID that is detected by UniProt-GOA, and then, the UniProt ID is used to match the GO ID to be analyzed, and finally, the annotation information of the corresponding protein is retrieved in the database according to the GO ID. InterProScan can be used to predict the GO function of a protein that is not retrieved from the UniProt-GOA database. The retrieved protein information was classified into three categories: cell composition, molecular function and physiological process. For each category, two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially modified proteins against all the identified proteins. GO data with corrected p-values < 0.05 are considered significant. 3) The KEGG pathway annotation tools were used. First, KEGG online KAAS service tools were used to annotate the KEGG database description. Then, the annotation results from the KEGG pathway database were mapped using the KEGG online service tool, KEGG mapper. The KEGG database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, which is used to determine the enrichment of the differentially modified proteins against all the identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. 4) The functional descriptions of the identified protein domains were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on the protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and it is made freely available to the public via web-based interfaces and services. The diagnostic models, known as signatures, are central to the database and can be used to search protein sequences to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterization of individual protein sequences. For each category of proteins, InterPro database (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) was searched, and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to determine the enrichment of the differentially modified proteins against all identified proteins. Protein domains with corrected p-values < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sle; 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; mass spectrometry; bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Nephrology Department of Guilin No.924 Hospital, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research, Guilin Key laboratory of Kidney Diseases Research
Nephrology Department of Guilin No.924 Hospital, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research, Guilin Key laboratory of Kidney Diseases Research; Clinical Medical Research Center, The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital)

### Submitter
Xianqing Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
Nephrology Department of Guilin No.924 Hospital, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research, Guilin Key laboratory of Kidney Diseases Research; Clinical Medical Research Center, The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital)


