### Accession
PXD044635

### Title
Comparison of tomato wild type and P69D knock-out mutant apoplast proteome and N-terminomes

### Description
The intercellular space or apoplast constitutes the main interface in plant-pathogen interactions. Apoplastic subtilisin-like proteases -subtilases- may play an important role in defence and they have been identified as targets of pathogen-secreted effector proteins. However, most evidence is limited to the interaction of plants with non-vascular foliar pathogens. Here, we characterise the role of the Solanaceae-specific P69 subtilase family in the interaction between tomato and the vascular bacterial wilt pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum.

### Sample Protocol
The tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) resistant line Hawaii 7996 and a CRISPR/Cas9 mutant line of P69D in the Hawaii7996 background were grown in controlled growth chambers at 60% humidity, 12h: 12h, day:night and 27°C (light-emitting diode (LED) lighting) or 25°C (fluorescent lighting). Apoplast proteomes were isolated from leaves of 8 to 10 plants per genotype and replicate by centrifugation at 3000 rpm after infiltration 50 mM phosphate buffer pH6.6 supplemented with 100 mM KCl. Protease inhibitor cocktails were added (cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche)and proteomes  purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Proteomes were taken up and denatured in 6M guanidine buffered with 100 mM HEPES to pH7.2, cysteine residues reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 30 mM IAA.  For proteome analysis, samples were digested with proteomics-grade trypsin at an enzyme:proteome ration of 1:100 for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides were differentially stable isotope labelled by reductive dimethylation with light labelling (20 mM CH2O and 20 mM NaBH3CN, +28.0313 Da) of wild type proteomes and heavy isotope labelling (20 mM 13CD2O and 20 mM NaBH3CN, +34.0631 Da) of 17a7 P69D-knock out proteomes. Labelling reactions incubated for 3h at 37°C, then quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 for 1h at RT, pooled, purified using reverse-phase STAGE tips.  HUNTER N-terminome analyses were performed as described in Demir et al. 2022 Methods Mol Biol. Briefly, free primary amines at the protein N-termini and lysine side chains were differentially stable isotope-labelled by reductive dimethylation, using the light isotopes for wild type (20 mM CH2O and 20 mM NaBH3CN, +28.0313 Da) and heavy isotope for 17A7 proteomes (20 mM 13CD2O and 20 mM NaBH3CN, +34.0631 Da) for the in vivo experiment. Proteins were then digested with trypsin and new peptide alpha-amines generated by the tryptic digest modified with undecanal. N-terminal peptides were then selectively enriched by depletion of the undecanal-modified peptides using HRX reverse phase cartridges (Macherey and Nagel). Enriched N-terminal peptides were desalted with SDP-RPS STAGE tips.  Peptides eluted from STAGE-tips were dried in a vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior and an estimated 1 ug analysed using an UltiMate 3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system (Thermo) online coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray ion source boosted with an ACN-saturated nitrogen gas stream. Peptides were loaded on a µPAC pillar array trap column (1 cm length, PharmaFluidics) and separated on a µPAC pillar array analytical column (50 cm flowpath, PharmaFluidics) using a 2 h elution protocol that included an 80 min separation gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (solvent A: H2O+0.1% FA, solvent B: ACN+0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl min–1 at 60 °C. Line-mode MS spectra were acquired in mass range 200–1400 m/z with a Top14 method.

### Data Protocol
Acquired tandem mass spectra were queried with MaxQuant (54) v.2.0.3 against a database consisting of the UniProt R. solanacearum database (release 2022_04) and the Uniprot Solanum lycopersicum database (release 2023_03), with the 7 entries A0A3Q7HVI0; A0A3Q7HTM2; A0A3Q7HVI4; A0A3Q7F3D9; A0A3Q7HHX1; A0A3Q7HI18; A0A3Q7HKM1 (incorrect annotations of P69 sequences) replaced by the eight P69 sequences downloaded from the Solanaceae Genomics Network (see above) and entry A0A3Q7HXW1 (incorrect annotation of PR1 proteins as fusion protein) removed and replaced by manually annotated PR1 protein homolog sequences (12 entries).  For proteome analysis, search settings were specific trypsin digestion, duplex dimethyl labeling of Lys residues and peptide N-termini, Cys carbamidomethlyation was set as fixed modification and variable Met oxidation considered as variable modifications.  For HUNTER data analysis, search settings were semispecific (free Nterm) digestion with ArgC, duplex dimethyl labeling, Cys carbamidomethlyation was set as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal pyro-Glutamate formation from Gln or Glu and variable Met oxidation considered as variable modifications. All other settings used standard MaxQuant settings for Bruker Q-TOF instruments, MaxQuant results further analysed using MANTI v5.4.

### Publication Abstract
The intercellular space or apoplast constitutes the main interface in plant-pathogen interactions. Apoplastic subtilisin-like proteases-subtilases-may play an important role in defence and they have been identified as targets of pathogen-secreted effector proteins. Here, we characterise the role of the Solanaceae-specific P69 subtilase family in the interaction between tomato and the vascular bacterial wilt pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum. R. solanacearum infection post-translationally activated several tomato P69s. Among them, P69D was exclusively activated in tomato plants resistant to R. solanacearum. In vitro experiments showed that P69D activation by prodomain removal occurred in an autocatalytic and intramolecular reaction that does not rely on the residue upstream of the processing site. Importantly P69D-deficient tomato plants were more susceptible to bacterial wilt and transient expression of P69B, D and G in Nicotiana benthamiana limited proliferation of R. solanacearum. Our study demonstrates that P69s have conserved features but diverse functions in tomato and that P69D is involved in resistance to R. solanacearum but not to other vascular pathogens like Fusarium oxysporum.

### Keywords
P69d, Ralstonia, Plant immunity, Serine protease, Subtilisin, Apoplast, Tomato

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics


