### Accession
PXD011365

### Title
Effects of hypoxia-reoxygenation stress on mitochondrial proteome and bioenergetics of the hypoxia-tolerant marine bivalve Crassostrea gigas

### Description
Intermittent hypoxia is a common stressor in estuarine and coastal habitats due to the diurnal and tidal cycles of oxygen availability. Oxygen deficiency results in energy stress by limiting aerobic ATP production, while reoxygenation may lead to oxidative injury due to the excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in mitochondria. Mitochondria are a key intracellular target of hypoxia-reoxygenation (H/R) stress due to their central role in ATP production, ROS generation and stress signaling. Marine intertidal bivalves such as the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas are adapted to frequent H/R cycles in the intertidal zone and maintain mitochondrial integrity and aerobic function despite frequent oxygen fluctuations. To gain insight into the molecular responses of mitochondria of the hypoxia-tolerant Pacific oyster to H/R stress, we studied changes in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) capacity, proton leak and activity of the electron transport system enzymes (ETS) in gill mitochondria of C. gigas. We furthermore investigated shifts in mitochondrial proteome and phosphoproteome after 24 h of hypoxia and 1 h of post-hypoxic recovery. Oyster mitochondria maintained normal ETS and OXPHOS capacity during H/R stress, despite a slight but significant decline in cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV) activity after reoxygenation. Fifty total proteins and 36 phosphoproteins were differentially abundant in mitochondria of H/R exposed oysters compared with the controls. Rearrangements of the mitochondrial (phospho)proteome during H/R stress involved upregulation of mitochondrial ETS (most notably Complexes I and IV) and iron-binding proteins (frataxin and ferrochelatase) as well as suppression of the metabolic pathways that channel electrons to ubiquinone, possibly as a mechanism to limit ROS production due to the iron overload and reverse flow of electrons through ETS. H/R stress also led to upregulation of a mitophagic activator serine/threonine protein phosphatase PGAM5 and dephosphorylation of metalloendopeptidase OMA1 indicating stimulation of mitochondrial quality control mechanisms during reoxygenation. Changes in the overall abundance and phosphorylation levels of several key proteins involved in the mitochondrial protein homeostasis (including subunits of the mitochondrial ribosome, mitochondrial inner membrane translocase and elongation factor G) are consistent with the suppression of the protein synthesis during hypoxia, likely as an energy-saving mechanism.  Overall, our study indicates that shifts in the mitochondrial (phospho-)proteome play an important role in responses of oysters to H/R stress and might complement adaptations of anaerobic metabolism and metabolic rate depression in ensuring hypoxic survival and rapid recovery in this hypoxia-tolerant intertidal species.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated from gill tissues of oysters as described earlier (Sokolov and Sokolova, 2018). Phosphorylated proteins were isolated by means of affinity chromatography using the Pro-Q ® Diamond Phosphoprotein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol for non-denatured proteins. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed after exposure of C. gigas to hypoxia (H), hypoxia followed by reoxygenation (R), and normoxia (control, C). Two sets of C. gigas proteins were analyzed in this study: 1) the total mitochondrial proteome (all proteins extracted from isolated mitochondria), and 2) the enriched mitochondrial phosphoproteome (only phosphorylated mitochondrial proteins) of the respective oyster specimens. Total mitochondrial proteome samples were analyzed in three biological replicates (n=3) for each condition (H, R and C). After 1D PAGE and in-gel digestion with 2 µg/µl trypsin solution, peptides were frozen at -80 °C until MS analysis in an LTQ Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer. Mitochondrial phosphoprotein-enriched samples were analyzed in five biological replicates (n=5) per condition. Enriched phosphoprotein extracts were mixed with sample buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 40 % glycerol, 8% SDS, 0.08% bromophenol blue, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), proteins were denatured at 90°C for 10 min and extracts were loaded onto 10% SDS mini gels for 1D PAGE. Electrophoresis was stopped after 40 min at 50 V, when the samples had spread out across approximately 10 mm of the gel. This step served to purify the samples and to remove CHAPS buffer before mass spectrometric analysis. Gels were fixed, stained with CBB (3-6 h) and washed in double-distilled water. Protein-containing gel areas were excised, and transferred to microcentrifuge tubes (without separation into subsamples), and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Subsequently, proteins in the gel pieces were subjected to reduction in 20 mM DTT (30 min, 55 °C, 800 rpm), washing in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (2 min, room temperature) and alkylation in 40 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, in the dark). After another washing step in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (2 min, room temperature), gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile (HPLC grade, 2 min, room temperature) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge again, before digestion with 4 µg/µl trypsin solution (37°C, 16 h). Peptides were eluted as described above and peptide extracts were concentrated to approximately 40 µl before determination of peptide concentrations using a Nanodrop micro-volume photometer. Peptide purification using StageTips was performed as described by according to Rappsilber et al. 2007. Peptide concentrations were adjusted with double-distilled water to 2 µg/µl and samples were frozen at -80 °C until mass spectrometric analysis in an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.  Purified peptides of enriched mitochondrial phosphoproteins were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). In-house self-packed nano-LC columns (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120, 3µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) were used to perform LC with an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% acetic acid (v/v)). Subsequently, the peptides were eluted by a non-linear binary gradient of 166 minutes from 5% to 99% solvent B (0.1% acetic acid (v/v), 99.9% acetonitrile (v/v)) in solvent A at a constant flow rate of 300 nl min-1. After injection into the MS, a full scan was recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z 300-2,000) with a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were consecutively isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented via collision-induced dissociation (CID). Unassigned charge states as well as singly charged ions were rejected and the lock mass correction was enabled. Selected ions were fragmented with 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed in data-dependent MS/MS in the linear trap quadrupole (LTQ). Peptides of total mitochondrial proteome samples were analyzed as described previously by Unfried et al. (2018; DOI: 10.1038/s41396-018-0243-5).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted and analyzed using the Sorcerer-Sequest software (Sorcerer v3.5, Sage-N Research; Sequest version v.27, rev. 11, Thermo-Finnigan, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) as described elsewhere (Pjevac et al., 2018). We used a combined target-decoy database containing all proteins encoded in the C. gigas genome (NCBI project accession PRJNA276446), 42 common laboratory contaminants, and the reversed amino acid sequences of all these proteins as decoys to determine false discovery rates (FDR; total number of ORFs in database: 78,206). MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications were evaluated with Scaffold version 4.8.3 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com). Protein level FDR and peptide level FDR were set to 1%. A minimum of 2 peptides was required for protein identification. For semi-quantitative analysis and comparison of relative protein abundances between samples, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) were calculated (Zybailov et al., 2006) using total spectrum counts. Proteome and phosphoproteome data were manually curated to include only the mitochondrial proteins in further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are key intracellular targets of hypoxia-reoxygenation (H/R) stress due to their central role in generation of ATP and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Intertidal oysters Crassostrea gigas are adapted to frequent H/R cycles and maintain aerobic function despite frequent oxygen fluctuations. To gain insight into the molecular mechanisms of H/R tolerance, we assessed changes in mitochondrial respiration and (phospho)proteome of C. gigas during hypoxia and recovery. Oyster mitochondria maintained OXPHOS capacity despite a decline in cytochrome c oxidase activity during H/R stress. Rearrangements of the mitochondrial proteome during H/R stress involved upregulation of mitochondrial electron transport system and iron-binding proteins, and suppression of the pathways that channel electrons to ubiquinone, possibly as a mechanism to limit ROS production. H/R stress led to upregulation of a mitophagic activator PGAM5 and dephosphorylation of metalloendopeptidase OMA1, indicating stimulation of mitochondrial quality control mechanisms. Changes in abundance and phosphorylation levels of key proteins involved in mitochondrial protein homeostasis indicate suppression of protein synthesis during hypoxia, likely as an energy-saving mechanism, and its subsequent reactivation during reoxygenation. Thus, shifts in the mitochondrial (phospho-)proteome might play an important role in H/R stress resistance of oysters ensuring mitochondrial integrity and function during oxygen fluctuations. SIGNIFICANCE: Hypoxia-reoxygenation (H/R) stress elicits shifts in proteome and phosphoproteome of mitochondria in a hypoxia-tolerant model bivalve, oyster Crassostrea gigas, upregulating electron transport system, limiting electron flow to ubiquinone and activating mitochondrial quality control and protein homeostasis mechanisms. These findings provide insights into the potential role of proteomic shifts in adaptive response to H/R stress and serve as an important benchmark to understand the mechanisms of mitochondrial sensitivity to hypoxia and reoxygenation.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Oyster, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia/reoxygenation

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


