### Accession
PXD039470

### Title
Enrichment and mass spectrometry analysis of TbTAX-1-interacting or TbTTC29-interacting proteins by co-immunoprecipitation

### Description
Study of Trypanosoma ZMYND12’s ortholog (TbTAX-1) confirmed an axonemal localization of the protein and knockdown of TbTAX-1 using RNAi induced dramatic flagellar motility defects as observed in human. Co-immunoprecipitation assays and ultra-structure expansion microscopy in Trypanosoma brucei then formally demonstrated that ZMYND12 and TTC29 directly interact and belong to the same axonemal complex. Subsequent comparative proteomics analysis in Trypanosoma and Ttc29 KO mice models also identified DNAH1 as a new interacting protein of both ZMYND12 and TTC29 proteins. These data evidenced the critical role of ZMYND12 for flagellum function and assembly in humans and Trypanosoma through its interaction with other axonemal partners such as TTC29 and DNAH1 in the same complex.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-G Dynabeads were resuspended in Laemmli buffer and boiled. The supernatants were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at room temperature and shrunken in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunken in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µl of trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid by an identical volume for each sample. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extract was loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 pre-column (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 48 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of R=30000 (@m/z 200), a standard AGC target and a maximum injection time in automatic mode. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Trypanosoma brucei brucei TREU927 protein database (9 788 entries, release 57, https://tritrypdb.org/ website). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (K) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a static modification. Peptide validation was performed using the Percolator algorithm21 and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The quantification parameters were selected as follows: (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) No normalization was applied (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based (6) Imputation mode : Low abundance resampling and (7) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold change above 2 and a statistical p-value adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg correction for the FDR lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zmynd12, Flagellar motility, Trypanosoma, Co-immunoprecipitations

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France. INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Team Genetics Epigenetics and Therapies of Infertility, University of Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Coutton
Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France. INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Team Genetics Epigenetics and Therapies of Infertility, University of Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.


