### Accession
PXD006432

### Title
The effect of Fusarium culmorum infection and deoxynivalenol (DON) application on proteome response in barley cultivars Chevron and Pedant

### Description
The effect of an artificial infection with Fusarium culmorum and an application of deoxynivalenol (DON) on barley spikes of cultivars Chevron and Pedant during flowering was investigated at grain mid-dough stage 10 days after pathogen inoculation (10 dai). Proteomic analysis using a two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) technique coupled with LC-MS/MS was used to investigate the quantitative or qualitative differences between the experimental variants.

### Sample Protocol
Plants of both cultivars were divided into three groups: control plants, plants inoculated with an inoculum of Fusarium culmorum strain B and plants treated with a solution of deoxynivalenol. The whole spikes were taken for proteomic analyses. Total proteome extraction was carried out using trichloroacetic acid/acetone/phenol extraction method. Proteins were labelled with CyDyes and resolved with 2D-SDS-PAGE. Protein spots revealing significant quantitative (at least 2-fold change or qualitative (presence/absence) differences were excised from preparative gels and sent to protein identification by in-gel digestion and nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peaklists from acquired raw data were extracted by DataAnalysis 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics). Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) was used for protein identification. Following parameters were set during search: custom made database containing 73,713 Hordeum vulgare, 14,239 Fusarium graminearum sequences and appended with common laboratory contaminants, enzyme trypsin with one allowed misscleavage, tolerance 10 ppm in MS mode and 0.05 Da in MS/MS mode, carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed and oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications. Proteins identified as „uncharacterized protein“ were subjected to BLASTP search against NCBInr database, taxonomy Viridiplantae,

### Publication Abstract
Fusarium head blight (FHB) disease adversely affects grain quality and final yield in small-grain cereals including barley. In the present study, the effect of an artificial infection with Fusarium culmorum and an application of deoxynivalenol (DON) on barley spikes of cultivars Chevron and Pedant during flowering was investigated at grain mid-dough stage (BBCH 73) 10days after pathogen inoculation (10 dai). Proteomic analysis using a two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) technique coupled with LC-MS/MS investigated 98 protein spots revealing quantitative or qualitative differences between the experimental variants. Protein functional annotation of 93 identified protein spots revealed that most affected functional groups represent storage proteins (globulins, hordeins), followed by proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism (&#x3b1;-amylase inhibitor, &#x3b2;-amylase, glycolytic enzymes), amino acid metabolism (aminotransferases), defence response (chitinase, xylanase inhibitor, serpins, SGT1, universal stress protein USP), protein folding (chaperones, chaperonins), redox metabolism (ascorbate-glutathione cycle), and proteasome-dependent protein degradation. The obtained results indicate adverse effects of infection on plant proteome as well as an active plant response to pathogen as shown by enhanced levels of several inhibitors of pathogen-produced degradation enzymes (&#x3b1;-amylase inhibitor, xylanase inhibitor, serpins), chaperones, and other stress-related proteins (SGT1, USP). Genotypic differences were found in hordein abundance between Chevron and Pedant.

### Keywords
Fusarium head blight; barley; fusarium culmorum; deoxynivalenol; stress-related proteins; storage proteins

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology and Biotechnology, Division of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Crop Research Institute, Prague, Czech Republic
University of Chemistry and Technology Prague

### Submitter
Jiri Santrucek

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Vitamvas
Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology and Biotechnology, Division of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Crop Research Institute, Prague, Czech Republic


