### Accession
PXD031440

### Title
Establishment and characterization of a tumoroid biobank derived from dog patients’ mammary tumors for translational research

### Description
Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer among women causing the greatest number of cancer-related deaths. Cancer heterogeneity is a main obstacle to therapies. Around 96% of the drugs fail from discovery to the clinical trial phase probably because of the current unreliable preclinical models. New models emerge such as companion dogs who develop spontaneous mammary tumors resembling human breast cancer in many clinical and molecular aspects. The present work aimed at developing a robust canine mammary tumor model in the form of tumoroids which recapitulate the tumor diversity and heterogeneity. We conducted a complete characterization of these canine mammary tumoroids through histologic, molecular and proteomic analysis, demonstrating their strong similarity to the primary tumor. We demonstrated that these tumoroids can be used as a drug screening model. Due to easy tissue availability, tumoroids can be produced at larger scale and cryopreserved to constitute a biobank. We have demonstrated that cryopreserved tumoroids keep the same histologic and molecular features (ER, PR and HER2 expression) as fresh tumoroids. Two techniques of cryopreservation were compared demonstrating that tumoroids made from frozen tumor material allowed to maintain a higher molecular diversity. These findings revealed that canine mammary tumoroids can be easily generated at large scale and can represent a more reliable preclinical model to investigate tumorigenesis mechanisms and develop new treatments for both veterinary and human medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Sections of fresh frozen tumor and corresponding tumoroids were collected in triplicate for each condition. The tumor sections and the tumoroids pellet were lysed with RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1% NP40, 1 mM PMSF, and 1X protease inhibitors) for total protein extraction.  Three steps of 30 seconds sonication at amplitude 50% on ice was applied, cell debris were removed by centrifugation (16,000 × g, 10 min, 4°C), the supernatants were collected and protein concentrations were measured using a Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To normalize the tumoroids and tumor protein quantities, 100 µg of each sample was used for protein digestion and subsequent shotgun proteomics analysis. Protein digestion was performed using the FASP method. Briefly, reduction solution was added to the sample (100 mM DTT in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris / HCl, pH 8.5 (UA buffer)) and incubated for 15 minutes at 95°C. The protein solution was then loaded onto 10 kDa Amicon filters, supplemented with 200 μL of UA buffer and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g. Next, 200 μL of UA buffer were loaded onto the filter and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g. Then, 100 μL of alkylation solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) were added and incubated for 20 min in the dark before centrifugation for 30 min at 14,000 g. Finally, a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (AB) was added and centrifuged again for 30 min at 14,000 g. This last step was repeated three time. For the digestion, 50 μL LysC/Trypsin at 20 μg/mL in AB buffer was added and incubated at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were recovered after centrifugation for 30 min at 14,000 g. Then, two washes with 100 µL of AB buffer were performed by centrifugation for 30 min at 14,000 g. Finally, the eluted peptides were acidified with 10 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
The samples once dried were reconstituted in 20 μL of a 0.1% TFA solution and desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, France). After elution with 20 µL of 80 % acetonitrile (ACN)/ 0,1 % TFA, the peptides were vacuum dried. Samples were then reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid/ACN (98:2, v/v), and separated by reverse phase liquid chromatography by an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC (Thermo Scientific) in the reverse phase unsing a preconcentration column (75 μm DI × 2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a nanoelectrospray ion source on an Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Separation was performed using a linear gradient starting at 95 % solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and 5 % solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) up to 70 % solvent A and 30 % solvent B for 120 min at 300 nL/min. The LC system was coupled onto a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer set to Top10 most intense precursors in data-dependent acquisition mode, with a voltage of 2.8 kV. The survey scans were set to a resolving power of 70 000 at FWHM (m/z 400), in positive mode and using a target AGC of 3E+6. For the shotgun proteomics, the instrument was set to perform MS/MS between +2 and +8 charge state. All the MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) software using the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against a database of Canis lupus familiaris obtain from Uniprot database and containing XXX sequences. For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein level was set to 1%. Label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with the default parameters. Analysis of the proteins identified were performed using Perseus (version 1.5.6.0) software. Multiple-sample tests were performed using ANOVA test with a p-value of 5% and preserving grouping in randomization. Visual heatmap representations of significant proteins variation were obtained using hierarchical clustering analysis. Functional annotation and characterization of identified proteins were obtained using PANTHER (version 13.0) software and STRING (version 9.1). The analysis of gene ontology, cellular components and biological processes, were performed with FunRich 3.0 analysis tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumoroid, Biobank, Breast cancer, Drug screening, Dog patients

### Affiliations
PRISM - Unite Inserm 1192 Universite de Lille France
PRISM Laboratory - Inserm U1192
Univerty of Lille

### Submitter
Antonella Raffo Romero

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Unite Inserm 1192 Universite de Lille France


