### Accession
PXD028906

### Title
Extracellular Matrix Proteomics of Human Heart Failure

### Description
MS analysis of human cardiac samples from left ventricles of patients undergoing cardiac transplantation due to ischaemic heart failure. Analysis of intracellular protein enriched extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from cardiac samples using a 3-step methodology described in Barallobre-Barreiro et al (Circulation, 2012). GuHCl extracts, enriched in extracellular matrix proteins were analysed in a parallel experiment. This experiment concerns intracellular extracts (SDS extracts). Trypsin was used to digest protein into peptides. Peptides were labelled using a TMT10plex Isobaric Mass Tag Labelling Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific, 90406) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A pooled sample consisting of aliquots of peptides from all individual samples was used as a cross-10plex control and labelled with TMT Label Reagent TMT10-131. After combining the labelled peptides into 10plex mixes, 10plex mixes were dried down resuspended in 0.1 ,% trifluoroacetic acid and fractionated using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, 84868) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for TMT-labelled peptides. Eight fractions per 10plex were vacuum centrifuged to dryness and reconstituted in 26 μl of 2 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05 % TFA (aq). The eight fractions were combined into three mixes according to a previously established protocol (16 µl per fraction; mix 1 = fractions 1, 4 and 8; mix 2 = fractions 2 and 6; mix 3 = fractions 3, 5 and 7). TMT-labelled, fractionated peptides were analysed using an LC-MS assembly consisting of a nano-flow UltiMate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Scientific) coupled via an EASY-Spray NG Source (Thermo Scientific) to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 cartridge (Thermo Scientific, 160454) at a flow rate of 25 µl/min for 3 min using 0.1 % formic acid (FA, aq). Peptides were eluted from the trap cartridge and separated using an EASY-Spray C18 column (Thermo Scientific, ES803) at 45 °C and a flow rate of 0.25 µl/min using the following gradient: 0–3 min, 4 % B; 3–10 min, 4–8 % B; 10–200 min, 8–30 % B; 200–210 min, 30–40 % B; 210–215 min, 40–99 % B; 215–220 min, 99 % B; 220–250 min, 4 % B; with A being 0.1 % FA (aq), and B being 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA (aq). MS data was acquired using a Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS)-MS3 method with a cycle time of 3 s. An Orbitrap full MS scan (scan range 375–1500 m/z; resolution 120,000; automatic gain control target 4e5; max. injection time 50 ms) was followed by an ion trap data-dependent MS2 scan using collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation (dynamic exclusion duration 60 s, MS isolation window 0.7 m/z; CID collision energy 35 %; automatic gain control target 1e4; max. injection time 50 ms), and an Orbitrap data-dependent SPS-MS3 scan using higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation to generate TMT reporter ions from 5 SPS precursors (scan range 100-500 m/z; resolution 60,000; MS2 isolation window 2 m/z; HCD collision energy 65 %; automatic gain control target 1e5; max. injection time 105 ms).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 2.2.0.388) and Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.0). For the analysis of TMT-labelled peptides (SDS extracts), raw files were searched against a human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, version from May 2018, 20,349 protein entries). The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin was set as the protein-digesting enzyme with up to two missed cleavages being allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification. To detect TMT-labelled peptides, the modifications specified in the quantification method (lysine and N-terminal residue modification +229.163 Da) were included in the search. Correction for the reagent lot-specific isotopic impurities of TMT tags was applied (TMT10plex lot no. TG271817A). To account for variation in abundances between samples, data was normalised to the total peptide amount. A pooled sample comprising all individual samples had been added to every 10plex mix as a control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Heart failure, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
King's College London

### Submitter
Javier Barallobre-Barreiro

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Barallobre-Barreiro
King's College London


