### Accession
PXD002380

### Title
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) lysine succinylation LC-MS/MS

### Description
Post-translational modification of proteins through lysine succinylation plays important regulatory roles in living cells. Lysine succinylation was recently identified as a novel post-translational modification in several organisms, including Escherichia coli, yeast, Toxoplasma gondii, and HeLa cells, as well as mouse liver. Interestingly, few sites of lysine succinylation were detected in plants. In this study, we identified 347 sites of lysine succinylation in 202 proteins of tomato by using high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction, Digestion and HPLC Fractionation  Similar quantities of the roots, stems, and leaves of a two-month-old tomato were obtained and mixed. The mixture was ground by liquid nitrogen, and the resulting powder was lysed three times in a cold solution containing 8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Set IV) by using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Unbroken debris were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Proteins were precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid for 2 h at −20 °C. After centrifugation at 5,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, the precipitate was washed thrice with cold acetone and redissolved in the buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM TEAB with pH of 8.0. Finally, the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced using 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C. The solution was then alkylated in the dark with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the second digestion for 4 h. The sample was then fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC with Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, and 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were initially separated into 80 fractions in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate with pH of 8.0 for 80 min by 2% to 60% acetonitrile gradient. The peptides were then combined into eight fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Enrichment of Succinylated Lysine Peptide Immunoprecipitation enriched the lysine-succinylated peptides. Briefly, trypsin digestion was redissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with antisuccinyl lysine antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4 °C overnight with gentle end-to-end rotation. After incubation, the beads were carefully washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with equivalent amount of purified water. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and then vacuum dried for HPLC–MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein and succinylation sites were identified using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v. 1.4.1.2). The MS/MS data were compared against the Lycopersicon esculentum protein subset in the Uniprot database (34,824 sequences, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot/) and concatenated with a reverse decoy database and protein sequences of common contaminants. During the MaxQuant database searches, trypsin/P was specified as the enzyme, with up to four missed cleavages allowed. Additional parameters included a maximum of five modifications per peptide and charge states of up to 5+. The mass error was set to ±20 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. Moreover, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation on methionine and succinylation on both lysine and protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Furthermore, false discovery rate thresholds were specified at 0.01 for modification sites, peptides, and proteins. The minimum length of peptide was set at 7 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification of proteins through lysine succinylation plays important regulatory roles in living cells. Lysine succinylation was recently identified as a novel post-translational modification in Escherichia coli, yeast, Toxoplasma gondii, HeLa cells, and mouse liver. Interestingly, only a few sites of lysine succinylation have been detected in plants to date. In this study, we identified 347 sites of lysine succinylation in 202 proteins in tomato by using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Succinylated proteins are implicated in the regulation of diverse metabolic processes, including chloroplast and mitochondrial metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis showed that succinylated proteins are evolutionarily conserved and involved in various cellular functions such as metabolism and epigenetic regulation. Moreover, succinylated proteins exhibit diverse subcellular localizations. We also defined six types of definitively conserved succinylation motifs. These results provide the first in-depth analysis of the lysine succinylome and novel insights into the role of succinylation in tomato, thereby elucidating lysine succinylation in the context of cellular physiology and metabolite biosynthesis in plants.

### Keywords
Lysine succinylation, Lc-ms/ms, Tomato

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University

### Submitter
Jun Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Weibo Jin
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University


