### Accession
PXD005566

### Title
Hybrid structural modeling of protein-RNA complexes using crosslinking of segmentally isotope labeled RNA and tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
To study protein-RNA interactions at single amino acid and single nucleotide resolution we developed a new approach, termed cross-linking of segmentally isotope labeled RNA and tandem mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS/MS). The method was developed using the PTBP1-EMCV IRES complex as a model system and additionally applied to the U1 snRNP complex. Data from both complexes are included in this submission.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-RNA complexes were formed using 1:1 mixtures of different forms of unlabeled and isotopically labeled RNA as described in the accompanying information (Results_table_PRIDE_final.xlsx). Complexes were irradiated at 254 nm using a UV Stratalinker 1800 (Stratagene). After UV cross-linking, proteins were precipitated with ethanol and digested with trypsin, RNase T1, RNAse A and benzonase. The digest was purified using solid-phase extraction. Enrichment of peptide-RNA adducts was performed using titanium dioxide metal affinity chromatography following the procedures of Sugiyama et al. (Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2007) and Leitner et al. (Anal. Chem., 2010). The enriched fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo) using 60 or 90 min gradients. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins. Selected nucleotide adducts (1-3 residues in length) were specified as “mono-link” mass shifts, and their corresponding mass shifts between unlabeled and labeled RNA were considered. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 5 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) are key regulators of cellular function. We established an efficient approach, crosslinking of segmentally isotope-labeled RNA and tandem mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS/MS), to localize protein-RNA interactions simultaneously at amino acid and nucleotide resolution. The approach was tested on polypyrimidine tract binding protein 1 and U1 small nuclear RNP. Our method provides distance restraints to support integrative atomic-scale structural modeling and to gain mechanistic insights into RNP-regulated processes.

### Keywords
Photochemical cross-linking; protein-rna cross-linking; segmental isotope labeling of rna; clir-ms/ms; ribonucleoproteins; structural proteomics; polypyrimidine tract binding protein 1; u1 snrnp

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


