### Accession
PXD034158

### Title
HTT-OMNI: A Web-based Platform for Huntingtin Interaction Exploration and Multi-omics Data Integration

### Description
We have developed a web-based platform for HTT PPI visualization, exploration, and multi-omic integration called HTT-OMNI. We demonstrate the utility of this platform not only for exploring and filtering existing huntingtin (HTT) PPIs, but also for investigating user-generated omics datasets. For example, we demonstrate the comparison of a published HTT IP-MS experiment, performed in the striatum brain region of a mouse HD model, to unpublished HTT IP-MS experiments in the cortex brain region. Overall, HTT-OMNI summarizes and integrates known HTT PPIs with polyQ-dependent transcriptome and proteome measurements, providing an all-in-one exploratory platform that facilitates the prioritization of target genes that may contribute to HD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Htt3xFlag IP-MS experiments in cortical tissues were performed as previously described (PXD025510), except the mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on a Thermofisher Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. IP-MS was performed from cortical tissues of Htt3xFlagQ20 andHtt3xFlagQ140 mice at 2 months and 10 months age in 3 biological replicates for each genotype-age. Frozen tissues were removed from -80°C and thawed on ice. Tissues were transferred to a pre-cooled Potter-Elvehjem tissue grinder, lysed in 4 ml lysis buffer (1xTBT buffer, 1% Triton X100, 150mM NaCl, 2x Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitors Cocktail, 100U/ml universal nuclease) with 2 x 10 strokes, incubated on ice for 5 min, and transfer to precooled 2 x 2mL Eppendorf tubes. The insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (20,000 x g at 4°C for 10 min). The supernatant was diluted to 10ml with lysis buffer and 2 x 4.5 mL aliquots were used for anti-FLAG and control IgG IPs in 5mL Lo-bind tubes.  Anti-FLAG and non-specific IgG antibodies (24 µg) were conjugated to Protein A/G magnetic beads (60 µL bead slurry), which were sufficient for two IPs. The unconjugated beads were washed 3 x 500 µL 1X TBT, and then incubated with antibody for 1 hr at 4°C. After conjugation, beads were washed 2 x 500 µL in lysis buffer, then added to the supernatant of the lysed tissue, and incubated for 1 hr at 4°C. The beads were collected on magnets and washed with lysis buffer (3 x 500 µL) and water (2 x 500 µL). Captured proteins were eluted in 1x TEL buffer (50 µL) heated at 70°C for 10 min with brief vortexing. Proteins were recovered by magnetic separation and reduced and alkylated with TCEP (0.5 µL of 500 mM TCEP) and chloroacetamide (1.5 µL of 500 mM), respectively, by heating at 70°C for 20 min.  Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was used to perform protease digestion of the samples, followed by StageTip desalting and peptide fractionation (n = 3 fractions) as previously described (PXD025510). Peptide fractions were suspended in 1% FA/1% ACN in a final volume of 5 µL. Desalted peptides (2 µL) were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (QE) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw instrument files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4, to extract of MS/MS spectra and assign the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) against the mouse protein database. Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) was carried out on REPRINT using spectral counts as input from bait (Htt3xFlag) and control (IgG) IgG IPs (REF). For each IP sample group, the two highest SAINT scores were averaged. Specific PPIs were assigned using an average score of 0.8. Protein abundances were calculated using the precursor intensity based approach performed by the Minora node in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Interaction abundances were normalized across samples by the abundance of the bait protein (Htt).

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neurological disorder that is caused by polyglutamine expansion of the huntingtin (HTT) protein. With the hope to uncover key modifiers of disease, a focus of the field of HD research has been on characterizing HTT-interacting proteins (HIPs) and the effect of the HTT polyglutamine expansion on the cellular omics landscape. However, while hundreds of studies have uncovered over 3000 potential HIPs to date, a means to interrogate these complementary interaction and omics datasets does not exist. The lack of a unified platform for exploring this breadth of potential HIPs and associated omics data represents a substantial barrier toward understanding the impact of HTT polyQ expansion and identifying interactions proximal to HD pathogenesis. Here, we describe the development of a web-based platform called HTT-OMNI (HTT OMics and Network Integration). This application facilitates the visualization and exploration of &#x223c;3400 potential HTT interactors (from the HINT database) and their associated polyQ-dependent omics measurements, such as transcriptome and proteome abundances. Additionally, HTT-OMNI allows for the integration of user-generated datasets with existing HIPs and omic measurements. We first demonstrate the utility of HTT-OMNI for filtering existing HTT PPIs based on a variety of experimental metadata parameters, highlighting its capacity to select for HIPs detected in specific model organisms and tissues. Next, we leverage our application to visualize the relationships between HTT PPIs, genetic disease modifiers, and their multiomic landscape. Finally, we generate and analyze a previously unreported dataset of HTT PPIs, aimed at defining tissue-specific HTT interactions and the polyQ-dependent modulation of their relative stabilities in the cortex and striatum of HD mouse models.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Computational tool, Huntington's disease, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University,USA
Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University,USA


