### Accession
PXD042407

### Title
Stoichiometry of MBD2 vs. MBD3-NuRD

### Description
To obtain a comprehensive and quantitative view on MBD2 vs MBD3-NuRD complex stoichiometry, we performed biotin co-immunoprecipitations in Mbd3 KO ES cells expressing either biotin-tagged MBD2a or MBD3a and identified known NuRD complex members using label-free mass spectrometry (Supplementary Fig. 8b-c). We then calculated the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values of the most predominant and statistically significant MBD-interacting proteins in both cell lines, which can be used to estimate the relative abundance. While we observe very similar complex composition between MBD2a-NuRD and MBD3a-NuRD, peptides shared between SALL1-4 proteins show a preferred interaction with the MBD2a-NuRD complex.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested with trypsin, washed twice with PBS and spun down for 5 min at 400xg at 4°C. Cells were resuspended in five volumes of buffer A (10 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl), incubated for 10 min on ice, and then centrifuged for 5 min at 400xg at 4°C. Cells were resuspended in two volumes of buffer A supplemented with 1xPIC and 0.15% NP40 and transferred to a Dounce homogeniser. After lysis with 40 strokes of a type B (tight) pestle, the suspension was centrifuged for 15 min at 3,200xg at 4°C. The pellet was washed with PBS and centrifuged again for 5 min at 3,200xg at 4°C. Then, it was dounced with 10 strokes of a type B pestle in two volumes of buffer C (420 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.9, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 1xPIC, 0.5 mM DTT) and transferred to a new eppendorf tube. This suspension was rotated for 1 h at 4°C and subsequently centrifuged for 45 min at 20,800xg at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, aliquoted, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Label-free biotin/streptavidin pull-downs were performed in triplicate. Per pull-down, 40 μl of M280 streptavidin dynabeads (Invitrogen) was used. Beads were washed twice with buffer C (300 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.9, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, 1xPIC). 1 mg of nuclear extract was diluted to a total volume of 400 μl with buffer C with or without NaCl (final concentration 150 mM) and rotated with the beads for 90 min at 4°C. After beads were washed twice with buffer C (0.5% NP40, 300 mM NaCl), twice with PBS plus 0.5% NP40 and twice with PBS, all supernatant was removed. Beads were then resuspended in 50 μl elution buffer (2 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.2, 10 mM DTT) and incubated for 20 min in a thermoshaker at 1,400 rpm at room temperature. After addition of 50 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), beads were incubated for 10 min at 1,400 rpm at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then on-bead digested into tryptic peptides by addition of 0.25 μg trypsin and subsequent incubation for 2 h at 1,400 rpm at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred to new tubes and further digested overnight at room temperature with an additional 0.1 μg of trypsin. The digest was stopped by the addition of 10 μl 5% TFA, after which tryptic peptides were purified on C18-StageTips (homemade by the FGCZ) 55 and stored at 4°C until use.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 56 against the UniProt mouse reference proteome (UP000000589_10090, version November 2020).  Settings used were protease cleavage sites K/R, maximum number of missed cleavages 2, fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications Oxidation (M); Acetyl (Protein N-term), first search mass tolerance 20 ppm, minimum peptide length 7 amino acids, peptide- and protein-level FDR 0.01, minimum number of unique peptides for protein identification 1, match between runs enabled. As a negative control, a control pull-down with biotin beads and wild type nuclear extract was used. Statistically enriched proteins were identified by a permutation-based FDR-corrected t-test. To determine the stoichiometry of the identified complexes the relative abundance of the identified interactors as measured by the iBAQ intensities were compared. The background binding level of proteins as measured by the iBAQ intensity in the different control samples was subtracted from the MBD2/3 biotin pulldown iBAQ intensity. Next, these relative abundance values were scaled to the obtained abundance of the bait protein which was set to 1. Volcano plots were produced in R.

### Publication Abstract
The Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylation (NuRD) complex is a crucial regulator of cellular differentiation. Two members of the Methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) protein family, MBD2 and MBD3, are known to be integral, but mutually exclusive subunits of the NuRD complex. Several MBD2 and MBD3 isoforms are present in mammalian cells, resulting in distinct MBD-NuRD complexes. Whether these different complexes serve distinct functional activities during differentiation is not fully explored. Based on the essential role of MBD3 in lineage commitment, we systematically investigated a diverse set of MBD2 and MBD3 variants for their potential to rescue the differentiation block observed for mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) lacking MBD3. While MBD3 is indeed crucial for ESC differentiation to neuronal cells, it functions independently of its MBD domain. We further identify that MBD2 isoforms can replace MBD3 during lineage commitment, however with different potential. Full-length MBD2a only partially rescues the differentiation block, while MBD2b, an isoform lacking an N-terminal GR-rich repeat, fully rescues the Mbd3 KO phenotype. In case of MBD2a, we further show that removing the methylated DNA binding capacity or the GR-rich repeat enables full redundancy to MBD3, highlighting the synergistic requirements for these domains in diversifying NuRD complex function.

### Keywords
Nurd complex, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Genome Biology and Epigenetics, Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity, Department of Biology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Tuncay Baubec

### Lab Head
Dr Tuncay Baubec
Genome Biology and Epigenetics, Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity, Department of Biology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


