### Accession
PXD033970

### Title
Proteomics and metabolomics profiling of pork exudate reveals meat spoilage during storage

### Description
Previous studies have evaluated pork quality by omics methods. However, proteomics coupled with metabolomics to investigate pork freshness by using pork exudates has not been reported. This study determined the changes in profiles of peptides and metabolites in exudates from pork stored at different temperatures (25, 10, 4, and -2 ℃). Multivariate statistical analysis revealed similar changes in profiles in exudates collected from pork stored at -2 and 4 ℃, and additional changes following storage at higher temperatures. We identified peptides from 7 proteins and 30 metabolites differing in abundance between fresh and spoiled pork. Significant correlations be-tween pork quality and most of the peptides from these 7 proteins and 30 metabolites were found. The present study provides insight into changes in peptide and metabolite profiles of exudates from pork during storage at different temperatures and our analysis suggest that such changes can be used as markers for pork spoilage.

### Sample Protocol
The longissimus lumborum muscles of pork were purchased at Beijing Hualian Group (Nanjing, China) and transported to the laboratory on ice within 2 h. After fat and connective tissues were removed, the muscles were cut into 3 cm thick steaks. Three steaks were assigned and packaged randomly in plastic trays (Cryovac TQBC-1175, Shanghai, China) and placed at different storage temperatures (25, 10, 4, and -2 ℃). The exudate produced during meat cutting was collected as fresh pork exudate (control). Exudates from pork stored at 25, 10, 4, and -2 ℃ were collected after 15 hours, 72 hours, 15 days, and 25 days, respectively, as previously described [15]. The exudates were stored at -80 ℃ until used for analysis. The pork exudate samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 20 min at 4 ℃, and then the supernatants were transferred into a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off ultrafiltration tube (Millipore, MA, USA) and centrifuged at 8000 g for 10 min at 4 ℃. The collected pep-tides were desalted with C18 cartridges (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA). The resulting solution was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) tri-fluoroacetic acid solution for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. A Nano-LC tandem with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was used to perform peptide analysis. 5 μg of peptides were loaded onto a C18 column (10 cm × 75 µm × 3 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and sepa-rated with a linear gradient of buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by Intel-liFlow technology over 60 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 and searched against the UniProt Sus scrofa database (49792 total entries, downloaded on 2021-08-16). The precursor mass and MS/MS tolerance of peptide were set to 6 and 20 ppm, respective-ly. No enzyme was selected to conduct enzymatic cleavage. The cut off of global false dis-covery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The protein inten-sity was quantified based on the razor and unique peptide intensity, the razor peptide can only contribute to the identification score of the protein group which has the highest probability. Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were characterized as proteins with a fold change in intensity > 2 or < 0.5 and p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Previous studies have evaluated pork quality by omics methods. However, proteomics coupled with metabolomics to investigate pork freshness by using pork exudates has not been reported. This study determined the changes in the profiles of peptides and metabolites in exudates from pork stored at different temperatures (25, 10, 4, and -2 &#xb0;C). Multivariate statistical analysis revealed similar changes in profiles in exudates collected from pork stored at -2 and 4 &#xb0;C, and additional changes following storage at higher temperatures. We identified peptides from 7 proteins and 30 metabolites differing in abundance between fresh and spoiled pork. Significant correlations between pork quality and most of the peptides from these 7 proteins and 30 metabolites were found. The present study provides insight into changes in the peptide and metabolite profiles of exudates from pork during storage at different temperatures, and our analysis suggests that such changes can be used as markers of pork spoilage.

### Keywords
Pork exudate; proteomics; metabolomics; pork quality; multivariate analysis; different temper-atures storage

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chong Wang
Nanjing Agricultural University


