### Accession
PXD034841

### Title
Acetylome profiling of bermudagrass stolons

### Description
Bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon L.) is an important warm-season turfgrass species with well-developed stolons, which lay the foundation for fast propagation of bermudagrass plants through asexually clonal growth. However, the growth and development of bermudagrass stolons are still poorly understood at the molecular level. In this study, we comprehensively analyzed the acetylation modifications of proteins in fast growing stolons of bermudagrass cultivar Yangjiang. A total of 4657 lysine acetylation sites on 1914 proteins were successfully identified using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from stolons of the bermudagrass plants using the Plant Total Protein Extraction Kit (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein concentration was also quantified using Bradford method. For trypsin digestion, 100 μg of protein was firstly reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 50°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein solution was then diluted by four volume of digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) containing 2 μg of Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, USA) and incubated at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were desalted using a Strata-X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) and lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation. Acetylated peptides were enriched from the lyophilized peptides using PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, USA) coupled with an Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the enriched peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% H2O), injected into a home-made C18 Nano-trap column (200 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm), and separated using a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (150 mm×75 μm, 2 μm) through the EASY-nLC™ 1200 system. The gradient for LC separation was set as: starting from 8% to 16% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, 19.9% H2O) in 30 min, 16% to 35% solvent B in 50 min, and 35% to 45% solvent B in 35 min, thereafter increasing to 95% solvent B in 1 min and holding at 95% solvent B for the last 4 min, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separated peptides were analyzed by the Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer with an ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI), spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C in the data-dependent acquisition mode. The mass spectrometer was operated in a full scan manner that peptide ions in the mass range of 350-1500 m/z was all collected in a 0.08 s time window and 30 most abundant ions were selected for automated MS/MS analysis with default parameters. The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the C. dactylon protein database (76879 sequences, 33188769 residues) annotated from the genome using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) integrated with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0. The searching parameters were set as follows: cleavage enzyme, trypsin; maximum missing cleavages, 2; precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; fixed modification, carbamido methylation of cystine (C); dynamic modifications, oxidation of methionine (M), acetylation of lysine (K); minimum peptide length, 7; false discovery rate (FDR) threshold, 0.01; site localization probability, 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bermudagrass; cynodon dactylon; stolon; metabolism; acetylation

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China
Yangzhou University

### Submitter
Bing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Zhang
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


