### Accession
PXD036033

### Title
System-wide vitreous proteome dissection reveals impaired sheddase activity in diabetic retinopathy

### Description
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a major complication of diabetes mellitus causing significant vision loss. Despite the success of anti-VEGF therapy as an effective therapy, many DR patients do not respond well to the treatment, emphasizing the involvement of other molecular players. To unveil these, we performed deep vitreous proteome profiling of patients with proliferative DR and extracted aberrated protein networks. This revealed impairment in ectodomain shedding of several transmembrane proteins playing critical roles in neurodegeneration and angiogenesis, that pointed to defects in their regulating sheddases, particularly ADAM10, which emerged as the predominant sheddase. We confirmed that ADAM10 protease activity was reduced in ocular disease models and established that activation of ADAM10 can suppress endothelial cell activation and angiogenesis. Furthermore, we identified impaired ADAM10-AXL axis as a retinal angiogenic driver. Taken together, we demonstrate restoration of aberrant ectodomain shedding as an effective strategy for treating DR and propose ADAM10 as an attractive novel target.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry:  Stored vitreous samples were thawed on ice and centrifuged to remove any remaining debris. The samples were then resuspended with 9M urea/100mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich Pte. Ltd.) buffer. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories) after dilution to 3M urea. Two samples (ERM33 and ERM38) were excluded at this stage due to low protein concentration. For all the other samples (n=18), 100µg from each sample were then subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich Pte. Ltd.) (final concentration of 5mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylation with iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich Pte. Ltd.) (final concentration of 10mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, followed by overnight digestion with 1µg of LysC (Lysyl Endopeptidase, Wako) at 37°C. Subsequently, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample to adjust the urea concentration to 1M before adding 2µg of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega). The samples were incubated for 8 hours at 37°C followed by desalting with the C18 solid phase extraction cartridge (3M company) and drying under vacuum to ~40µL.  TMT 10-plex labelling:  Desalted peptides were subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling using TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific™) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All samples were run in a total of five sets and samples were assigned to each TMT set by randomization, in addition to pooled control and pooled PDR samples. Briefly, TMT label was reconstituted in 41 µL anhydrous acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) before mixing with respective peptides and incubated for 1hour. Reaction was quenched using final 5% hydroxylamine (Merck) in triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer (Fluka) for 15min. Labeled peptides were mixed before vacuum-dried and fractionated using off-gel isoelectric focusing.  Off-gel isoelectric focusing:  Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent, G3100AA) was used to fractionate the labelled peptides into 24 fractions according to manufacturer’s protocol. The fractions were desalted using self-packed C18 (3M company) stage tips and vacuum-dried prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry:   For proteome analysis, peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for analysis on Thermo Easy nLC 1000 that was connected to Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™). The trap column used was C18 Acclaim PepMap™ 100 of 3μm, 100A, 75 μm I.D. x 2 cm nanoViper and the analytical column was PepMap™ RSLC C18, 2μm, 100A, 75μm I.D. x 50 cm. The LC solvent A comprised of 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and LC solvent B comprised of 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile. The gradient was as follows: 8-40 % solvent B in 180 min; 40-100 % solvent B in 10 min; 100% solvent B for 10 min at the flow rate of 200nL/min. The mass spectrometer was set in the data dependent acquisition mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 310 – 1510) were acquired with a resolution of R=120,000 at an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 orbitrap HCD scan of resolution of 60,000 with AGC target of 1e5 and fragmented using a normalized collision energy of 34% at with fixed first mass at 120 and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For 10plex-TMT labeled proteome analysis, raw MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific™). Database search was performed using the integrated Sequest HT search engine against the Uniprot human FASTA database (release 2017) for tryptic peptides with maximum of two missed cleavage sites, MS and MS/MS mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Searches included cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT-modifications at peptide N-termini and lysine residues as fixed modifications, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were performed at false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a major complication of diabetes mellitus causing significant vision loss. DR is a multifactorial disease involving changes in retinal microvasculature and neuronal layers, and aberrations in vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF) and inflammatory pathways. Despite the success of anti-VEGF therapy, many DR patients do not respond well to the treatment, emphasizing the involvement of other molecular players in neuronal and vascular aberrations in DR. <b>Methods:</b> We employed advanced mass spectrometry-based proteome profiling to obtain a global snapshot of altered protein abundances in vitreous humor from patients with proliferative DR (PDR) in comparison to individuals with epiretinal membrane without active DR or other retinal vascular complications. Global proteome correlation map and protein-protein interaction networks were used to probe into the functional inclination of proteins and aberrated molecular networks in PDR vitreous. In addition, peptide-centric analysis of the proteome data was carried out to identify proteolytic processing, primarily ectodomain shedding events in PDR vitreous. Functional validation experiments were performed using preclinical models of ocular angiogenesis. <b>Results:</b> The vitreous proteome landscape revealed distinct dysregulations in several metabolic, signaling, and immune networks in PDR. Systematic analysis of altered proteins uncovered specific impairment in ectodomain shedding of several transmembrane proteins playing critical roles in neurodegeneration and angiogenesis, pointing to defects in their regulating sheddases, particularly ADAM10, which emerged as the predominant sheddase. We confirmed that ADAM10 protease activity was reduced in animal models of ocular angiogenesis and established that activation of ADAM10 can suppress endothelial cell activation and angiogenesis. Furthermore, we identified the impaired ADAM10-AXL axis as a driver of retinal angiogenesis. <b>Conclusion:</b> We demonstrate restoration of aberrant ectodomain shedding as an effective strategy for treating PDR and propose ADAM10 as an attractive therapeutic target. In all, our study uncovered impaired ectodomain shedding as a prominent feature of PDR, opening new possibilities for advancement in the DR therapeutic space.

### Keywords
Vitreous humor/diabetic retinopathy/ectodomain shedding/sheddase

### Affiliations
IMCB
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore

### Submitter
Asfa Alli Shaik

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Translational Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore


