### Accession
PXD029191

### Title
OpenCell: proteome-scale endogenous tagging enables the cartography of human cellular organization

### Description
Elucidating the wiring diagram of the human cell is one of the central goals of the post-genomic era. Here, we integrate genome engineering, confocal live-cell imaging, mass spectrometry and data science to systematically map the localization and interactions of human proteins. Our approach provides a data-driven description of the molecular and spatial networks that organize the proteome. Unsupervised clustering of these networks delineates functional communities that facilitate biological discovery, and uncovers that RNA-binding proteins form a specific sub-group defined by unique interaction and localization properties. Furthermore, we discover that localization patterns are remarkably predictive of protein function and often contain enough information to identify molecular interactions. Paired with a fully interactive website (opencell.czbiohub.org), we provide a resource for the quantitative cartography of human cellular organization.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracted from whole cell lysate, trypsin digest, peptides fractionated offline with high pH protocol and 24 concatenated fractions run on a Thermo Fusion Lumos-based LC-MS system.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched and peptides quantified using Maxquant (version 1.6.17.0). Resulting tables further processed within Perseus using the Proteomic Ruler to generate protein copy number.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Localizations, Spatial proteomics, Interactions

### Affiliations
CZ Biohub
Group Leader, Cell Atlas

### Submitter
Frank McCarthy

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Manuel Leonetti
Group Leader, Cell Atlas


