### Accession
PXD013434

### Title
The long noncoding RNA neuroLNC modulates neurotransmitter release interacting with a neurodegeneration-associated protein

### Description
The roles of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in synaptic transmission and neuronal development are emerging. Here we applied an integrated bioinformatic/biological screening strategy to identify lncRNAs that regulate synaptic vesicle release. We identified neuroLNC, a conserved neuron-specific nuclear lncRNA that modulates synaptic vesicle release, presynaptic calcium influx, neurite elongation and neuronal migration. In neurons neuroLNC interacts with a neurodegeneration-associated protein and tunes a set of presynaptic transcripts implicated in neurotransmitter release.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitated proteins were loaded on pre-casted NuPAGE gels. Gels were run for 20 minutes at constant voltage of 200V, stained overnight with Coomassie Blue, and destained with water. After destaining, each lane was cut into 6 gel pieces using an in-house-made gel cutter, and processed for in-gel digestion using trypsin. The eluted peptides were dried and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA acid solution, and were further processed for LC-MS in an online UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled online to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data was analyzed using MaxQuant software. The rat UniProt database was used for identifying proteins. Label-Free-Quantitation (LFQ) was used for comparing the relative protein amounts in the given experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular and the molecular mechanisms by which long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) may regulate presynaptic function and neuronal activity are largely unexplored. Here, we established an integrated screening strategy to discover lncRNAs implicated in neurotransmitter and synaptic vesicle release. With this approach, we identified <i>neuroLNC</i>, a neuron-specific nuclear lncRNA conserved from rodents to humans. <i>NeuroLNC</i> is tuned by synaptic activity and influences several other essential aspects of neuronal development including calcium influx, neuritogenesis, and neuronal migration in vivo. We defined the molecular interactors of <i>neuroLNC</i> in detail using chromatin isolation by RNA purification, RNA interactome analysis, and protein mass spectrometry. We found that the effects of <i>neuroLNC</i> on synaptic vesicle release require interaction with the RNA-binding protein TDP-43 (TAR DNA binding protein-43) and the selective stabilization of mRNAs encoding for presynaptic proteins. These results provide the first proof of an lncRNA that orchestrates neuronal excitability by influencing presynaptic function.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Neuron, Ellps, Brain turnover, Cortex, Protein lifetimes, Glia, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
University Medical Centre Göttingen, 
Georg-August-Universität

Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology University Medical Center Göttingen Humboldtallee 23 37073 Göttingen

### Submitter
Sunit Mandad

### Lab Head
Dr Eugenio F. Fornasiero
Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology University Medical Center Göttingen Humboldtallee 23 37073 Göttingen


