### Accession
PXD009783

### Title
Proteomic proximity mapping by rapamycin-dependent targeting of APEX2

### Description
Enhanced ascorbate peroxidase 2 (APEX2) can be used as a genetic tag that produces short-lived yet highly reactive biotin species, allowing the modification of proteins that interact with or are in very close proximity to the tagged protein, ideally within a confined compartment. Biotinylated proteins can be isolated using immobilized streptavidin and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Here we used rapamycin-dependent targeting of APEX2 to tail-anchored proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum and of the inner nuclear membrane (INM). In combination with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), our novel approach (rapamycin- and APEX-dependent identification of proteins by SILAC; RAPID-SILAC or RAPIDS) allowed the identification of proteins that are in close proximity to the prototypic INM-protein emerin and the vesicle-trafficking protein VAPB. In addition to well-known interaction partners, several new potential binding partners were identified. In RAPIDS, the comparison of plus/minus-rapamycin conditions allows a clear distinction between specific and non-specific hits.

### Sample Protocol
Rapamycin-dependent biotinylation assay HeLa P4 cells were grown in SILAC medium as described above. Cells were transfected with pmCherry-FRB-emerin or pmCherry-FRB-VAPB and pcDNA3-FKBP12-EGFP-APEX2 and grown to confluency. Cells were then incubated for 30 min with 500 µM biotin-phenol (Iris Biotech, Marktredwitz, Germany), with or without 200 nM rapamycin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). For each experiment, forward and reverse reactions were performed. For forward reactions, cells grown in “light’’ SILAC medium were treated with rapamycin and cells grown in “heavy” SILAC medium were not. For reverse reactions, this labeling scheme was switched. After incubation with biotin-phenol and rapamycin, 1 mM H2O2 was added at room temperature. After 1 min, the medium was aspirated and cells were washed twice with quenching buffer (5 mM Trolox, 10 mM NaN3, 10 mM sodium ascorbate in PBS) and once with PBS. Cells used for fluorescence microscopy were fixed immediately.  For Western blot and SILAC analyses, cells from each dish were lysed with 1.4 ml RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM Trolox, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethane sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 10 mM NaN3, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 µg ml-1 aprotinin, 1 µg ml-1 leupeptin and 1 µg ml-1 pepstatin). The cell lysate was incubated for 5 min on ice and centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000 g and 4°C. The cleared cell lysate was used to enrich biotinylated proteins with Neutravidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The biotinylation experiment using APEX2-dEGFP-NLS-FKBP12 was performed as described above with the following changes: Cells were seeded in 6-well plates and transfected with pmCherry-FRB-emerin and pAPEX2-dEGFP-NLS-FKBP12. Cells of two wells were lysed in 0.5 ml RIPA buffer. In total, 6 ml of rapamycin-treated cell lysate and 6 ml of lysate derived from cells that had not been treated with rapamycin were obtained and the same protein amounts were mixed. 24 batches of 40 µl Neutravidin beads were incubated with 0.5 ml cell lysate each. For elution, three batches of beads were consecutively incubated in 40 µl 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and several elution samples were pooled. Standard APEX-biotinylation assay The biotinylation experiment using APEX2 directly fused to emerin was performed as described above for the FKBP12-EGFP-APEX2 construct with the following changes: instead of comparing biotinylated proteins with or without incubation of cells with rapamycin, the biotinylation of proteins in cells that had been transfected with either pAPEX2-emerin or with pEGFP-APEX2 was compared by SILAC. Mass spectrometric analyses Samples were reconstituted in 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and separated on 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue, and each lane sliced into 11-12 equidistant bands. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) as described previously {Atanassov, 2013}.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.0.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified against the combined M. musculus and R. norvegicus UniProt reference proteomes (v2016.07) along with a set of common lab contaminants. The Arginine R10 and Lysine K8 labels including the ‘Re-quantify’ option were specified for relative protein quantitation. Perseus Software version 1.5.0.15 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used for statistical evaluation of relative protein quantitation values.

### Publication Abstract
Emerin is one of the best characterized proteins of the inner nuclear membrane, but can also occur at the level of the endoplasmic reticulum. We now use enhanced ascorbate peroxidase 2 (APEX2) to probe the environment of emerin. APEX2 can be used as a genetic tag that produces short-lived yet highly reactive biotin species, allowing the modification of proteins that interact with or are in very close proximity to the tagged protein. Biotinylated proteins can be isolated using immobilized streptavidin and analyzed by mass spectrometry. As an alternative to the standard approach with a genetic fusion of APEX2 to emerin, we also used RAPIDS (rapamycin- and APEX-dependent identification of proteins by SILAC), a method with improved specificity, where the peroxidase interacts with the protein of interest (i.e., emerin) only upon addition of rapamycin to the cells. We compare these different approaches, which, together, identify well-known interaction partners of emerin like lamin A and the lamina associated polypeptide 1 (LAP1), as well as novel proximity partners.

### Keywords
Apex2, Silac, Mass spectrometry, Apex, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry


