### Accession
PXD013549

### Title
Cilia and the exocyst are involved in urinary extracellular vesicle production and content

### Description
A recently proposed model of cell-cell communication, called “urocrine signaling”, hypothesizes that small (50-150 mm) extracellular vesicles (EVs) carry signals to “downstream” kidney tubule cells. We previously showed that the exocyst, a highly-conserved eight-protein (Exoc1-8) trafficking complex, is necessary for ciliogenesis, we show that the EV number released from MDCK cells was increased in EXOC5 OE, while it was decreased in Exoc5 KD, compared to control.  To determine how Exoc5 changes the composition of EVs, we isolated EVs from Exoc5 control, KD, and OE MDCK cells, and subjected them mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis to determine the protein composition of the EVs. By dendrogram, heat map, and principle component analysis, the protein content of the EVs was significantly different in Exoc5 KD, EXOC5 OE, and control MDCK cells. To confirm the proteomic results, we examined, by Western blot analysis, expression of the small guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein ADP-ribosylation factor (Arf6) and the epidermal growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8-like protein 2 (Eps8L2).

### Sample Protocol
We grew large amounts (nine 15 cm plastic dishes for each replicate) of EXOC5 OE, Exoc5 KD, and control MDCK cells in MEM media supplemented with 5% exosome-depleted FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin, at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells were grown to 100% confluency, and conditioned media was harvested five days later, with the media changed every two days. The conditioned media was collected 24 hours after the final media change. Following harvesting of the EVs, purification of the EVs was achieved by first centrifuging the conditioned media at 3,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C to remove large debris, and then collecting the supernatant. The supernatant was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 40 minutes at 4°C, and the remaining supernatant was again collected. The final supernatant was centrifuged at 143,000 x g for 70 minutes at 4°C to obtain the EV pellet, which was washed with PBS to eliminate contaminating proteins, and centrifuged one last time at 143,000 x g for 70 minutes at 4°C.  The resulting pellet was resuspended in 150 mL PBS.  For each condition (EXOC5 OE, Exoc5 KD, and control MDCK cells-all in triplicate), 20 µg of alkylated and reduced proteins were digested with trypsin in the presence of sodium deoxycholate. Deoxycholate was removed by ethyl acetate fractionation and enriched using solid phase chromatography cartridges (Strata-x, Phenomenex). Equal amounts of peptide (2 µg) were separated with a linear gradient of 5–50% buffer B (95% ACN and 0.2% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18-reversed phase column packed in-house with GmbH ReprosSil-Pur, 120 C18-AQ, 1.9um resin. A Dionex U3000 nano-LC chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) was on-line coupled to the Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting the fragmentation events based on the precursor abundance in the survey scan (400–1700 Th). The resolution of the survey scan was 60,000 at m/z at 400 Th with a target value of 1e6 ions and 1 microscan. Low resolution CID MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5000 ions in normal CID scan mode. MS/MS acquisition in the linear ion trap was partially carried out in parallel to the survey scan in the Orbitrap analyzer by using the preview mode (first 192 ms of the MS transient). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was 120 seconds and early expiration was enabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 Th.

### Publication Abstract
The recently proposed idea of "urocrine signaling" hypothesizes that small secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs) contain proteins that transmit signals to distant cells. However, the role of renal primary cilia in EV production and content is unclear. We previously showed that the exocyst, a highly conserved trafficking complex, is necessary for ciliogenesis; that it is present in human urinary EVs; that knockdown (KD) of exocyst complex component 5 (EXOC5), a central exocyst component, results in very short or absent cilia; and that human EXOC5 overexpression results in longer cilia. Here, we show that compared with control Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, EXOC5 overexpression increases and KD decreases EV numbers. Proteomic analyses of isolated EVs from EXOC5 control, KD, and EXOC5-overexpressing MDCK cells revealed significant alterations in protein composition. Using immunoblotting to specifically examine the expression levels of ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) and EPS8-like 2 (EPS8L2) in EVs, we found that EXOC5 KD increases ARF6 levels and decreases EPS8L2 levels, and that EXOC5 overexpression increases EPS8L2. Knockout of intraflagellar transport 88 (IFT88) confirmed that the changes in EV number/content were due to cilia loss: similar to EXOC5, the IFT88 loss resulted in very short or absent cilia, decreased EV numbers, increased EV ARF6 levels, and decreased Eps8L2 levels compared with IFT88-rescued EVs. Compared with control animals, urine from proximal tubule-specific EXOC5-KO mice contained fewer EVs and had increased ARF6 levels. These results indicate that perturbations in exocyst and primary cilia affect EV number and protein content.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicle, Exocyst, Gtpase, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina
Renal Division Director Professor of Medicine and Arthur V. Williams Chair Medical University of South Carolina

### Submitter
Starr Hazard

### Lab Head
Dr Josh Lipschutz, M.D.
Renal Division Director Professor of Medicine and Arthur V. Williams Chair Medical University of South Carolina


