### Accession
PXD011680

### Title
Intermolecular Architecture of Fibrin Clots and its Interaction INterface with Albumin

### Description
In this project we establish the unit cell of fibrin polymer network by using of XL-MS methods and modelling approaches. With shotgun proteomics approach we estimate the ratio of proteins in the purified Fibrin Clots and ratio of Albumin inter- and intralinks

### Sample Protocol
Fibrin clots were generated, exctracted and further processed according to standard tryptic digestion procedure

### Data Protocol
Crosslinking were acquited with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tune Page version 3.0.2022.16 and processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with Incorporated XlinkX node. Shotgun data were acquited with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tune Page version 3.0.2022.16 and Orbitrap Exactive HF-X and processed MaxQuant 1.6.5.0

### Publication Abstract
Upon activation, fibrinogen forms large fibrin biopolymers that coalesce into clots which assist in wound healing. Limited insights into their molecular architecture, due to the sheer size and the insoluble character of fibrin clots, have restricted our ability to develop novel treatments for clotting diseases. The, so far resolved, disparate structural details have provided insights into linear elongation; however, molecular details like the C-terminal domain of the &#x3b1;-chain, the heparin-binding domain on the &#x3b2;-chain, and other functional domains remain elusive. To illuminate these dark areas, we applied cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to obtain biochemical evidence in the form of over 300 distance constraints and combined this with structural modeling. These restraints additionally define the interaction network of the clots and provide molecular details for the interaction with human serum albumin (HSA). We were able to construct the structural models of the fibrinogen &#x3b1;-chain (excluding two highly flexible regions) and the N termini of the &#x3b2;-chain, confirm these models with known structural arrangements, and map how the structure laterally aggregates to form intricate lattices together with the &#x3b3;-chain. We validate the final model by mapping mutations leading to impaired clot formation. From a list of 22 mutations, we uncovered structural features for all, including a crucial role for &#x3b2;Arg'169 (UniProt: 196) in lateral aggregation. The resulting model can potentially serve for research on dysfibrinogenemia and amyloidosis as it provides insights into the molecular mechanisms of thrombosis and bleeding disorders related to fibrinogen variants. The structure is provided in the PDB-DEV repository (PDBDEV_00000030).

### Keywords
Fibrin, Xl-ms, Fibrinogen, Albumin, Docking, Dsso, Modeling

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
Distinguished Faculty Professor Utrecht University Scientific Director Netherlands Proteomics Centre and Scientific Director Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Oleg Klykov

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Distinguished Faculty Professor Utrecht University Scientific Director Netherlands Proteomics Centre and Scientific Director Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


