### Accession
PXD040788

### Title
Automated sample preparation workflow for tandem mass tag-based proteomics

### Description
Although tandem mass tag (TMT)-based isobaric labeling has become a powerful technique for multiplexed protein quantitation, it has not been easy to automate the workflow for widespread adoption. This is because preparation of TMT labeled peptide samples involves multiple steps ranging from protein extraction, denaturation, reduction and alkylation to tryptic digestion, desalting, labeling with TMT reagents and cleanup, all of which require a high level of proficiency. The variability resulting from multiple processing steps is inherently problematic especially with large-scale studies such as clinical studies that involve hundreds of samples where reproducibility is critical for quantitation. Here, we sought to compare the performance of a recently introduced platform, AccelerOme, for automated proteomics workflows for TMT-labeling experiments with manual processing of samples. Cell pellets were prepared and subjected to a 16-plex experiment using the automated platform and a conventional manual protocol. Single shot LC-MS/MS analysis revealed a higher number of proteins and peptides identified using the automated platform. Efficiencies of tryptic digestion, alkylation and TMT labeling were similar both in manual and automated process. In addition, comparison of quantitation accuracy and precision showed similar performance in automated workflow compared to manual sample preparation. Overall, we demonstrated that the automated platform performs at a level similar to manual process in TMT-based proteomics. We expect that the automated workflow will increasingly replace manual work and be applied to large-scale TMT-baed studies providing robust results and high sample throughput.

### Sample Protocol
For automated sample preparation, we processed samples using AccelerOme TMTpro 16-plex MS Sample Preparation Kit as per the manufacturer's instructions. All the reagents used in this experiment were provided in the kit. Briefly, the cells were resuspended in 200 µl lysis solution and 1 µl of universal nuclease and pipetted for 15-20 cycles until the sample viscosity is reduced before loading onto AccelerOme. From the sample solution, 10 µl was loaded into 16 wells each and submitted for automated sample preparation by selecting ‘Quick start setup’ to start a run on the instrument. The After the run is completed, labelled and pooled sample was collected from the output plate, dried in speed vac and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis.   For manual sample preparation, three sets of Jurkat cell pellet, each containing ~2 million cells were lysed using the same lysis buffer for automated experiments.  Briefly, 200 µl of lysis buffer and 1 µl of universal nuclease was added to the cells and pipetted down 10-15 times to lyse the cells. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 minutes at 4 ˚ C to pellet down the cell debris. For each set, 10 µl of cell lysate was then transferred to 16 tubes. The samples were reduced at 37 ˚C for 30 minutes using 10 mM of dithiothreitol followed by alkylation for 30 minutes in dark at room temperature using 40 mM of iodoacetamide. Subsequently, samples were digested with trypsin/Lys-C enzyme and incubated at 37 ˚C for overnight. The digestion reaction was then quenched using 20 % trifluoroacetic acid and samples were desalted using C18 tips.  Peptides were collected and dried using speed vac. All dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 30 µl of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Each sample was then labelled using TMT 16-plex as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The labelling reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature for an hour and quenched using 5 µl of 5% hydroxylamine solution with incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature prior pooling. The pooled sample was then dried and desalted. The peptide amount of the samples was estimated using the colormetric peptide assay kit.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data was searched using SEQUEST search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) against UniProt Human protein database (20,609 entries). Tryptic peptides with maximum of three missed cleavages were considered. Carbamidomethylation at a cysteine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, TMT 16-plex labels at peptide N-terminus and lysine were set as variable modifications. FDR of 1% was applied as a cut-off value for reporting identified peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Although tandem mass tag (TMT)-based isobaric labeling has become a powerful approach for multiplexed protein quantitation, automating the workflow for this technique has not been easy to achieve for widespread adoption. This is because preparation of TMT-labeled peptide samples involves multiple steps ranging from protein extraction, denaturation, reduction, and alkylation to tryptic digestion, desalting, labeling, and cleanup, all of which require a high level of proficiency. The variability resulting from multiple processing steps is inherently problematic, especially with large-scale clinical studies that involve hundreds of samples where reproducibility is critical for quantitation. Here, we sought to compare the performance of a recently introduced platform, AccelerOme, for an automated proteomic workflow employing TMT labeling with the manual processing of samples. Cell pellets were prepared and subjected to a 16-plex experiment using an automated platform and a conventional manual protocol. Single-shot liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry analysis revealed a higher number of proteins and peptides identified using the automated platform. Efficiency of tryptic digestion, alkylation, and TMT labeling were similar in both manual and automated processes. In addition, comparison of quantitation accuracy and precision showed similar performance in an automated workflow compared to manual sample preparation by an expert. Overall, we demonstrated that the automated platform performs at a level similar to a manual process performed by an expert for TMT-based proteomics. We anticipate that this automated workflow will increasingly replace manual pipelines and has the potential to be applied to large-scale TMT-based studies, providing robust results and high sample throughput.

### Keywords
Automation, Proteomics, Tandem mass tags

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA


