### Accession
PXD020080

### Title
TET2 binding protein of human colon cancer cell SW480-SW620

### Description
This project was aimed to identify proteins interatcted with TET2 and the differences between SW480 and SW620.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysis of SW480-lenti, sw480-TET2,sw620-lenti and sw620-TET2 was used to generate data.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with the help of software provieded by the manifacture.

### Publication Abstract
Mutation-induced malfunction of ten-eleven translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2) is widely reported in haematological malignancies. However, the role of TET2 in solid cancers, including colorectal cancer (CRC), is unclear. Here, we found that TET2 malfunction in CRC is mostly due to decreased nuclear localization and that nuclear localization of TET2 is correlated with better survival of patients. To explore the underlying mechanisms, 14 immortalized solid tumour cell lines and 12 primary CRC cell lines were used. TET2 was mostly detected in the nucleus, and it induced significant DNA demethylation and suppressed cell growth by demethylating RORA and SPARC in cell lines like SW480. While in cell lines like SW620, TET2 was observed in the cytosol and did not affect DNA methylation or cell growth. Further examination with immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry illustrated that &#x3b2;-catenin activation was indispensable for the nuclear localization and tumour suppression effects of TET2. In addition, the &#x3b2;-catenin pathway activator IM12 and the TET2 activator vitamin C were used simultaneously to enhance the effects of TET2 under low-expression conditions, and synergistic inhibitory effects on the growth of cancer were observed both in vitro and in vivo. Collectively, these data suggest that &#x3b2;-catenin-mediated nuclear localization of TET2 is an important therapeutic target for solid tumours.

### Keywords
Tet2 colon cancer sw480-sw620

### Affiliations
GIBH

### Submitter
li changpeng

### Lab Head
Dr Zheng Hui
GIBH


