### Accession
PXD009418

### Title
Analysis of the preserved amino acid bias in peptide profiles of Iron Age teeth from a tropical environment enabling sexing of individuals using amelogen in MRM

### Description
We describe the first dental proteomic profiles of Iron Age individuals (c2000-1000 years B.P), collected from the site of Long Long Rak rock shelter (LLR) in northwest Thailand. A bias toward the preservation of small, acidic and hydrophobic amino acids is observed. It is evident that the 212 proteins identified (2 peptide, FDR <1%) comprise a palimpsest of alterations that occurred both ante-mortem and post-mortem. Conservation of particular amino acids has contributed to the identification of amelogenin peptides. A novel MRM method for sexing individuals using the amelogenin protein is described, with four teeth indicating male origin. Stable isotope analysis using carbon and oxygen isotopes highlights the strongly C3 based (~80%) diet of the Long Long Rak cemetery people, which probably comprised rice combined with protein from freshwater fish among other food items. The combination of pathway and isotopic analysis adds weight to the relatively simple C3 based diets having contributed to the enrichment of pathways associated with metabolic conditions and shows capacity for harboring these conditions prior to death. The combination of proteomics and stable isotope analysis provides a complementary strategy for assessing the demography, diet, lifestyle and possible diseases experienced by ancient populations.  

### Sample Protocol
Six Teeth were collected from two log coffins (C2 and C6) from Chamber 1 of a three-chambered cave at LLR in Ban Tham Lod, Highland Pang Mapha, in northwest Thailand in the borderland between Thailand and Myanmar. Controls included deciduous teeth from two healthy individuals (n=2), and extracted adult teeth from two healthy individuals (1 male, 1 female) recovered 30 years ago from modern day humans. Control samples were run in duplicate and sufficient protein was obtained from sample 2B to be run in duplicate. LLR samples 2B, 2D, 6A, 6B, 6D where used in shotgun experiments and were treated as biological replicates representing the LLR population. Briefly, teeth were cut lengthwise with a diamond blade. One portion of half of the tooth was used for proteomic analysis. All preparations for protein extractions were carried out in a biological safety cabinet in a PC1 lab environment. Appropriate protective equipment including gloves were worn when handling specimens. All care was taken to avoid cross-contamination by wiping down all surfaces between sampling. A dental burr was used to abrade the tooth surface and remove any surface contamination prior to ultrasonic cleaning for 30 min. Other potential contamination was handled with further wash steps as follows. Teeth were washed overnight in 0.5M HCl at 4⁰C followed by an overnight wash in 500mM NaCl in 50mM NH4CO3, pH8 with added protease inhibitors (Roche, EDTA free) at 10 RPM on a shaker at 4⁰C. The tooth samples were then rinsed for 5mins in ddH20 twice and air-dried in a biological safety cabinet. The tooth enamel / dentin was crushed in a mortar and pestle under liquid nitrogen. An equal amount of powder was weighed out (100mg) to continue the analysis. The samples were treated with 500 µL of 0.5M HCl at 4⁰C for 18 hours, followed by 5min centrifugation at 14,000g. The pellet was retained and resuspended in 50µl of 50mM NH4CO3in 10mM DTT, 2M Urea, pH8. Protein concentration was measured with 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare-Life sciences) following the manufacturer’s instructions and 10µg was taken for digestion with Trypsin overnight at 25⁰C in a 1:100 ratio. Digestion was halted by acidification, and peptides dried down. Digested peptides were reconstituted in 5 µL 0.1% formic acid and separated by nano-LC using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). The sample, 1.6µg (0.8µl), was loaded onto a virgin micro C18 pre-column (300 µm×5mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1% TFA) at 10 µL/min. After washing, the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port valve, Dionex) into line with a virgin fritless nano column (75 µm i.d × 12cm) containing reverse phase C18 media (1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1% formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1% formic acid) at 250 nl min−1 over 120min. The OrbitrapVelos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer was run in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein dataset-peak lists were generated using ProgenesisQI to create a mascot generic file and submitted to Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK, www.matrixscience.com). All MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot and the CRAPome database (downloaded Jan 2018) using the Mascot search program for protein identification with the following criteria: (1) species, Homo sapien; (2) allowed 3 missed cleavage; (3) variable modifications, Oxidation (M, K, P), Deamidation (N, Q), Carbamidomethyl (N-terminus), (4) peptide tolerance, ±4 ppm; (5) MS/MS tolerance, ± 0.4Da; (6) peptide charge +2 and +3; and (7) enzyme specificity, semi-tryptic. The peptides were considered to be confidently identified when matches had an ion score >34 and peptides were assigned to a protein. Only proteins identified from the Uniprot database with an adjusted FDR of 1%, with 2 unique peptides were used in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The first dental proteomic profile of Iron Age individuals (ca. 2000-1000 years B.P.), collected from the site of Long Long Rak rock shelter in northwest Thailand is described. A bias toward the preservation of the positively charged aromatic, and polar amino acids is observed. It is evident that the 212 proteins identified (2 peptide, FDR &lt;1%) comprise a palimpsest of alterations that occurred both ante-mortem and post-mortem. Conservation of amino acids within the taphonomically resistant crystalline matrix enabled the identification of both X and Y chromosome linked amelogenin peptides. A novel multiple reaction monitoring method using the sex specific amelogenin protein isoforms is described and indicate the teeth are of male origin. Functional analysis shows an enrichment of pathways associated with metabolic disorders and shows a capacity for harboring these conditions prior to death. Stable isotope analysis using carbon isotopes highlights the strongly C<sub>3</sub> based (&#x2248;80%) diet of the Long Long Rak cemetery people, which probably comprised rice combined with protein from freshwater fish among other food items. The combination of proteomics and stable isotope analysis provides a complementary strategy for assessing the demography, diet, lifestyle, and possible diseases experienced by ancient populations.

### Keywords
Iron-age, Proteome, Tooth

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre University of NSW Australia
UNSW

### Submitter
Valerie Wasinger

### Lab Head
Dr Valerie Wasinger
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre University of NSW Australia


