### Accession
PXD008296

### Title
Middle-Down Characterization of the Cell Cycle Dependence of Histone H4 PTMs and Proteoforms

### Description
In the present study, a middle-down approach is employed for the identification, characterization, and quantitation of the PTMs and proteoforms of histone H4 in two breast cancer cell lines. Our experimental strategy not only preserves the combinatorial attributes of existing PTMs, but also enhances the separation ability and reduces the complexity of downstream data analysis. The fluctuations in the relative abundances of common modifications throughout the cell cycle, including phosphorylation, acetylation, and methylation, suggest that they play significant roles at different stages of the cell cycle in breast cancer and could participate in carcinogenesis. In summary, our analysis advances the understanding and elucidation of cancer epigenetics at the single-molecule level, and lays the foundation for further study of histones or other proteins.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-10A cell lines are grown and chemically synchronized through thymidine and nocodazole block. Asynchronous cells and cells at S and M phase are harvested separately. After nuclei isolation, the resulting pellets are acid-extracted with 0.4 N H2SO4, precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid, washed by acetone, and air-dried overnight. Reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) separates the histones into different families (H2A, H2B, H3.1, H3.2, H3.3, H4, and H1). Histone H4 is collected and subsequently digested with endoprotease AspN at a protein:enzyme ratio of 10:1 for 6 h at 37 ºC. Digestion is quenched by freezing at -80 ºC. The target 23-amino acid peptide of the N-terminal tail of histone H4 was further purified on a second C18 column implemented on the second channel of the above HPLC system. The N-terminal tails of histone H4 were then separated in the second dimension by pH gradient-driven weak cation exchange-hydrophilic interaction LC (WCX-HILIC) with a nanoLC system (Eksigent 2D- NanoLC Ultra), coupled on-line to a custom-built hybrid Velos Pro- FT-ICR mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data processing is performed by a custom analysis suite adapted from a previously reported computational method. Both MS1 and MS2 spectra are analyzed with chromatographic context resulting in identity and quantity for each proteoform. Values are normalized to total percent of histone H4. Discrete and combinatorial values are obtained through marginalization of proteoform quantities. Statistical analysis and figure generation is done by use of R and Python programming languages and packages (matplotlib). Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05 derived from two-tail student’s t.test and Pearson correlations were used to determine reproducibility.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones are important epigenetic regulatory mechanisms that are often dysregulated in cancer. We employ middle-down proteomics to investigate the PTMs and proteoforms of histone H4 during cell cycle progression. We use pH gradient weak cation exchange-hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (WCX-HILIC) for on-line liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis to separate and analyze the proteoforms of histone H4. This procedure provides enhanced separation of proteoforms, including positional isomers, and simplifies downstream data analysis. We use ultrahigh mass accuracy and resolution Fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass spectrometer to unambiguously distinguish between acetylation and tri-methylation (&#x2206;m&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.036&#xa0;Da). In total, we identify and quantify 233 proteoforms of histone H4 in two breast cancer cell lines. We observe significant increases in S1 phosphorylation during mitosis, implicating an important role in mitotic chromatin condensation. A decrease of K20 unmodified proteoforms is observed as the cell cycle progresses, corresponding to an increase of K20 mono- and di-methylation. Acetylation at K5, K8, K12, and K16 declines as cells traverse from S phase to mitosis, suggesting cell cycle-dependence and an important role during chromatin replication and condensation. These new insights into the epigenetics of the cell cycle may provide new diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers.

### Keywords
Hilic, Ft-icr, Etd, Ptm, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Florida State University
Verna & Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Tingting Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas L. Young
Verna & Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology Baylor College of Medicine


