### Accession
PXD022405

### Title
Protein profiling reveals the characteristic changes of complement cascade pathway in the tissues of gastric signet ring cell carcinoma

### Description
Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) is a histological subtype of gastric cancer with distinct features in multiple aspects compared to adenocarcinomas (ACs). Lacking of systematically molecular overview to this disease made a slow progress in its clinical practice. In the present proteomics study, gastric tissues were collected from tumor and adjacency including 14 SRCCs and 34 ACs, and laser capture microdissection (LCM) was employed to eradicate cellular heterogeneity of the tissues. Proteome of tissues were profiled by data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). Based on the over 6 000 proteins quantified. Univariate analysis and pathway enrichment revealed that some proteins and pathways bared the differences between SRCC and ACs. Importantly, the up regulation for a majority of complement-related proteins were iconic for SRCC but not for AC. A hypothesis, based on the proteomics evidence, was proposed that the complement cascade was evoked in the SRCC microenvironment upon infiltration, while the SRCC cells survived the complement cytotoxicity by secreting endogenous negative regulators. Moreover, an attempt was made to seek appropriate cell models for gastric SRCC, through proteomic comparison of the 15 gastric cell lines and the gastric tumors. The prediction of supervised classifier suggested none of these gastric cell lines qualified in mimicking SRCC. This study discovered that complement cascade is activated at a higher level in gastric SRCC than AC.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues were obtained from the specimen library of digestive diseases in Xijing Hospital, China. LCM was employed to purify cancer cells and adjacent epithelial cells from tissues. LCM samples were lysis by ultrasonication. Protein were digested with trypsin. The resulted peptides were desalted with self-packed tip columns with OLIGO R3 reverse-phase resin and quantitated with Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay kit (23290, Thermo Scientific, USA). For PRM, approximately 1μg peptides spiked with 0.667ng IRT peptides in each sample was loaded to Ultimate 3000 nanoLC coupled with Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) at an elution gradient of 65 min. The peptide precursors were isolated in quadrupole, then the corresponding fragment ions were acquired in orbitrap at resolution of 30K.

### Data Protocol
The PRM signal data were analyzed by Skyline 20.1 (MacCoss Lab, USA), and the resulted quantities of peptides were taken for statistical evaluation of the pathway regulation.

### Publication Abstract
Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) is a histological subtype of gastric cancer with distinct features in multiple aspects compared with adenocarcinomas (ACs). The lack of a systematic molecular overview of this disease has led to slow progress in its clinical practice. In the present proteomics study, gastric tissues were collected from tumors and adjacent tissues, including 14 SRCCs and 34&#xa0;ACs, and laser capture microdissection (LCM) was employed to eradicate the cellular heterogeneity of the tissues. The proteomes of tissues were profiled by data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). Based on the over 6000 proteins quantified, univariate analysis and pathway enrichment revealed that some proteins and pathways demonstrated differences between SRCC and ACs. Importantly, the upregulation of a majority of complement-related proteins was notable for SRCC but not for ACs. A hypothesis, based on the proteomics evidence, was proposed that the complement cascade was evoked in the SRCC microenvironment upon infiltration, and the SRCC cells survived the complement cytotoxicity by secreting endogenous negative regulators. Moreover, an attempt was made to establish appropriate cell models for gastric SRCC through proteomic comparison of the 15 gastric cell lines and gastric tumors. The predictions of a supervised classifier suggested that none of these gastric cell lines qualified to mimic SRCC. This study discovered that the complement cascade is activated at a higher level in gastric SRCC than in ACs.

### Keywords
Signet ring cell, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Complement system proteins, Stomach neoplasms

### Affiliations
Clinical Laboratory of BGI Health, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China
BGI

### Submitter
Yuting Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Ren
Clinical Laboratory of BGI Health, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China


