### Accession
PXD015251

### Title
Analysis of factors bound to native metaphase ESC chromosomes following purification by flow cytometry

### Description
Stem cells are able to self-renew and also generate differentiated progeny. How gene expression patterns are transmitted through mitosis remains unresolved. Conventional studies have relied upon rigorous cell-cycle-stage synchronisation to find factors in mitotic lysates that could ‘bookmark’ the genome. Here we use an alternative approach, purifying native-unfixed mitotic chromosomes from different cell types using flow cytometry and directly identifying chromosome-bound proteins by LC-MS/MS. This revealed a rich profile of pluripotency- and lineage-specific transcription factors that remained bound to mitotic chromosomes in pluripotent ESCs and lymphocytes, as well as factors implicated in chromosome condensation, architecture and gene silencing. Removal of DNA methylation, PRC2 activity, or in situ cleavage of cohesin, each resulted in the reduced compaction of mitotic chromosomes. These data provide a comprehensive catalogue of bookmarking factors in pluripotent versus lineage-restricted cells and demonstrate an expected duality of function by candidates in regulating both gene expression and mitotic chromosome structure.

### Sample Protocol
FACS sorted mitotic chromosomes were pelleted by centrifugation (20,000 g, 10 min, 5 °C). Supernatants were removed and the obtained pellet was processed by in-Stage Tip digestion1 using commercially available iST tips (Preomics, Martinsried, Germany) using the manufacturers recommendations. Briefly, pellets were suspended in lysis buffer and heat denatured, reduced and alkylated on a heated shaking incubator (1,000 rpm, 10 min, 95 °C). DNA was fragmented by sonication on a ultrasonic water bath (10 min) and samples were digested with trypsin (500 rpm, 1 h, 37 °C). Sample clean-up and desalting was carried out in the iST device using the recommended wash buffers. Peptides were eluted with elution buffer (2x 100 ul), concentrated in a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in LC loading buffer (20 ul). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as follows: Resuspended protein digests were transferred to auto sampler vials for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. Sample volumes were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 um x 2 cm) at 8 ul/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA.Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75 um x 75 cm). Peptides were separated at 200 nl/min using a ramped 120 min gradient from 1-42% buffer B (buffer A: 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO). Eluted peptides were analysed operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 120,000 resolution (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap followed by HCD (Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation) of the top 30 most abundant. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 3e6 and 5e4 for a maximum injection time of 25 ms and 50 ms, respectively. A survey scan covering the range of 350 – 1750 m/z was used, with HCD parameters of isolation width 1.6 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.2.3) with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (16,950 entries, v.20180104). A reverse decoy database was created and results displayed at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications. Search parameters included: trypsin, two missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 0.7 and 20 min, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic information is transmitted from mother to daughter cells through mitosis. Here, to identify factors that might play a role in conveying epigenetic memory through cell division, we report on the isolation of unfixed, native chromosomes from metaphase-arrested cells using flow cytometry and perform LC-MS/MS to identify chromosome-bound proteins. A quantitative proteomic comparison between metaphase-arrested cell lysates and chromosome-sorted samples reveals a cohort of proteins that were significantly enriched on mitotic ESC chromosomes. These include pluripotency-associated transcription factors, repressive chromatin-modifiers such as PRC2 and DNA methyl-transferases, and proteins governing chromosome architecture. Deletion of PRC2, Dnmt1/3a/3b or Mecp2 in ESCs leads to an increase in the size of individual mitotic chromosomes, consistent with de-condensation. Similar results were obtained by the experimental cleavage of cohesin. Thus, we identify chromosome-bound factors in pluripotent stem cells during mitosis and reveal that PRC2, DNA methylation and Mecp2 are required to maintain chromosome compaction.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Mitosis, Stem cells, Chromosomes

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences
Lymphocyte Development Group MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Imperial College School of Medicine  Hammersmith Hospital Campus  Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN  United Kingdom

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G. Fisher
Lymphocyte Development Group MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Imperial College School of Medicine  Hammersmith Hospital Campus  Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN  United Kingdom


