### Accession
PXD027258

### Title
Supermeres in breast and pancreatic cancer cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, and exomere nanoparticles, are under intense investigation for cargo that may serve as clinical biomarkers or therapeutic targets. Here, we report discovery of a new extracellular nanoparticle, termed supermeres. We performed LC/MS-MS proteomics analyses on gradient-purified sEVs, NVs, exomeres and supermeres. The proteomic profile of supermeres is clearly distinct from that of sEVs, NVs and exomeres. This study identifies a new functional nanoparticle replete with potential circulating biomarkers and therapeutic targets that can be exploited for clinical benefit in a host of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular samples including sEVs, exomeres and supermeres were isolated from MDA-MB-231 cells or PANC1 cells using high speed sequential ultracentrifugation and high-resolution iodixanol density gradient fractionation. Samples were lysed and quantified by BCA method. Equal amounts of proteins from each fraction were digested with trypsin in S-trap filters, and peptides were analyzed via LC/MS-MS using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For identification of peptides and proteins, tandem mass spectra were searched with Sequest against the UniprotKB human proteome database. Search results were assembled using Scaffold 4.3.2, where a minimum protein probability of 99%, a minimum peptide probability of 95%, and a minimum of 2 distinct peptides within the sample set were required for protein and peptide identifications. Spectral counts of proteins were normalized by the total spectral counts and log2-transformed, and differential expression was performed using LIMMA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Supermere, Exomere, Proteomics, Sevs, Cancer

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt university
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University


