### Accession
PXD015073

### Title
The core proteome of biofilm-grown clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates

### Description
Comparative genomics has greatly facilitated the identification of shared as well as unique features among individual cells or tissues, and thus offers the potential to find disease markers. While proteomics is recognized for its potential to generate quantitative maps of protein expression, comparative proteomics in bacteria has been largely restricted to the comparison of single cell lines or mutant strains. In this study, we used a data independent acquisition (DIA) technique, which enables global protein quantification of large sample cohorts, to record the proteome profiles of overall 27 whole genome sequenced and transcriptionally profiled clinical isolates of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Analysis of the proteome profiles across the 27 clinical isolates grown under planktonic and biofilm growth conditions led to the identification of a core biofilm-associated protein profile. Furthermore, we found that protein-to-mRNA ratios between different P. aeruginosa strains are well correlated, indicating conserved patterns of post-transcriptional regulation. Uncovering core regulatory pathways, which drive biofilm formation and associated antibiotic tolerance in bacterial pathogens, promise to give clues to interactions between bacterial species and their environment and could provide useful targets for new clinical interventions to combat biofilm-associated infections.

### Sample Protocol
Washed pellets were lysed in 800 µL lysis-buffer and sonicated as described previously. After sonication cell debris was removed by centrifugation and proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by TCA/Acetone as proposed elsewhere ([1], Protocol 5). In Brief, proteins were reduced by DTT and precipitated by TCA. The pellet was redissolved in ice-cold Acetone, spinned down and acetone precipitation was repeated. The resulting pellet was dried and redissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate- RapiGest (Waters, USA)-Solution. Afterwards, protein concentration was measured by DC-ProteinTM Assay (Bio-Rad, USA) and 50 µg protein was used for in-solution digest. After reduction by DTT followed by alkylation (IAA), proteins were digested by trypsin. Digestion reaction was stopped by adding TFA. After centrifugation and rejection of the pellet, peptides in the supernatant were dried by vacuum centrifugation. For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 80 µg, and separated into eight fractions using a reversed phase spin column (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150°C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1,163 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.3 µg/µl. For each analysis 1.5 µg of digested protein were enriched on a precolumn (0.18 mm ID x 20 mm, Symmetry C18, 5 µm, Waters, Milford/MA, U.S.A) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, HSS T3, 1.8 µm, Waters) using a 90 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1. Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top30 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 350–1,250 accumulated for 350 ms at a resolution of 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Four technical replicates per reversed phase fraction were analyzed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 65 variable size windows across the 400-1,050 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 350–1400 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 100 ms survey scan this resulted in an overall cycle time of 2.75 s. Two replicate injections were acquired for each biological sample.  1.  Vowinckel, J.; Capuano, F.; Campbell, K.; Deery, M.J.; Lilley, K.S.; Ralser, M. The beauty of being (label)-free: sample preparation methods for SWATH-MS and next-generation targeted proteomics. F1000Research 2014, 2, 272.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4,769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. Spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against the Pseudomonas genome database protein annotations of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain UCBPP-PA14 (5892 entries, May 2019) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to identify 2,275 proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using suitable high abundant peptides, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1%. The resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide area values. These peptides were filtered for those that are present in the proteome sequences of all the analyzed strains, normalized by total area sums and finally summed to protein area values of 1996 proteins. Proteome sequences were generated from consensus genome sequences produced with the mpileup option of the SAMtools package after DNA sequencing of the samples as described in [36]. Protein coding sequences were extracted based on the reference annotation, and ambiguous nucleotides (“N”) were replaced with reference nucleotides to be able to obtain proteome sequences. This, as well as the translation of these DNA sequences, was done using Biopython’s Bio.SeqIO module. In an additional filtering step, those proteins were excluded from the analyses that differed significantly (student’s t-test, pvalue < 0.5, log2 fold-change > 0.5) between two batches measured 5 month apart. Processed proteome data is available in Supplemental Table 2.  mRNAs were measured as described elsewhere [36,38] (planktonic samples) or as part of another project [Thöming et al, to be published] (biofilm samples) but with the same protocol. Sequences were then mapped to the P. aeruginosa PA14 genome using stampy  with default settings. Resulting read counts per gene (RPG) were normalized by DESeq  in R as described elsewhere. Processed transcriptome data is available in Supplemental Table 3. All enrichment analyses were conducted with the R-package bc3net and a p value < 0.05 as cutoff for significant enriched functions.

### Publication Abstract
Comparative genomics has greatly facilitated the identification of shared as well as unique features among individual cells or tissues, and thus offers the potential to find disease markers. While proteomics is recognized for its potential to generate quantitative maps of protein expression, comparative proteomics in bacteria has been largely restricted to the comparison of single cell lines or mutant strains. In this study, we used a data independent acquisition (DIA) technique, which enables global protein quantification of large sample cohorts, to record the proteome profiles of overall 27 whole genome sequenced and transcriptionally profiled clinical isolates of the opportunistic pathogen <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa.</i> Analysis of the proteome profiles across the 27 clinical isolates grown under planktonic and biofilm growth conditions led to the identification of a core biofilm-associated protein profile. Furthermore, we found that protein-to-mRNA ratios between different <i>P. aeruginosa</i> strains are well correlated, indicating conserved patterns of post-transcriptional regulation. Uncovering core regulatory pathways, which drive biofilm formation and associated antibiotic tolerance in bacterial pathogens, promise to give clues to interactions between bacterial species and their environment and could provide useful targets for new clinical interventions to combat biofilm-associated infections.

### Keywords
Microbiology, Swath, Bacteria, Mass spectrometry, Dia

### Affiliations
Medical School Hannover - ZFA Proteomics & Twincore, Molecular Bacteriology
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Jelena Erdmann

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany


