### Accession
PXD022998

### Title
Evaluation of the p53 isoform Δ133p53β aggregation capacity

### Description
p53 isoforms and particularly Δ133p53β play a critical role in cancer progression. We demonstrate that WT Δ133p53β activity is regulated through an aggregation-dependent mechanism. Creation of WT Δ133p53β aggregates depends on associations with specific interacting partners and was observed both in cancer cell lines and in human tumour biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
H1299 cell were transfected with empty pcDNA3Flag or plasmid expressing wt Δ133p53β. 24h afterwards upon protein extraction, immunoprecipitation analysis applying α-Flag agarose beads was performed. Samples were resuspended in sample loading buffer and loaded on a SDS-PAGE precast gel (12% polyacrylamide, Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Gels, Bio-Rad). Gel was stained with the PageBlue Protein Staining Solution (Euromedex).  Enzymatic in-gel digestion was performed according to the Shevchenko protocol (1). Briefly, gel slices were destained by three washes in 50% acetonitrile, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and incubated overnight at 25°C (with shaking) with 1 µg of trypsin (Gold, Promega, Madison USA) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid, and dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid - 2% acetonitrile and analyzed online by nano-flow HPLC-nanoelectrospray ionization using a Qexacive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® precolumn (0.3 mm x 10 mm). A gradient consisting of 0-25% B for 100 min, 25-90% B for 5 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1 % formic acid in 80 %acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary (0.075 mm x 500 mm) reverse-phase column (Pepmap®, Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with a stainless steel LC/MS emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS/MS experiments comprised cycles of 13 events; one MS1 scan with Orbitrap mass analysis at 60,000 resolutions followed by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) of the 12 most abundant precursors (resolution: 30.000, NCE: 28). Spectra were acquired with the instrument operating in the information-dependent acquisition mode throughout the HPLC gradient. The mass scanning range was m/z 375–1500 and standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were: spray voltage, 2 kV; heated capillary temperature, 270°C; S lens RF level, 55.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant software package (v 1.5.5.1). Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregation, P53 isoform, Δ133p53β

### Affiliations
CRBM, CNRS, UMR5237, Montpellier
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Roux
CRBM, CNRS, UMR5237, Montpellier


