### Accession
PXD026117

### Title
LC-MS analysis of in vitro SUMOylated SRFR1 protein.

### Description
FLAG-SRFR1 was expressed in reconstituted E. coli system (Okada el al 2009) in the presence of SUMO1 T91R SUMOylation-competent (containing diglycine, GG) or -deficient (diglycine replaced by dialanine, AA) isoforms, SCE1a, and SAE1/2. After induction of expressions, total extracts were probed with anti-FLAG antibodies. A slower migrating band than FLAG-SRFR1 was detected in the presence of only GG, but not AA forms of co- expressed SUMO1. We then subjected the slower migrating protein bands of SRFR1 expressed with SUMO1 T91R for trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. SUMO1, but not SUMO2 or SUMO3 footprints on selective lysine residues of SRFR1 was detected in the identified peptides. Remarkably, lysine residue present in the previously predicted LK325EE SUMOylation motif was identified with SUMO1-modifications. In addition, the K229 residue of SRFR1 was also covalently modified by SUMO1 even though conserved features of a SUMOylation motif was absent for this lysine.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was processed according to protocol mentioned in Ingole et al., 2021 (Ingole KD, Dahale SK, Bhattacharjee S. Proteomic analysis of SUMO1-SUMOylome changes during defense elicitation in Arabidopsis. J Proteomics. 2021 Feb 10;232:104054. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.104054. Epub 2020 Nov 22. PMID: 33238213.) In Brief: In gel trypsin digestion: Sample was incubated with Trypsin (Promega, USA) at final pro- tease: protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) for in-gel digestion at 37 ◦C for 16 h. Digested peptides were extracted using gradient of 20% to 80% ACN diluted in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Extraction solution having gel pieces were sonicated for 5 min in ultra-sonicator water bath to achieve maximum recovery of peptides. The pooled extracts were dried using speed-vac centrifuge. The peptides were desalted with Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific), 100 μl bed according to manufacturer instructions and peptides were eluted in 100 μl of 75% ACN in 0.1% FA. Eluates were dried using speed-vac centrifuge. Tandem Mass Spectrometry: Vacuum dried peptides were resuspended in 10 μl 2% ACN in 0.1% FA and subjected to MS/MS using TripleTOF® 5600+ (ABsciex) mass spectrometer instrument. The mass analyser was attached through the trap and analytical column with specification ChromeXP, 3C18-CL-120, 3 μm, 120 Å and 0.3 × 150 mm respectively. The spray nozzle was connected with electro ionization source to inject the peptide sample in a mass spectrometer. The used flow rate was 5 μl/min for the analytical chromatography to separate the peptides in the continuous gradient of elution with the 2%–90% acetonitrile for 65 min total run time. The system uses the solvent composition with mixture of two reservoirs. Reservoir A of 98% water and 2% ACN in 0.1% FA, and B with 98% ACN and 2% water in 0.1% FA was used. The acquisition was executed with conventional data-dependent mode while operating the instrument into an automatic MS and MS/MS fashion. The parent spectra were acquired with the scan range of 350–1250 m/z. The ion source was operated with the following parameters: ISVF = 5500; GS1 = 25; GS2 = 22; CUR = 30. The data dependent acquisition experiments was set to obtain a high resolution TOF–MS scan over a mass range 150–1500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For SUMO1-proteome analysis, raw MS data files were searched and peptide sequences were assigned using the MASCOT software (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science) against the Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (www.NCBI.nlm.NIH.gov/RefSeq/). Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 2.5 Da, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.3 Da and up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. The variable modification of Lys (K) residues by SUMO1 [QTGG p343.149184 m/z] was set. Peptide identification was accepted if the threshold was of more than 50% probability (p &gt; 0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Steady-state SUMOylome of a plant is adjusted locally during developmental transitions and more globally during stress exposures. We recently reported that basal immunity in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> against <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> pv <i>tomato</i> strain DC3000 (<i>PstDC3000</i>) is associated with strong enhancements in the net SUMOylome. Transcriptional upregulations of SUMO conjugases, suppression of protease, and increased SUMO translations accounted for this enhanced SUMOylation. Antagonistic roles of SUMO1/2 and SUMO3 isoforms further fine-tuned the SUMOylome adjustments, thus impacting defense amplitudes and immune outcomes. Loss of function of <i>SUPPRESSOR OF rps4-RLD1</i> (<i>SRFR1</i>), a previously reported negative regulator of basal defenses, also caused constitutive increments in global SUMO-conjugates through similar modes. These suggest that SRFR1 plays a pivotal role in maintenance of SUMOylation homeostasis and its dynamic changes during immune elicitations. Here, we demonstrate that SRFR1 degradation kinetically precedes and likely provides the salicylic acid (SA) elevations necessary for the SUMOylome increments in basal defenses. We show that SRFR1 not only is a SUMOylation substrate but also interacts <i>in planta</i> with both SUMO1 and SUMO3. In <i>sum1</i> or <i>sum3</i> mutants, SRFR1 stabilities are reduced albeit by different modes. Whereas a <i>srfr1 sum1</i> combination is lethal, the <i>srfr1 sum3</i> plants retain developmental defects and enhanced immunity of the <i>srfr1</i> parent. Together with increasing evidence of SUMOs self-regulating biochemical efficiencies of SUMOylation-machinery, we present their impositions on SRFR1 expression that in turn counter-modulates the SUMOylome. Overall, our investigations reveal multifaceted dynamics of regulated SUMOylome changes via SRFR1 in defense-developmental balance.

### Keywords
Srfr1, Arabidopsis, Sumoylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad, Haryana, India
Postdoctoral Researcher 

### Submitter
Kishor Ingole

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Saikat Bhattacharjee
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad, Haryana, India


