### Accession
PXD001379

### Title
LysargiNase cleavage specificity characterization

### Description
Determination of LysargiNase and tryptic ckeavage efficiency at dimethylated Lys residues

### Sample Protocol
Soluble E.coli proteome from sonication lysis in presence of protease inhibitors denatured, reduced, alkylated and modified by reductive dimehtylation of primary amines. Proteome was cpurified by Chloroform/methanol precipitation before digest with LysargiNase or trypsin (1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio). Peptides were desalted using Varian Omix C18 tips before analysis

### Data Protocol
Data acquired on a QStar XL, converted to mzXML. Peptide to sequence matching with X!Tandem in conjunction with Peptide Prophet as implemented in the TransProteomicPipeline v4.6. An estimated FDR of 0.05 was accepted for peptide identifications. Search parameters are included.

### Publication Abstract
To improve proteome coverage and protein C-terminal identification, we characterized the Methanosarcina acetivorans thermophilic proteinase LysargiNase, which cleaves before lysine and arginine up to 55 &#xb0;C. Unlike trypsin, LysargiNase-generated peptides had N-terminal lysine or arginine residues and fragmented with b ion-dominated spectra. This improved protein C terminal-peptide identification and several arginine-rich phosphosite assignments. Notably, cleavage also occurred at methylated or dimethylated lysine and arginine, facilitating detection of these epigenetic modifications.

### Keywords
Trypsin, E.coli, Dimethyl-lys, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Centre for Blood Research, University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M Overall
Centre for Blood Research, University of British Columbia


