### Accession
PXD030605

### Title
Identification of protein interaction partners of the lncRNA ADPGK-AS1

### Description
M2-like macrophage upregulated lncRNA ADPGK-AS1 regulates macrophage phenotype and modulates the influence of macrophages on lung tumor apoptosis and migration. Here we identified proteins that interact with ADPGK-AS1 that might give insight into how this regulation this is regulated on molecular level. We were able to identify interaction with mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, leading to regulation of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
For RNA pulldown, ADPGK-AS1 encoded in pCDNA3.1+ plasmid were linearized with a single cutter restriction enzyme before in vitro transcription using the HiScribe T7 quick high yield RNA synthesis Kit (New Englang Biolabs, Frankfurt, Germany). Transcribed RNA was isolated and biotinylated using the 3’-end biotin labeling Kit (Pierce, Waltham, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was again isolated and 3 µg of biotinylated RNA was resuspended in RNA folding buffer and heated up to 90 °C for 2 min. Subsequently, samples were incubated for 3 min on ice and 25 min on RT to allow the RNA correct folding. RNA pulldown was performed by incubation of biotinylated RNA in macrophage whole cell lysate in a head over tail rotator on 4 °C overnight. Formed RNA-protein complexes were crosslinked by UV light exposure for 90 seconds. Streptavidin beads were equilibrated with dilution buffer, then added to the samples and further incubated for 1 hour at 4 °C on a head over tail rotator for pulldown of the crosslinked RNA-protein-complexes. After incubation, the beads were washed four times for 10 min in dilution buffer at 4 °C. The last washing step was carried out in dilution buffer without addition of detergents or proteinase inhibitors, and beads were transferred into a fresh tube. Samples were centrifuged, supernatant discarded and beads were frozen at -80 °C for subsequent mass spectrometry.  Beads were resuspended in 20 µl 6M GdmCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing six  C18-disks . Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007). Peptides were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 %  eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 10E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnology), Perseus 1.6.1.3 (Tyranova et al 2016) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2013) were used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines as a fixed modification. The human reference proteome set (Uniprot, September 2021, 78120 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1. Reverse identifications and common contaminants were removed. Proteins were filtered to be at least identified 4 times in one experimental group.  Missing values were replaced from normal distribution. Significant interacting proteins were determined by student´s t-Test..   Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906 (2007).  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. (2016)The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 13:731-40.

### Publication Abstract
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) influence the transcription of gene networks in many cell types, but their role in tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) is still largely unknown. We found that the lncRNA ADPGK-AS1 was substantially upregulated in artificially induced M2-like human macrophages, macrophages exposed to lung cancer cells in vitro, and TAMs from human lung cancer tissue. ADPGK-AS1 is partly located within mitochondria and binds to the mitochondrial ribosomal protein MRPL35. Overexpression of ADPGK-AS1 in macrophages upregulates the tricarboxylic acid cycle and promotes mitochondrial fission, suggesting a phenotypic switch toward an M2-like, tumor-promoting cytokine release profile. Macrophage-specific knockdown of ADPGK-AS1 induces a metabolic and phenotypic switch (as judged by cytokine profile and production of reactive oxygen species) to a pro-inflammatory tumor-suppressive M1-like state, inhibiting lung tumor growth in vitro in tumor cell-macrophage cocultures, ex vivo in human tumor precision-cut lung slices, and in vivo in mice. Silencing ADPGK-AS1 in TAMs may thus offer a novel therapeutic strategy for lung cancer.

### Keywords
Rna/protein interaction

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Rajkumar Savai
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany


