### Accession
PXD027300

### Title
Potent anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity by the natural product gallinamide A and analogues via inhibition of cathepsin L

### Description
The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in late 2019, and the subsequent COVID-19 pandemic, has led to substantial mortality together with mass global disruption. There is an urgent need for novel antiviral drugs for therapeutic or prophylactic application. Cathepsin L is a key host cysteine protease utilized by coronaviruses for cell entry and is recognized as a promising drug target. The marine natural product, gallinamide A and several synthetic analogues, were identified as potent inhibitors of cathepsin L activity with IC50 values in the picomolar range. Lead molecules possessed selectivity over cathepsin B and other related human cathepsin proteases and did not exhibit inhibitory activity against viral proteases Mpro and PLpro. We demonstrate that gallinamide A directly interacts with cathepsin L in cells, and together with two lead analogues potently inhibits SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro, with EC50 values in the nanomolar range. However, in an in vivo mouse model of infection, gallinamide A did not reduce viral load in the lung tissue, possibly due to compensatory viral entry mechanisms. In support of this, in TMPRSS2-overexpressing cells gallinamide A had reduced anti-viral activity, but when combined with a TMPRSS2 inhibitor synergistically improved inhibition of viral entry. The data highlights the potential of cathepsin L as a COVID-19 antiviral drug target, and the likely necessity to inhibit multiple routes of viral entry routes to achieve therapeutic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of gallinamide A protein targets from VeroE6 cells: 80-90% confluent VeroE6 cells in 6-well plates were treated with gallinamide A only, or gallinamide A-alkyne probe, at 10 µM for 1 hr (performed in triplicate). The cells were washed 3 times with DPBS, lysed in 4% SDS buffer (4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) containing cOmplete ULTRA Mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Sigma) and immediately heated to 95oC for 10 mins. Protein quantitation (Bradford, Sigma) was performed on the lysates and 1 mg protein was used for a copper-catalysed click reaction (CuAAC) to azide-biotin and protein precipitated [ref Darabedian and Pratt, 2019]. The protein pellet was resuspended in 4% SDS buffer then incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce) to enrich for biotinylated targets. After binding, beads were washed 6x with 1% SDS in PBS then 4x with PBS. Bound protein was eluted by heating to 95oC for 10 mins in 4% SDC buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0). To identify gallinamide A-CatL covalent adducts in cells, VeroE6 cells were treated with gallinamide A as above then lysed in 4% SDC buffer before proceeding to proteomics analysis. Proteomics and Activity Assays using Cell Lysates: For proteomics, cell lysates, or eluates from SA-bead enichment, were digested to peptides and purified using a protocol described previously (PMID: 33657384). Peptide mixtures were analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS as described. The HEK293, MRC5, and A549 cells were analysed using the Homo sapiens proteome database and the VeroE6 cells using the Chlorocebus sabaeus proteome database, both of which were downloaded from Uniprot. The identification of the gallinamide A covalent adduct on cathepsin L was performed using a wildcard search for potential adducts on cysteine ranging from -40 to 600 Da. This adduct was quantified in VeroE6 cell lysates using a targeted parallel reaction monitoring acquisition method. Isolation of precursor ions at m/z 807.3928 (+4) NQGQC(Cam)GSC(galA)WAFSATGALEGQMFRK, and m/z 1033.4898 (+3) NQGQC(galA)GSC(Cam)WAFSATGALEGQMFR with a window of 0.7 Th, prior to HCD fragmentation and orbitrap spectral acquisition was performed on a Thermo Eclipse Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification were performed using either MaxQuant, or Byonic (Protein Metrics), with a 1% false discovery rate at both the peptide and protein level using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Cathepsin L is a key host cysteine protease utilized by coronaviruses for cell entry and is a promising drug target for novel antivirals against SARS-CoV-2. The marine natural product gallinamide A and several synthetic analogues were identified as potent inhibitors of cathepsin L with IC<sub>50</sub> values in the picomolar range. Lead molecules possessed selectivity over other cathepsins and alternative host proteases involved in viral entry. Gallinamide A directly interacted with cathepsin L in cells and, together with two lead analogues, potently inhibited SARS-CoV-2 infection <i>in vitro</i>, with EC<sub>50</sub> values in the nanomolar range. Reduced antiviral activity was observed in cells overexpressing transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2); however, a synergistic improvement in antiviral activity was achieved when combined with a TMPRSS2 inhibitor. These data highlight the potential of cathepsin L as a COVID-19 drug target as well as the likely need to inhibit multiple routes of viral entry to achieve efficacy.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid, Cathepsin l, Mrc5, Gallinamide a, Hek293, Veroe6

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Travis Ruan

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
The University of Sydney


