### Accession
PXD042546

### Title
Spectral Library Search for Improved TMTpro Labelled Peptide Assignment in Human Plasma Proteomics

### Description
Clinical biomarker discovery is often based on the analysis of human plasma samples. However, the high dynamic range and complexity of plasma pose significant challenges to mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Current methods for improving protein identifications require laborious pre-analytical sample preparation. In this study, we developed and evaluated a TMTpro-specific spectral library for improved protein identification in human plasma proteomics. The library was constructed by LC-MS/MS analysis of highly fractionated TMTpro-tagged human plasma, human cell lysates, and relevant arterial tissues. The library was curated using several quality filters to ensure reliable peptide identifications. Our results show that spectral library searching using the TMTpro spectral library improves the identification of proteins in plasma samples compared to conventional sequence database searching.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were prepared either as un-depleted, MARS14-depleted or Proteominer enriched.Briefly described, un-depleted plasma proteins were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 150 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), acetone precipitated, and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Protein pellets were then redissolved in 8 M urea prior to addition of a triethylammonium bicarbonate solution (TEAB) followed by tryptic protein digestion (protein:trypsin: 20:1 w/w) and incubation at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic peptides from artery walls and intraluminal thrombus from abdominal aortic aneurysms was prepared by dissolving approx. 10 mg of collected walls or trombus in an extraction buffer (200 mmol/L dithiothreitol, 50 mmol/L tetraethylammonium bicarbonate, and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate) followed by ultrasonication (3 rounds of 15 min ultrasonication followed by 15 minutes of cooling.Extracted proteins were alkylated by addition of a 600 mmol/L iodoacetamide solution to a final dithiothreitol:iodoacetamide concentration ratio of 1:3 for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Extracted proteins were acetone precipitated, redissolved in 5 μL 8 mol/L urea, and subsequently further diluted to 1 mol/L urea in 200 mmol/L and proteolytically cleaved by the addition of 4 μg trypsin and overnight incubation at 30°C. A vial of commercially available lyophilized tryptic Pierce HeLa Protein Digest standard (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was redissolved in 80 µl of 0.2 M TEAB. Samples for the creation of the spectral library, seven µg of each tryptic sample digest was tagged with TMTpro 16-tags (126-134N) in 1:1 ratio (w/w) using the manufacturers’ standard procedure (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA; lot. nr: WA314599).

### Data Protocol
Raw files acquired for spectral library construction were converted to mzML files using MSConvertGUI from ProteoWizard (v. 3.0.23052) with peakPicking enabled and zlib compression disabled. The resulting mzML files were then processed using the FragPipe (v. 19.1) suite (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/) applying the ‘TMT16’ template in which files were searched using MSFragger (v. 3.7) and, peptide validation using PeptideProphet (v. 4.8.1), both applying default settings. The generated .pepXML files were then imported into SpectraST (v. 5.0) as part of the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (v. 6.2.0), which then generated the initial raw spectral library from the .pepXML files. SpectraST was then used to generate the consensus spectral library. The consensus spectral library was finally filtered for impure, low quality spectra and spectra of non-TMTpro labelled peptides. The spectrum library is available in three different formats: .sptxt, .msp and .zip. The .zip format is for direct import into Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4) and includes a decoy spectral library, which was automatically generated by Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Clinical biomarker discovery is often based on the analysis of human plasma samples. However, the high dynamic range and complexity of plasma pose significant challenges to mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Current methods for improving protein identifications require laborious pre-analytical sample preparation. In this study, we developed and evaluated a TMTpro-specific spectral library for improved protein identification in human plasma proteomics. The library was constructed by LC-MS/MS analysis of highly fractionated TMTpro-tagged human plasma, human cell lysates, and relevant arterial tissues. The library was curated using several quality filters to ensure reliable peptide identifications. Our results show that spectral library searching using the TMTpro spectral library improves the identification of proteins in plasma samples compared to conventional sequence database searching. Protein identifications made by the spectral library search engine demonstrated a high degree of complementarity with the sequence database search engine, indicating the feasibility of increasing the number of protein identifications without additional pre-analytical sample preparation. The TMTpro-specific spectral library provides a resource for future plasma proteomics research and optimization of search algorithms for greater accuracy and speed in protein identifications in human plasma proteomics, and is made publicly available to the research community via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042546.

### Keywords
Peptide identification; plasma proteomics; spectral library search; tmtpro

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark


