### Accession
PXD045003

### Title
Global proteome of PTH1R transfected U2OS cells

### Description
Brachydactyly type E (BDE), shortened metacarpals, metatarsals, cone-shaped epiphyses, and short stature, is an autosomal-dominant condition that commonly occurs as a sole phenotype. Parathyroid hormone-like protein (PTHrP) has been shown to be responsible in all forms to date, either directly or indirectly. We used linkage and then whole genome sequencing in a small pedigree, to elucidate BDE and identified a truncateddisintegrin-and-metalloproteinase-19 (ADAM19) allele in all affected family members, but not in nonaffected persons. Since we had shown earlier that the extracellular domain of the parathyroid hormone receptor (PTHR1) is subject to an unidentified metalloproteinase cleavage, we tested the hypothesis that ADAM19 is a sheddase for PTHR1. We transfected U2OS cells with ADAM19 (Control), PTH1R (disease-model), both PTH1R plus ADAM19 (healthy), and no transfection at all as another control. We did global proteome on these cell lines and compared them using a student t test.

### Sample Protocol
After transient transfection, cell were collected and lysed using RIPA buffer. 20 ug of protein was  taken from each sample to perform digestion. A final concentration of 10mM DTT was added to each sample for 1h at 37C to perform the reduction step. Addition of a 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 minutes in the dark at room temperature followed. Samples were digested with trypsin overnight. The digestion was coupled with SP3 protocol for sample clean up.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with DIANN 1.8.1 beta 16  with match between runs on.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Global proteome, Brachydactyly type e, Pth1r, Adam19

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Trendelina Rrustemi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine


