### Accession
PXD036680

### Title
Proteomes of ZIP8-wildtype and ZIP8-KO HeLa cell lines

### Description
The human ZRT/IRT-like protein 8 (ZIP8), encoded by the solute carrier family 39 member 8 gene SLC39A8, is a metal cation symporter located mainly on the cell membrane. ZIP8 is well-known for its role in transporting divalent metal ions into the cells – these ions include several essential micronutrients (e.g., iron [Fe], manganese [Mn], and zinc [Zn]) and non-essential toxic heavy metal cadmium (Cd).  In the current project, ZIP8 gene in the human cervical cancer HeLa cell line was knockout (KO) using the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology. Then, the proteomes of ZIP8-KO HeLa cell line and HeLa parental cell line (with wildtype ZIP8 gene sequence) were quantified using iTRAQ and LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
For sample collection, HeLa parental cell line and ZIP8-KO HeLa cell line were grown to 80–85% confluency in 10 cm diameter Petri dishes. Samples ready to be extracted were placed on ice and washed with 5 mL pre-chilled phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for six times. Then, 1 mL PBS per dish was added, and cells were scratched with a sterile plastic scraper. The cell suspension was then transferred to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 1200 × g for 5 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation, the supernatant was carefully removed, and the sample was stored at -80 °C.  For protein extraction and digestion, frozen cell samples were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, and 50 mM Tris•HCl pH 7.4) containing PhosSTOP™ protease inhibitor cocktail. The samples were subsequently homogenized by sonication on ice with 15% ultrasound power under the repeated settings of “2 sec on and 3 sec off” for 4 min. The homogenate was then cleared using centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. Next, supernatants were transferred into clean tubes, and protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. Then, 150 µg of protein from each lysate was mixed with solutions of 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris•HCl, 0.1 M dithiothreitol, and 5 mM iodoacetamide, as described in Wiśniewski et al. (2009; PMID: 19377485). Nanosep® centrifugal devices were used to centrifuge the samples.  For iTRAQ labelling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 μL of isopropanol and added to the respective peptide mixture for 120 min. The labelling reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 μL of Milli-Q® H2O, and all labelled samples were then pooled into one sample. After pooling, the samples were evaporated by vacuum concentration to remove excess water, triethylammonium bicarbonate, and isopropanol. Specifically, the ZIP8-WT control samples (H1, H2, and H3) were labelled with tag-113, -114, and -115, while the ZIP8-KO samples (Z1, Z2, and Z3) were labelled with tag-116, -117, and -118.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, data-dependent acquisition (DDA) MS techniques on a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ MS fitted with a Nanospray Flex™ ion source were used. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 1.9 kV and an interface heater temperature of 275 °C. The MS was operated with FULL-MS scans. For DDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 msec, and up to 20 product ion scans (50 msec) were collected. Only spectra with a charge state of 2–4 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and quantification using the Proteome Discoverer™ (v2.1.0.81). The local false discovery rate was 1.0% after searching against the Homo sapiens protein database with a maximum of two missed cleavages and one missed termini cleavage. The following settings were selected: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Pyro-glu from E, and Pyro-glu from Q for variable modifications; Carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ 8plex (K), and iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide N-term) for fixed modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Single-gene knockout-coupled omics, Slc39a8, Itraq, Hela cell line, Zip8

### Affiliations
Shantou University Medical College
Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Epigenetics, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041, Guangdong, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
Heng Wee Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Andy T. Y. Lau
Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Epigenetics, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041, Guangdong, People’s Republic of China


