### Accession
PXD000630

### Title
Anopheles gambiae brain proteomic analysis

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Anopheles gambiae brain tissue after in-gel trypsin digestion. To gain insights into neurobiology of the Anopheles gambiae mosquito, we carried out a proteomic analysis of its brain using a comprehensive proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, high resolution Fourier-transform tandem mass spectrometry revealed a repertoire of >1,800 proteins in the mosquito brain of which >100 were designated as hypothetical. We identified proteins that were found to be implicated in diverse biological processes including metabolism, transport, transcriptional and translational machinery and olfaction.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data was searched using Sequest and Mascot search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3) against An. gambiae (AgamP3.6 genebuild) protein database. The search parameters include: oxidation of methionine as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification. A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed for tryptic peptides. Mass error window of 20 ppm and 0.1 Da were allowed for MS and MS/MS, respectively. 1% FDR was used as a cut-off value for reporting identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Anopheles gambiae has a well-adapted system for host localization, feeding, and mating behavior, which are all governed by neuronal processes in the brain. However, there are no published reports characterizing the brain proteome to elucidate neuronal signaling mechanisms in the vector. To this end, a large-scale mapping of the brain proteome of An. gambiae was carried out using high resolution tandem mass spectrometry, revealing a repertoire of &gt;1800 proteins, of which 15% could not be assigned any function. A large proportion of the identified proteins were predicted to be involved in diverse biological processes including metabolism, transport, protein synthesis, and olfaction. This study also led to the identification of 10 GPCR classes of proteins, which could govern sensory pathways in mosquitoes. Proteins involved in metabolic and neural processes, chromatin modeling, and synaptic vesicle transport associated with neuronal transmission were predominantly expressed in the brain. Proteogenomic analysis expanded our findings with the identification of 15 novel genes and 71 cases of gene refinements, a subset of which were validated by RT-PCR and sequencing. Overall, our study offers valuable insights into the brain physiology of the vector that could possibly open avenues for intervention strategies for malaria in the future.

### Keywords
Brain, Anopheles gambiae, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


