### Accession
PXD046401

### Title
Interactome analysis reveals a link of the novel ALMS1-CEP70 complex to centrosomal clusters

### Description
Alström syndrome (ALMS) is a very rare autosomal-recessive disorder, causing a broad range of clinical defects most notably retinal degeneration, type 2 diabetes and truncal obesity. The ALMS1 gene codes for a ~0.5 MDa protein, which has hampered analysis in the past. Interestingly, ALMS1 has been shown to localize at the centrioles and basal body of cilia, and is involved in signaling processes, e.g. TGF-β signaling. However, the exact molecular function of ALMS1 at the basal body is still elusive and controversial. We recently demonstrated that protein complex analysis utilizing endogenously tagged cells provides an excellent tool to investigate protein interactions of ciliary proteins. Here, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated endogenously tagged ALMS1 cells were used for affinity-based protein complex analysis. Centrosomal and microtubule-associated proteins were identified, which are potential regulators of ALMS1 function, like the centrosomal protein 70 kDa (CEP70). Candidate proteins were further investigated in ALMS1 deficient hTERT-RPE1 cells. Loss of ALMS1 led to shortened cilia with no change in structural protein localization, e.g. acetylated and ɣ-tubulin, Centrin-3 or the novel interactor CEP70. On the other hand, reduction of CEP70 resulted in decreased ALMS1 at the ciliary basal body. Complex analysis of CEP70 revealed domain-specific ALMS1 interaction involving the TPR-containing C-terminal (TRP-CT) fragment of CEP70. In addition to ALMS1, several ciliary proteins, including CEP135, were found to specifically bind to the TPR-CT domain. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042621. Protein interactors identified in this study provide candidate lists, which help to understand ALMS1 and CEP70 function in cilia-related protein modification, cell death, and disease-related mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype and endogenously ALMS1 tagged HEK293T cells were cultivated in DMEM supplements (described above) at 37 °C in 5 % CO2. These cells were starved with DMEM (without supplements) overnight before lysis. Cells were seeded in 14 cm petri dishes.  For Flag IP, overexpression constructs N-terminal Strep Flag (NSF) -CEP70 and NSF-Raf1 were used for 48 h of transfection with polyethylenimine solution (PEI, 23966-2, PolyScience Inc, homemade). Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (0.5 % Nonidet-P40 (NP40, 11754599001, Roche); 2 % protease inhibitor mixture (11 83 61 45 001, Roche) and 1 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (P5726, P0044, Sigma Aldrich), followed by a 30 min incubation on an end over end rotator (NeoLab) at 4 °C. The samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g at 4 °C. To measure the protein concentration of the supernatant, the Bradford Assay (500-0006, BioRad) was performed ensuring an equal amount of protein per experiment. Lysates were incubated with sfGFP (gta-20, Chromotek) or Flag agarose beads (A2220, Sigma Aldrich) for 1 h at 4 °C. Lysate-sfGFP-bead mixtures were washed three times with washing buffer (0.1 % Nonidet-P40, 1 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 in TBS). For elution from sfGFP beads 0.2 M Glycine (pH 2.5) and 1M Trisbase buffer (pH 10.4) were used, followed by precipitation with LC-MS Methanol (1.06035, Merck) and chloroform (1.02445.1000, VWR). A subsequent protein digest was performed (DTT, 1.11474.0025, VWR; IAA 8.04744.0025, VWR; ABC, A6141, Sigma, and trypsin, T6567, Sigma; 37286.04, Serva), that was inactivated with TFA (40967, Fluka). Lysat-Flag beads were washed three times with 1x TBS (1 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3), followed by an on-bead digest with urea-digestion washing buffers (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) containing trypsin and 1 mM DTT. IAA was added to the supernatant and incubated over night at 37°C. Trypsin was inactivated using TFA. Afterwards, the samples were purified using stop-and-go extraction tips (Sp301, StageTips, Thermo Scientific USA) and solutions containing 5 % TFA in 80 %, 50 % Acetonitril (ACN, 34967-1L, Sigma) or HPLC water (1.153.33, Merck). The volume was reduced to max. 5 µl using a SpeedVac. 0.5 %TFA was added to a final sample volume of 15 µl. Total 5 µl of this solution was injected for the mass spectrometry measurement.

### Data Protocol
For quantification, unique and razor peptides were set. The Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3, 1.6.5.0) was used for statistical analysis [17]. A minimum of six (CEP70 analysis) to eight (endogenous ALMS1 cells) biological replicates and controls (RAF1 for CEP70, un-tagged cells for endogenously tagged ALMS1-sfGFP) are available for statistics. Potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence were excluded for all data. Within the groups, minimum half of the samples should have valid values. Furthermore, mean, standard deviation and coefficient of variation values of the groups was intended. Identified proteins are analyzed and classified in two Tier system. Tier 1 interactors are stringently filtered with significance A (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 0.05) and Student’s t-test (Permutation based FDR <0.05). Tier 2 includes additional proteins with a less stringent analysis (Significance A Benjamini Hochberg FDR < 0.05 and Student’s t-test p-value p < 0.05). The t-test, two-sample-test, was used to identify stable proteins, that are enriched within groups. Network was generated using experimental and functional interactions extracted from curated database using STRING [18] and visualized in Cytoscape 3.9.1 (https://cytoscape.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Alstr&#xf6;m syndrome (ALMS) is a very rare autosomal-recessive disorder, causing a broad range of clinical defects most notably retinal degeneration, type 2 diabetes, and truncal obesity. The ALMS1 gene encodes a complex and huge &#x223c;0.5&#xa0;MDa protein, which has hampered analysis in the past. The ALMS1 protein is localized to the centrioles and the basal body of cilia and is involved in signaling processes, for example, TGF-&#x3b2; signaling. However, the exact molecular function of ALMS1 at the basal body remains elusive and controversial. We recently demonstrated that protein complex analysis utilizing endogenously tagged cells provides an excellent tool to investigate protein interactions of ciliary proteins. Here, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated endogenously tagged ALMS1 cells were used for affinity-based protein complex analysis. Centrosomal and microtubule-associated proteins were identified, which are potential regulators of ALMS1 function, such as the centrosomal protein 70&#xa0;kDa (CEP70). Candidate proteins were further investigated in ALMS1-deficient hTERT-RPE1 cells. Loss of ALMS1 led to shortened cilia with no change in structural protein localization, for example, acetylated and &#x263;-tubulin, Centrin-3, or the novel interactor CEP70. Conversely, reduction of CEP70 resulted in decreased ALMS1 at the ciliary basal body. Complex analysis of CEP70 revealed domain-specific ALMS1 interaction involving the TPR-containing C-terminal (TRP-CT) fragment of CEP70. In addition to ALMS1, several ciliary proteins, including CEP135, were found to specifically bind to the TPR-CT domain. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD046401. Protein interactors identified in this study provide candidate lists that help to understand ALMS1 and CEP70 function in cilia-related protein modification, cell death, and disease-related mechanisms.

### Keywords
Protein complex analysis, Ciliopathy, Alström syndrome, Crispr/cas9, Centrosome, Basal body, Cilia

### Affiliations
Uniklinik Tübingen
Institute for Ophthalmic Research University of Tübingen

### Submitter
Tina Beyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Institute for Ophthalmic Research University of Tübingen


