### Accession
PXD030524

### Title
SU086 Treatment for Advanced Prostate Cancer

### Description
We tested a novel small molecule, SU086, as a therapeutic strategy for advanced prostate cancer.  Proteomic analysis was performed on treated cell lines and controls to identify protein differences.  Cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) was used to determine the interaction of SU086 with proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Line Analysis: Two biological replicates of C4-2 and DU145 cells were treated with 1 µM SU086 or vehicle control for 48 hours. Cells were harvested by scraping, lysed in 1% SDS lysis buffer with 1x protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich) followed by sonication using a Branson probe sonicator (Fisher Scientific) with an amplitude of 40% for 15 seconds on followed by 30 seconds off in cold water to minimize over-heating the sample. Protein concentration was quantified with a standard BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fifty µg of protein per sample were aliquoted out into new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes (Fisher Scientific). Sample volume was brought up to 100 µL using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich). Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 5 µL of 200 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (Sigma Aldrich) and incubating at 55 °C on a heating plate for 1 hour. Then, thiolate groups on cysteine were carbamidomethylated with 7.5 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide (Acos Organics) incubated at room temperature for 45 minutes in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with 1 mL of cold acetone and stored at -20 °C overnight. The following morning, precipitated proteins were pelleted via centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C and reconstituted back into solution with 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested with 3.0 µg of trypsin enzyme (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37 °C overnight.   Tryptic peptides were analyzed by injecting 3 µL of the tryptic peptides solution into a 10 µL loop using a Dionex Ultimate Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and subsequently loading tryptic peptides onto a C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 10 minutes. A reversed-phase liquid chromatography gradient consisting of mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was used to separate tryptic peptides on a 25 cm long analytical column packed with Magic AQ C18 resin (Michrom Bioresources). Eluted peptides were subject to MS/MS analysis on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient program was set to hold mobile phase B at 2% for the first 10 minutes, steadily ramped up to 35% B over the next 100 minutes, followed by an increase to 85% B over 7 minutes with a 5-minute hold at a constant flow rate of 0.5 µL/min. Each sample was analyzed by triplicate injections for the two biological replicates. The MS acquisition method consisted of the top 10 most abundant ions per MS1 scan within the scan mass range of 400-1800 m/z. Abundant ions were selected for higher energy collision induced dissociation (35 eV) in a data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 seconds and a MS1 mass resolution of 60,000.  DU145 cells were treated with vehicle control (DMSO) or SU086 (2.5 µM) at 70% confluency for 1.5 hours. Cells were scraped and washed twice with PBS. Cells were then pelleted, counted, and resuspended in PBS into ten tubes of 1x106 cells (in 100 µl PBS). Tubes were exposed to respective temperatures (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, 67 °C) for 3 min using a thermal cycler, followed by two minutes at room temperature, and subsequently snap frozen with liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed by freeze thaw cycling three times, then centrifuged at 14000 RPM for 30 min at 4 °C. Equal amounts of cell lysate from each temperature group was labeled with Tandem mass Tag (TMT) using manufacturers protocol (TMT10plex TM Isobaric Label Reagent Set #90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT labeled samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS in triplicate, as described by our group.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw data files were searched using Byonic 2.11.0 software (Protein Metrics) against a Swiss-Prot database reference human proteome (2017; 20,484 entries), including search parameters of trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance- 0.5 Da, fragment mass tolerance- 10 ppm, fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation. CETSA analysis was performed as previously described (Going, C.C. et al. Quantitative Proteomic Profiling Reveals Key Pathways in the Anticancer Action of Methoxychalcone Derivatives in Triple Negative Breast Cancer. J Proteome Res 17, 3574-3585 (2018).)

### Publication Abstract
Among men, prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-associated mortality, with advanced disease remaining a major clinical challenge. We describe a small molecule, SU086, as a therapeutic strategy for advanced prostate cancer. We demonstrate that SU086 inhibits the growth of prostate cancer cells <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i>, cell-line and patient-derived xenografts <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i>, and <i>ex&#xa0;vivo</i> prostate cancer patient specimens. Furthermore, SU086 in combination with standard of care second-generation anti-androgen therapies displays increased impairment of prostate cancer cell and tumor growth <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i>. Cellular thermal shift assay reveals that SU086 binds to heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) and leads to a decrease in HSP90 levels. Proteomic profiling demonstrates that SU086 binds to and decreases HSP90. Metabolomic profiling reveals that SU086 leads to perturbation of glycolysis. Our study identifies SU086 as a treatment for advanced prostate cancer as a single agent or when combined with second-generation anti-androgens.

### Keywords
Cell lines, Lc-ms/ms, Prostate cancer, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Radiology Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Palo Alto, CA USA

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Department of Radiology Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Palo Alto, CA USA


