### Accession
PXD026859

### Title
Proteomic analysis of filaggrin insufficient keratinocytes and secreted exosomes.

### Description
Filaggrin (FLG) is a key structural protein expressed in epidermal keratinocytes. Mutations in the filaggrin gene (FLG) are strongly linked to atopic dermatitis (AD) and allergic inflammation occurring later in life at distant body locations in AD patients. Keratinocytes secrete exosomes, small, lipid-rich membrane vesicles to communicate with distant cells, including within the immune system. The FLG gene was silenced in the HaCaT keratinocyte cell line by shRNA delivered using a lentiviral vector. HaCaT cells transduced with scrambled shRNA were used as a control.

### Sample Protocol
HaCaTs were cultured in exosome-depleted medium for 3 days upon reaching 80% confluence. Exosomes were isolated from conditioned media by ultracentrifugation. Cell and exosome samples for the proteome analysis were prepared in 4 biological replicates. Lysis of cells and exosomes was performed in 1% SDS. Samples were then processed using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method that involved thiol alkylation by iodoacetamide and protein digestion by trypsin. The digestion products were then desalted on a C18 resin following the STAGE Tips procedure. A Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer coupled with an Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System was used to carry out the LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectral libraries were constructed by sample measurement in the data-dependent acquisition mode. Relative quantification of the samples was performed by the SWATH-MS method in triplicates. ProteinPilot 4.5 software was used to build spectral libraries for the cell and exosome samples by database search against the SwissProt Homo sapiens database. SWATH-MS data was processed with corresponding libraries using the PeakView 2.2 software. The total area sums (TAS) normalization was applied to the obtained protein intensities. In the Perseus software, median values for technical replicate intensities were calculated followed by their log2-transformation and normalization by z-score. Significant differences between the test and control groups were determined by t-test. FDR-adjusted p-values < 0.05 were regarded as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ichthyosis vulgaris, Atopic dermatitis, Lc-ms/ms, Keratinocyte, Filaggrin, Exosomes, Cd1a

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


