### Accession
PXD015173

### Title
Cdk1 controls global epigenetic landscape  in embryonic stem cells

### Description
The cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) represents an ancient cell cycle kinase that has been conserved from yeast to humans.  Cdk1 is the only essential mammalian Cdk, which drives cytokinesis by phosphorylating a large number of cellular proteins.  To uncover additional functions of Cdk1, we generated a knock-in strain of mice expressing an analog-sensitive version of Cdk1 in place of wild-type Cdk1.  These mice and cells derived from them allow us to investigate Cdk1 function in essentially any compartment and at any stage of development.  In our study, we focused on embryonic stem (ES) cells, as this cell type expresses particularly high levels of Cdk1.  Very unexpectedly, we found that in ES cells the majority of Cdk1 substrates are localized on chromatin.  Cdk1 phosphorylates a large number of proteins involved in epigenetic regulation, including writers and erasers of all major histone marks.  Consistent with this finding, inhibition of Cdk1 altered histone modification status of ES cells.  High levels of Cdk1 in ES cells (and in induced pluripotent stem cells) phosphorylate and partially inactivate Dot1l, the histone H3 lysine 79 methyltransferase responsible for placing activating H3K79 marks on gene bodies.  Decrease of Cdk1 activity during ES cell differentiation de-represses Dot1l, thereby allowing coordinated expression of differentiation genes.  These analyses indicate that Cdk1 functions to maintain the epigenetic identity of ES cells.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enrichment, Tandem Mass Tag labeling, and fractionation of phosphopeptides obtained from the inhibition approach Phosphopeptide enrichment.   Digested peptides (∼10 mg per TMT channel) were resuspended in 1 ml of 2 M lactic acid/50% acetonitrile (ACN) and centrifuged at 15 000g for 20 min.  Supernatants were removed, placed in an Eppendorf tube containing 15 mg of titanium dioxide beads (GL Sciences, Japan), and vortexed for 1 h at room temperature.  Beads were washed twice with 2 M lactic acid/50% ACN and once with 0.1% TFA in 50% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 150 μl of 50 mM K2HPO4, pH 10, acidified with 40 μl of 20% formic acid, and subjected to C18 StageTip desalting (3M Empore, South Eagan, MN). Isobaric labeling of the enriched phosphopeptides was performed using 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents.  TMT reagents (5 mg) were dissolved in 250 μl of dry acetonitrile (ACN), and 10 μl was added to 100 μg of phosphopeptides dissolved in 100 μl of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5.  After 1 h, the reaction was quenched by adding 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine.  Labeled peptides were combined, acidified with 20 μl of 20% FA (pH ∼2), and concentrated via C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (50 mg bed volume). TMT labelled phosphopeptides were subjected to orthogonal basic-pH reverse phase (bpHrp) fractionation.  Labelled phosphopeptides were solubilized in buffer A (5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) and separated on an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm i.d. and 220 mm in length).  Using an Agilent 1100 binary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), a 45 min linear gradient from 8% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (flow rate of 0.8 ml/min) separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 96 fractions. The 96 fractions were consolidated into 24 samples in a checkerboard manner, acidified with 10 μl of 20% formic acid and vacuum-dried.  Each sample was redissolved in 5% formic acid, desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted for LC–MS/MS analysis. Identification of thiolabeled peptides.   Peptides were fractionated as described above and samples were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid-MS equipped with an ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography unit (Proxeon).  Peptides were separated on a 3 h RP gradient of 6-30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ~400 nl/min.  In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolutions and an AGC of 2 x 105 ions).  Top 10 most abundant ions were selected for isolation (0.5 Da), fragmentation (CID with 30% collision energy), and subsequent MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution, AGC of 1 x 105 ions).  Ions were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds and had a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms. Using the same LC conditions as the direct labelling experiments above, each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolutions and an AGC of 2 x 105 ions).  The subsequent MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted for top 10 most intense ions and fragmented by CID with following settings: collision energy of 35%, AGC 4x103, isolation window 0.5 Da, maximum ion accumulation time 150 ms with 40 seconds of dynamic exclusion.  Following the MS2 scan, for the MS3 analyses, precursor isolation was performed using a 2.5 Da window and fragmented in the ion trap using CID using a collision energy of 35%, AGC targeted of 8,000 ions and a maximum ion injection time of 150 ms.  Multiple fragment ions (SPS ions) were co-isolated and further fragmented by HCD.  Selection of fragment ions was based on the previous MS2 scan and the MS2-MS3 was conducted using recently described sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology55.  MS3 was performed using HCD with55% collision energy and reporter ion detection in the Orbitrap with an AGC of 150,000 ions, a resolution of 60,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and reporter ion quantitation in-house software tools were used to convert RAW file to the .mzxml format56.  Correction of erroneous charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were performed using method detailed in ref. 56.  Assignment of MS/MS spectra were made with the Sequest algorithm57 using an indexed Uniprot mouse database (compiled 2016) prepared with forward and reversed sequences concatenated as per the target-decoy strategy58.  Database searches were conducted using cysteine alkylation and TMT on the peptide N-termini and lysines residues as static modification, oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da (for CID).  Sequest matches were filtered using linear discriminant analysis as previously reported58 first to a dataset level error of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences. Protein rankings were generated by multiplying peptide probabilities and the dataset was finally filtered to 1% FDR at the protein level.  The final peptide-level FDR fell well below 1% (~0.2% peptide level).  A reductionist model was used for assignment of peptides to protein matches, where all peptides were explained using the least number of proteins.  Quantitation of peptides using TMT reporter ions was performed as previously published55,59.  Briefly, a 0.003 Th window centered on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was recorded for each of the 6 reporter ions, and the intensity of the signal closest to the theoretical m/z value was recorded.  TMT signals were also corrected for isotope impurities as per manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptides were only considered quantifiable if the total signal-to-noise for all channels was >200 and an isolation specificity of >0.75.  Within each TMT experiment, peptide quantitation was normalized by summing the values across each channel and then each channel was corrected so that each channel had the same summed value.  Protein quantitation was performed by summing the signal-to-noise for all peptides for a given protein.  Statistical analyses and dissemination of proteomic data.  Phosphopeptide site localisation.  We used a modified version of the Ascore algorithm to quantify the confidence with which phosphorylation site could be assigned to a particular residue.  Phosphorylation sites with Ascore values >13 (P ≤ 0.05) were considered confidently localized to a particular residue56.  Statistical analyses for phosphopeptide profiling.  Student’s t test was used to assign confidence in changes in phosphopeptide abundance.  Multiple test correction was performed by adjusting the calculated p-values according to Benjamini–Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
The cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) drives cell division. To uncover additional functions of Cdk1, we generated knockin mice expressing an analog-sensitive version of Cdk1 in place of wild-type Cdk1. In our study, we focused on embryonic stem cells (ESCs), because this cell type displays particularly high Cdk1 activity. We found that in ESCs, a large fraction of Cdk1 substrates is localized on chromatin. Cdk1 phosphorylates many proteins involved in epigenetic regulation, including writers and erasers of all major histone marks. Consistent with these findings, inhibition of Cdk1 altered histone-modification status of ESCs. High levels of Cdk1 in ESCs phosphorylate and partially inactivate Dot1l, the H3K79 methyltransferase responsible for placing activating marks on gene bodies. Decrease of Cdk1 activity during ESC differentiation de-represses Dot1l, thereby allowing coordinated expression of differentiation genes. These analyses indicate that Cdk1 functions to maintain the epigenetic identity of ESCs.

### Keywords
Kinase, Proteomics, Cdk1, Analogue sensivtive

### Affiliations
dana farber cancer institute and harvard medical school
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joel Chick

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Sicinski
dana farber cancer institute and harvard medical school


