### Accession
PXD006117

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lineage 7 Reveals Differentially Abundant Proteins Linked to Slow Growth

### Description
Differentially abundant proteins were quantified in the slowly growing Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis) lineage 7 strains and the M. tuberculosis lineage 4 reference strain H37Rv. Mass spectrometry  based proteomic analysis was employed to identify, quantitate and compare the protein profiles of strains from the two M. tuberculosis lineages (lineage 7 and 4). Label-free peptide quantification of whole cells from M. tuberculosis lineage 7 and 4 yielded the identification of 2825 and 2541 proteins, respectively. A combined total of 2867 protein groups covering 71% of the predicted M. tuberculosis proteome were identified. Comparative proteomic mapping of M. tuberculosis lineage 7 and 4 strains showed that the abundance of 125 proteins was significantly altered. Functional analysis showed that a number of M. tuberculosis proteins involved in growth and virulence were less abundant in lineage 7 compared to lineage 4. Five ABC transporter proteins, three phosphate binding proteins essential for inorganic phosphate uptake, and six components of the type 7 secretion system ESX-3 involved in iron acquisition were less abundant in M. tuberculosis lineage 7. This proteogenomic analysis provided an insight into the lineage 7-specific protein profile which may provide cues to understanding the differential properties of lineage 7 strains in terms of slow growth, survival fitness and pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
A total cellular protein lysate were extracted using a lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 tablet per 50 ml EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail  and 1 tablet per 10 ml PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Proteins were pre-fractionated by 1.0 mm, 4%-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel, at 80 V for 5 min followed by 20 min at 200 V. Colloidal Blue stained gel lane was divided into 6 fractions, and each fraction was subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Peptide products were analyzed by nano-LC–MS/MS using a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap mass spectrometer interfaced with an EASY-spray ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to a nano-LC HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Dionex). Peptides were injected in triplicates into a pre-analytic column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoviper, C18, 3µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å, 50µm x 15cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 120 min solvent gradient and flow rate of 0.3 μL/min at 60°C. The gradient used was from 2% to 30% solvent B for 90 min followed by 30% to 45% solvent B from 90 to 100 min. Thereafter the gradient was kept at 90% solvent B from 100 to 120 min, using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) as solvent A and 0.1% FA in 97% ACN as solvent B (FA: LC-MS grade, Fluka; ACN: LC-MS grade, Merck Laboratories). The MS instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. The full MS scans were acquired at 70K resolution, with automatic gain control target of 1 × 106 ions, maximum injection time of 200 ms and MS scan range 300-1800 m/z. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for peptide fragmentation with normalized collision energy set to 28. The MS/MS scans were performed using a data-dependent top10 method at a resolution of 17.5K with an automatic gain control target of 5×104 ions at maximum injection time of 100 ms and isolation window of 2.0 m/z units. An under fill ratio of 10% and dynamic exclusion duration of 30s were applied. Generation of raw files into MS/MS peak lists and quantifications were performed with MaxQuant (MQ) software package (version 1.4.0.5) as described by Cox and Mann (2008). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against M. tuberculosis H37Rv reference proteome UP000001584 (UniProt-proteome) using reverse decoy databases and a selection of known contaminants provided by MQ. The following parameters were applied for the database search: Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ion were applied. The ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ options were utilized with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus, conversion of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications for database searches. The first search for precursor ions was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for calibration, while 6 ppm was applied for the main search. For protein identification, at least 1 unique peptide was required per protein group. Minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required for identification. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.01 (1%) was set at both the peptide spectra matches and the protein group levels. For all other parameters, the default setting was applied.

### Publication Abstract
In order to decipher the nature of the slowly growing <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M</i>.tuberculosis) lineage 7, the differentially abundant proteins in strains of <i>M. tuberculosis</i> lineage 7 and lineage 4 were defined. Comparative proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry was employed to identify, quantitate and compare the protein profiles of strains from the two <i>M. tuberculosis</i> lineages. Label-free peptide quantification of whole cells from <i>M. tuberculosis</i> lineage 7 and 4 yielded the identification of 2825 and 2541 proteins, respectively. A combined total of 2867 protein groups covering 71% of the predicted <i>M. tuberculosis</i> proteome were identified. The abundance of 125 proteins in <i>M. tuberculosis</i> lineage 7 and 4 strains was significantly altered. Notably, the analysis showed that a number of <i>M. tuberculosis</i> proteins involved in growth and virulence were less abundant in lineage 7 strains compared to lineage 4. Five ABC transporter proteins, three phosphate binding proteins essential for inorganic phosphate uptake, and six components of the type 7 secretion system ESX-3 involved in iron acquisition were less abundant in <i>M. tuberculosis</i> lineage 7. This proteogenomic analysis provided an insight into the lineage 7-specific protein profile which may provide clues to understanding the differential properties of lineage 7 strains in terms of slow growth, survival fitness, and pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Type 7 secretion, Proteomics, Lineage 7, Mass spectrometry, Ethiopia

### Affiliations
Genome dynamics group, Oslo University Hospital
Department of Microbiology,Institute of clinical medicine, University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Shewit Kalayou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Tone Tønjum
Department of Microbiology,Institute of clinical medicine, University of Oslo, Norway


