### Accession
PXD016015

### Title
Hsp110 Mitigates α-Synuclein Pathology In Vivo

### Description
Parkinson’s disease is characterized by the aggregation of the presynaptic protein α-synuclein and its deposition into pathologic Lewy bodies. While extensive research has been carried out on mediators of α-synuclein aggregation, molecular facilitators of α-synuclein disaggregation are still generally unknown. We investigated the role of molecular chaperones in both preventing and disaggregating α-synuclein oligomers and fibrils, with a focus on the mammalian disaggregase complex. Here, we show that overexpression of the chaperone Hsp110 is sufficient to reduce α-synuclein aggregation in a mammalian cell culture model. Additionally, we demonstrate that Hsp110 effectively mitigates α-synuclein pathology in vivo through the characterization of transgenic Hsp110 and double transgenic α-synuclein/Hsp110 mouse models. Unbiased analysis of the synaptic proteome of these mice revealed that overexpression of Hsp110 can override the protein changes driven by the α-synuclein transgene. Furthermore, overexpression of Hsp110 is sufficient to prevent endogenous α-synuclein templating and spread following injection of aggregated α-synuclein seeds into brain, supporting a role for Hsp110 in the prevention and/or disaggregation of α-synuclein pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Sample prep is forebrain synaptosomes. We analyzed the four genotypes for differential protein expression to assess potential rescue of protein expression in disease state, as well as chaperone levels.  Mass spectrometric analysis. Synaptosomes of the denoted genotypes were prepared as described previously (1). 1. Westphal CH & Chandra SS (2013) Monomeric synucleins generate membrane curvature. J Biol Chem 288(3):1829-1840.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification on these samples was done on a Thermo Fusion Orbitrap as done previously (2). Proteins with at least 2 independent peptides were analyzed after normalizing both to spiked internal standards and total spectral counts. Pathways altered in the 4 genotypes were identified using STRING analysis. 2. Henderson MX, et al. (2016) Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with DNAJC5/CSPα mutation has PPT1 pathology and exhibit aberrant protein palmitoylation. Acta Neuropathologica 131:621-637.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease is characterized by the aggregation of the presynaptic protein &#x3b1;-synuclein and its deposition into pathologic Lewy bodies. While extensive research has been carried out on mediators of &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregation, molecular facilitators of &#x3b1;-synuclein disaggregation are still generally unknown. We investigated the role of molecular chaperones in both preventing and disaggregating &#x3b1;-synuclein oligomers and fibrils, with a focus on the mammalian disaggregase complex. Here, we show that overexpression of the chaperone Hsp110 is sufficient to reduce &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregation in a mammalian cell culture model. Additionally, we demonstrate that Hsp110 effectively mitigates &#x3b1;-synuclein pathology in vivo through the characterization of transgenic Hsp110 and double-transgenic &#x3b1;-synuclein/Hsp110 mouse models. Unbiased analysis of the synaptic proteome of these mice revealed that overexpression of Hsp110 can override the protein changes driven by the &#x3b1;-synuclein transgene. Furthermore, overexpression of Hsp110 is sufficient to prevent endogenous &#x3b1;-synuclein templating and spread following injection of aggregated &#x3b1;-synuclein seeds into brain, supporting a role for Hsp110 in the prevention and/or disaggregation of &#x3b1;-synuclein pathology.

### Keywords
Synapse, Alpha synuclein, Chaperone, Disaggregate, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Yale University
Associate Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Sreeganga Chandra
Associate Professor of Neurology and Neuroscience


