### Accession
PXD042753

### Title
Employing Hindlimb Unloading Model for The Identification of Serum Biomarkers Associated with Cardiovascular and Skeletal Muscle Deconditioning.

### Description
Microgravity and prolonged periods of inactivity cause a variety of diseases, including skeletal muscle mass loss and weakening as well as cardiovascular deconditioning. The primary causes of the inadequate preventative measures for these deconditionings are the lack of biomarkers and unknown underlying mechanisms of cardiovascular and skeletal muscle deconditioning in these conditions. Here, we used a hindlimb unloading (HU) mouse model that replicates astronauts in space and bedridden patients to first evaluate cardiovascular and skeletal muscle performance. Serum samples from these mice were used to identify new biomarkers using metabolomic and proteomic approaches. Three weeks of unloading resulted in alterations in cardiovascular system function in C57/Bl6 mice, as measured by changes in mean arterial pressure and heart weight. Unloading for three weeks also altered skeletal muscle function, resulting in a decrease of grip strength in HU mice, as well as skeletal muscle atrophy, as shown by a drop in muscle mass. A two-week recovery time from the unloading condition partially reversed these alterations, stressing the importance of the recovery process.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were taken on the day of sacrifice using the cardiac puncture procedure, which was conducted humanely under anesthesia, blood samples were then centrifuged at 2000 RCF for 10 minutes and the serum was transfered into a new tube and stored in -80 freezer. After animal sacrifice and tissue collection, tissues were snap frozen using liquid nitrogen and kept in a -80 freezer.  Proteins were precipitated from plasma and in-solution digestion was carried out on 100 µg total protein. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature (RT) with gentle agitation and then alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at RT for 1 hour in the dark, to prevent the formation of disulfide bonds. Proteins were pre-digested with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:100) for 3 hours at 30°C before being diluted four times with HPLC-grade water to a final concentration of ~1.5 M urea. The diluted samples were then digested overnight with trypsin (1:100 ratio) at 30°C. The digestion was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide preparations were then desalted using PIERCE C18 stage tips (100µL) as per manufacter instructions and dried before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed through MaxQuant (2.1.4.0) with default settings and searched against the mouse proteome (UP000000589, accesed 2022-12-05). One unique and two total peptides were required for a positive identification and the FDR (1%) estimated using the reversed target decoy approach

### Publication Abstract
Microgravity, in space travel and prolonged bed rest conditions, induces cardiovascular deconditioning along with skeletal muscle mass loss and weakness. The findings of microgravity research may also aid in the understanding and treatment of human health conditions on Earth such as muscle atrophy, and cardiovascular diseases. Due to the paucity of biomarkers and the unknown underlying mechanisms of cardiovascular and skeletal muscle deconditioning in these environments, there are insufficient diagnostic and preventative measures. In this study, we employed hindlimb unloading (HU) mouse model, which mimics astronauts in space and bedridden patients, to first evaluate cardiovascular and skeletal muscle function, followed by proteomics and metabolomics LC-MS/MS-based analysis using serum samples. Three weeks of unloading caused changes in the function of the cardiovascular system in c57/Bl6 mice, as seen by a decrease in mean arterial pressure and heart weight. Unloading for three weeks also changed skeletal muscle function, causing a loss in grip strength in HU mice and atrophy of skeletal muscle indicated by a reduction in muscle mass. These modifications were partially reversed by a two-week recovery period of reloading condition, emphasizing the significance of the recovery process. Proteomics analysis revealed 12 dysregulated proteins among the groups, such as phospholipid transfer protein, Carbonic anhydrase 3, Parvalbumin alpha, Major urinary protein 20 (Mup20), Thrombospondin-1, and Apolipoprotein C-IV. On the other hand, metabolomics analysis showed altered metabolites among the groups such as inosine, hypoxanthine, xanthosine, sphinganine, l-valine, 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol, and l-Glutamic acid. The joint data analysis revealed that HU conditions mainly impacted pathways such as ABC transporters, complement and coagulation cascades, nitrogen metabolism, and purine metabolism. Overall, our results indicate that microgravity environment induces significant alterations in the function, proteins, and metabolites of these mice. These observations suggest the potential utilization of these proteins and metabolites as novel biomarkers for assessing and mitigating cardiovascular and skeletal muscle deconditioning associated with such conditions.

### Keywords
Skeletal muscle atrophy, Plasma, Mouse, Recovery

### Affiliations
Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah
1 - College of Pharmacy, University of Sharjah, Sharjah 2 - Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah

### Submitter
Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Mohammad H Semreen
1 - College of Pharmacy, University of Sharjah, Sharjah 2 - Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah


