### Accession
PXD006798

### Title
Synaptosomal proteome from schizophrenia patients

### Description
Proteomic characterization of the synaptosome fraction of the orbitofrontal cortex using label-free and iTRAQ labeling strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosome fraction of post-mortem brain tissues was prepared from the orbitofrontal cortex region of SCZ patients (n=6) and controls (n=8) following Gray & Whittaker protocol. Extracted proteins were digested and iTRAQ labeled using three reporter groups for patients and one for a pool of controls. iTRAQ labeled peptide mix was analyzed by EASY-1000 nanoLC coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos and label free quantification was made in the EASY-1000 nanoLC and Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 against the NeXtProt (FDR <1%); for statistical analysis was used the Inferno RDN software.

### Publication Abstract
Schizophrenia is a chronic and incurable neuropsychiatric disorder that affects about one percent of the world population. The proteomic characterization of the synaptosome fraction of the orbitofrontal cortex is useful for providing valuable information about the molecular mechanisms of synaptic functions in these patients. Quantitative analyses of synaptic proteins were made with eight paranoid schizophrenia patients and a pool of eight healthy controls free of mental diseases. Label-free and iTRAQ labeling identified a total of 2018 protein groups. Statistical analyses revealed 12 and 55 significantly dysregulated proteins by iTRAQ and label-free, respectively. Quantitative proteome analyses showed an imbalance in the calcium signaling pathway and proteins such as reticulon-1 and cytochrome c, related to endoplasmic reticulum stress and programmed cell death. Also, it was found that there is a significant increase in limbic-system-associated membrane protein and &#x3b1;-calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, associated with the regulation of human behavior. Our data contribute to a better understanding about apoptosis as a possible pathophysiological mechanism of this disease as well as neural systems supporting social behavior in schizophrenia. This study also is a joint effort of the Chr 15 C-HPP team and the Human Brain Proteome Project of B/D-HPP. All MS proteomics data are deposited in the ProteomeXchange Repository under PXD006798.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Quantitative proteomics, Schizophrenia

### Affiliations
Dep. Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Gilberto Domont
Dep. Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


