### Accession
PXD003898

### Title
Pachysolen tannophilus LC-MSMS

### Description
The genetic code is the cellular translation table for the conversion of nucleotide sequences into amino acid sequences. Changes to the meaning of sense codons would introduce errors into almost every translated message and are expected to be highly detrimental. However, reassignment of single or multiple codons in mitochondria and nuclear genomes, although extremely rare, demonstrates that the code can evolve. Several models for the mechanism of alteration of nuclear genetic codes have been proposed (including ‘codon capture’, ‘genome streamlining’ and  ‘ambiguous intermediate’ theories), but with little resolution. Here, we report a novel sense codon reassignment in Pachysolen tannophilus, a yeast related to the Pichiaceae. By generating proteomics data and using tRNA sequence comparisons we show that Pachysolen translates CUG codons as alanine and not as the more usual leucine. The Pachysolen tRNA(CAG) is an anticodon-mutated Ala-tRNA containing all major alanine tRNA recognition sites. The polyphyly of the CUG-decoding tRNAs in yeasts is best explained by a tRNA loss driven codon reassignment mechanism. Loss of the CUG-tRNA in the ancient yeast is followed by gradual decrease of respective codons and subsequent codon capture by tRNAs whose anticodon is not part of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase recognition region.

### Sample Protocol
Pachysolen tannophilus NRRL Y-2460 was obtained from ATCC (LGC Standards). Cells were grown in YFPD medium at 30°C, harvested by centrifugation (20' at 5,000 x g), and washed and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 6,8, 100 mM KCl). The cells were disrupted by three passages through a French press (20,000 lb/in2) at 4°C, and intact cells and the cell debris removed by centrifugation (10' at 15,000 x g). The supernatant was subjected to SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis. SDS-PAGE-separated protein samples were processed as described by Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko et al. 1996).

### Data Protocol
The Pachysolen genome assembly (Liu et al. 2012) has been obtained from NCBI (GenBank accessions CAHV01000001-CAHV01000267). Gene prediction was done with AUGUSTUS (Stanke and Waack 2003) using the parameter “genemodel=complete”, the gene feature set of Candida albicans, and the standard codon translation table. The gene prediction resulted in 5,288 predicted proteins, out of which 4,210 contain at least one CUG codon. For mass spectrometry database search the database was multiplied so that each new database contains the CUG codons translated by another amino acid.  Data analysis and search were performed using MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 as search engine with 1% FDR against the Pachysolen genome annotation database. Search parameter for searching the precursor and fragment ion masses against the database were as described in Oellerich et al. (Oellerich et al. 2011) except that all peptides shorter than seven amino acids were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
The genetic code is the cellular translation table for the conversion of nucleotide sequences into amino acid sequences. Changes to the meaning of sense codons would introduce errors into almost every translated message and are expected to be highly detrimental. However, reassignment of single or multiple codons in mitochondria and nuclear genomes, although extremely rare, demonstrates that the code can evolve. Several models for the mechanism of alteration of nuclear genetic codes have been proposed (including "codon capture," "genome streamlining," and "ambiguous intermediate" theories), but with little resolution. Here, we report a novel sense codon reassignment in Pachysolen tannophilus, a yeast related to the Pichiaceae. By generating proteomics data and using tRNA sequence comparisons, we show that Pachysolen translates CUG codons as alanine and not as the more usual leucine. The Pachysolen tRNACAG is an anticodon-mutated tRNA(Ala) containing all major alanine tRNA recognition sites. The polyphyly of the CUG-decoding tRNAs in yeasts is best explained by a tRNA loss driven codon reassignment mechanism. Loss of the CUG-tRNA in the ancient yeast is followed by gradual decrease of respective codons and subsequent codon capture by tRNAs whose anticodon is not part of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase recognition region. Our hypothesis applies to all nuclear genetic code alterations and provides several testable predictions. We anticipate more codon reassignments to be uncovered in existing and upcoming genome projects.

### Keywords
Yeast cug codon usage

### Affiliations
Group Systems Biology of Motor Proteins, Department of NMR-based Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Martin Kollmar

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Kollmar
Group Systems Biology of Motor Proteins, Department of NMR-based Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany


