### Accession
PXD032001

### Title
Mining gastric cancer cellular quantitative phosphotyrosine proteomics data to analyse the signiling cascade regulated my CAMKK2 in gastric cancer

### Description
Gastric cancer is a global health concern. Tyrosine kinases (TKs) are important mediators of signaling cascades, which regulate diverse biological processes like growth, differentiation, metabolism, and apoptosis in response to external and internal stimuli. Molecular alterations in various signaling pathways have been implicated in the development and late-stage progression/metastasis of gastric cancer. Dysregulation of TK’s are reported to be involved in different malignancies.1 Tyrosine kinases represent a major portion of all oncoproteins that play a transforming role in a plethora of cancers.. This study aimed at analysing the phosphotyrosine proteome change upon inhibition of CAMKK2 in gastric cancer cells using LC-MS/MS based quantitative inhibition proteomic approach. A label free based quantitative approach was used to identify the significantly altered phosphorylations upon inhibition of CAMKK2. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and pathway analysis was done for the significantly altered proteins and was later validated by immunoblotting.

### Sample Protocol
For the protein extraction , cells were grown to 70% confulency and washed with ice-cold PBS before harvesting. The cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 100 mM HEPES buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitors cocktail). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Equal amounts of protein (6 mg) were used for digestion. The protein sample was reduced and alkylated using 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Samples were diluted to decrease the urea concentration to 1M. Proteins were digested by TPCK-treated trypsin in the enzyme protein ratio of 1:20 for 16 h at 37oC. The reaction was quenched with the addition of 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA). The digested peptides were cleaned by C18 StageTips and vacuum dried before immunoaffinity purification of tyrosine phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained after data acquisition were searched using Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the Human RefSeq 94 database along with known mass spectrometry contaminants by using SEQUEST and Mascot algorithms. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT at peptide N-terminal and lysine as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.966 Da) and acetylation at protein N-terminus.   Minimum peptide length was set as 7 amino acids with 1 missed cleavage allowed. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm at MS level and 0.05 Da for MS/MS level, and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CAMKK2) is a serine/threonine protein kinase which functions <i>via</i> the calcium-triggered signaling cascade with CAMK1, CAMK4, and AMPK&#x3b1; as the immediate downstream substrates. CAMKK2 is reported to be overexpressed in gastric cancer; however, its signaling mechanism is poorly understood. We carried out label-free quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics to investigate tyrosine-mediated molecular signaling associated with CAMKK2 in gastric cancer cells. Using a high-resolution Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Fourier-transform mass spectrometer, we identified 350 phosphotyrosine sites mapping to 157 proteins. We observed significant alterations in 81 phosphopeptides corresponding to 63 proteins upon inhibition of CAMKK2, among which 16 peptides were hyperphosphorylated corresponding to 13 proteins and 65 peptides were hypophosphorylated corresponding to 51 proteins. We report here that the inhibition of CAMKK2 leads to changes in the phosphorylation of several tyrosine kinases such as PKP2, PTK2, EPHA1, EPHA2, PRKCD, MAPK12, among others. Pathway analyses revealed that proteins are differentially phosphorylated in response to CAMKK2 inhibition involved in focal adhesions, actin cytoskeleton, axon guidance, and signaling by VEGF. The western blot analysis upon inhibition and/or silencing of CAMKK2 revealed a decrease in phosphorylation of PTK2 at Y925, c-JUN at S73, and STAT3 at Y705, which was in concordance with the mass spectrometry data. The study indicates that inhibition of CAMKK2 has an anti-oncogenic effect in gastric cells regulating phosphorylation of STAT3 through PTK2/c-JUN in gastric cancer.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Sto-609, Stat3, Data mining, Camkk2, Mass spectrometry, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi chatterjee
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India


