### Accession
PXD019199

### Title
Mapping the CCL8:P672 interface using HDX-MS

### Description
We use HDX-MS to characterise the binding interface between the tick evasin P672 and the chemokine CCL8, in order to assist in the development of peptides capable of mimicking P672 anti-inflammatory activity.

### Sample Protocol
For estimation of HDX in the heterodimer state, solutions of CCL8 and P672 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH=6.5 were mixed in a (1:1) ratio to reach a final concentration of 17.5 μM and incubated at 4°C for 1h. Additionally, solutions of unbound 17.5μM CCL8 and P672 were prepared. Aliquots of 4.3 μL of heterodimer or unbound proteins were mixed with 48.2 μL of D2O containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer adjusted to pH=6.5 with DCl (final content of D2O of 91.8%) and incubated for 5 s, 30 s, 5 min and 60 min at RT. HDX was quenched by adding 22.5 μL of 10% formic acid to reach a final volume of 75 μL and pH=2.5, corresponding to a final concentration of 1 μM. Samples were then rapidly flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for up to 5 days before analysis. An Acquity M class ultra-high performance liquid chromatographer with a nanoAcquity HDX manager coupled to a Synapt G2-Si TOF (Waters) was used and controlled using the MassLynx 4.1 software. Samples were loaded at 200 μL/min into an Enzymate pepsin column (2.1 mm x 30 mm, 5µm particle size) where the proteins were quickly digested at 20°C. Peptides were then captured for 2 min into a BEH C18 trap column (300 μm x 30 mm, 1.7 µm particle size) at 0°C and then separated in a BEH C18 analytical column (2.1 mm x 50 mm, 1.7 µm particle size) at 40 μL/min and 0°C under a 12 minutes linear gradient from 4 to 85% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The MSE approach was used for peptide mapping of non-deuterated proteins with trap collision energies of 15 to 35 V. Deuterated samples were analysed in scan mode only. Source parameters included: cone voltage 30V, capillary voltage 2.8 KV, source temperature 80°C, desolvation temperature 150°C, gas cone flow rate 80 L/h and desolvation gas 250 L/h.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.2 software. Spectra were searched against a custom database containing CCL8 and P672 protein sequences, requiring a non-specific digestion enzyme and allowing for variable modifications (i.e. N-terminus pyroglutamic acid from glutamine and deamidation or HexNAc (N-acetylhexosamine) of asparagine present in a N-X-S/T motif). Peptide identification required at least 3 fragment ion matches, the peptide presence in 4 out of 5 replicates, a retention time relative standard deviation of ≤ 5%, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and peptide maximum length of 30 residues. Relative deuterium uptakes % at the peptide-level were estimated using Dynamix 3.0. Manual check of peptide retention time, charge state and possible peak overlap were also performed. Statistical analysis included a t-Student test and HDX rate differences ≥ 5% with a p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemokine, Evasin, Protein-protein interaction, Inflammation

### Affiliations
RDM Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Lucia Geis-Asteggiante

### Lab Head
Dr Shoumo Bhattacharya
RDM Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.


