### Accession
PXD021396

### Title
CNS-derived extracellular vesicles from superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)G93A ALS mice originate from astrocytes and neurons and carry misfolded SOD1

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted by myriad cells in culture and also by unicellular organisms, and their identification in mammalian fluids suggests that EV release also occurs at the organism level. However, although it is clearly important to better understand EVs&#39; roles in organismal biology, EVs in solid tissues have received little attention. Here, we modified a protocol for EV isolation from primary neural cell culture to collect EVs from frozen whole murine and human neural tissues by serial centrifugation and purification on a sucrose gradient. Quantitative proteomics comparing brain-derived EVs from nontransgenic (NTg) and a transgenic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mouse model, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) G93A , revealed that these EVs contain canonical exosomal markers and are enriched in synaptic and RNA-binding proteins. The compiled brain EV proteome contained numerous proteins implicated in ALS, and EVs from SOD1 G93A mice were significantly depleted in myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein compared with those from NTg animals. We observed that brain- and spinal cord–derived EVs, from NTg and SOD1 G93A mice, are positive for the astrocyte marker GLAST and the synaptic marker SNAP25, whereas CD11b, a microglial marker, was largely absent. EVs from brains and spinal cords of the SOD1 G93A ALS mouse model, as well as from human SOD1 familial ALS patient spinal cord, contained abundant misfolded and nonnative disulfide-cross-linked aggregated SOD1. Our results indicate that CNS-derived EVs from an ALS animal model contain pathogenic disease-causing proteins and suggest that brain astrocytes and neurons, but not microglia, are the main EV source.

### Sample Protocol
See publication for full method (PMID: 30635404). Excerpt: Quantitative proteomics When isolating BDEX for proteomics, TBS was substituted for PBS at all steps, and at the final pelleting step, vesicles were resuspended in TBS without protease inhibitor. Protein concentration was determined using a Pierce BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  To remove surface proteins from BDEX for separate analysis, it was assumed that the surface protein content was 1% of total vesicle protein content, as is generally assumed for eukaryotic cells. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to BDEX at a 1:50 protein ratio in TBS and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, after which vesicles were acidified to pH 2 with 10% acetic acid to kill trypsin activity. TBS was added to the trypsinized BDEX followed by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g at 4 °C for 1 h. Tryptic peptides from surface proteins remained in the supernatant while intact vesicles were pelleted and resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate and stored at −80 °C. The resulting surface-depleted vesicle pellet and surface peptide preparations were reduced and alkylated as per (85) and further digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptide samples were purified by solid-phase extraction on C-18 STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (86), and each treatment was chemically labeled by reductive demethylation using formaldehyde isotopologues (87). The final product was purified again by C-18 STAGE tips and run on a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF coupled to an Easy-Nano LC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (88). 85. PMID: 12724530 86. PMID: 12498253 87. PMID: 23021491 88. PMID: 28096346

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to assign peptide and protein identifications and relative abundance ratios (89). Perseus was used to analyze relative abundance ratios and determine significantly enriched proteins (90). ErmineJ was used to determine statically enriched gene ontology (GO) annotations in the BDEX and surface proteomes compared with the entire mouse genome (91, 92). 89. PMID: 19029910 90. PMID: 27348712 91. PMID: 20539290 92. PMID: 16280084

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted by myriad cells in culture and also by unicellular organisms, and their identification in mammalian fluids suggests that EV release also occurs at the organism level. However, although it is clearly important to better understand EVs' roles in organismal biology, EVs in solid tissues have received little attention. Here, we modified a protocol for EV isolation from primary neural cell culture to collect EVs from frozen whole murine and human neural tissues by serial centrifugation and purification on a sucrose gradient. Quantitative proteomics comparing brain-derived EVs from nontransgenic (NTg) and a transgenic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mouse model, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)<sup>G93A</sup>, revealed that these EVs contain canonical exosomal markers and are enriched in synaptic and RNA-binding proteins. The compiled brain EV proteome contained numerous proteins implicated in ALS, and EVs from SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice were significantly depleted in myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein compared with those from NTg animals. We observed that brain- and spinal cord-derived EVs, from NTg and SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> mice, are positive for the astrocyte marker GLAST and the synaptic marker SNAP25, whereas CD11b, a microglial marker, was largely absent. EVs from brains and spinal cords of the SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> ALS mouse model, as well as from human SOD1 familial ALS patient spinal cord, contained abundant misfolded and nonnative disulfide-cross-linked aggregated SOD1. Our results indicate that CNS-derived EVs from an ALS animal model contain pathogenic disease-causing proteins and suggest that brain astrocytes and neurons, but not microglia, are the main EV source.

### Keywords
Exosome (vesicle), Secretion, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) (lou gehrig disease), Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Mouse model, Central nervous system (cns), Protein homeostasis, Astrocyte

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Centre for Brain Health, Dept. of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1B5, Canada

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Neil R. Cashman
Centre for Brain Health, Dept. of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1B5, Canada


