### Accession
PXD009894

### Title
dHF proteomic following EGb treatment

### Description
We have previously shown that standardized extracts of Ginkgo biloba (EGb) modulate fear memory formation, which is associated with CREB-1 (mRNA and protein) upregulation in the dorsal hippocampal formation (dHF), in a dose-dependent manner. Here, we employed proteomic analysis to investigate EGb effects on different protein expression patterns in the dHF, which might be involved in the regulation of CREB activity and the synaptic plasticity required for long-term memory (LTM) formation. Adult male Wistar rats were randomly assigned to four groups (n=6/group) and were submitted to conditioned lick suppression 30 min after vehicle (12% Tween 80) or EGb (0.25; 0.50 and 1.00 g.kg-1) administration (v.o). All rats underwent a retention test session 48 hours after conditioning. Twenty-four hours after the test session, the rats were euthanized via decapitation, and dHF samples were removed for proteome analysis using two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by peptide mass fingerprinting. In agreement with our previous data, no differences in the suppression ratios were identified among the groups (P>0.05). However, our results showed, for the first time, that 32 proteins were affected in the dHF following treatment with 0.25, 0.50 and 1.00 g.kg-1 doses of EGb, which upregulated 7, 19 and 5 proteins, respectively. Additionally, EGb downregulated 2 proteins at each dose. These proteins are correlated with remodelling of the cytoskeleton; the stability, size and shape of dendritic spines; myelin sheath formation; and composition proteins of structures found in the membrane of the somatodendritic and axonal compartments. Our findings suggested that EGb modulates conditioned suppression LTM through differential protein expression profiles, which may be a target for cognitive enhancers and for the prevention or treatment of neurocognitive impairments.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-four hours after the retention test ended, the animals were euthanized via decapitation, and the dHF was rapidly removed, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ºC until it was analysed. Sample preparation was performed as previously described (Pedroso et al., 2012), with minor modifications. The entire dHF was homogenized in 1 mL of extraction buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.5% Triton X-100) containing cOmplete™, Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Sample lysates were centrifuged (14,000 rpm/30 min), and the supernatants were stored at -80 ºC until analysis. Protein concentrations of the supernatants were determined using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, using bovine albumin as a standard. Aliquots of 750 μg of protein were precipitated with a solution of 35% chlorate potassium, 43% chloroform, and 22% methanol (v/v). The mixture was homogenized and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm and at 4°C for 15 min. The pellet was recovered and air-dried at room temperature. For isoelectric focusing (IEF), the pellet was dissolved in 500 μL of rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.5% Triton X-100, 100 mM DTT, 0.2% IPG buffer, pH 3–10 (GE Healthcare, USA) and traces of bromophenol blue). IEF was carried out on a Protean® IEF Cell (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), using an Immobiline™ DryStrip, with a pH of 3-10, an 18-cm linear gradient (GE Healthcare, USA), and having been previously rehydrated for 12–14 h. IEF was performed with the current limit set at 50 mA per IPG strip at 18 °C with the following conditions: 250 V for 30 min, 500 V for 1 h, 1000 V for 1 h, 2000 V for 1 h, 4000 V for 1 h, and 8000 V for 1 h followed by 8000 V until 40,000 Vh. After focusing, the strips were equilibrated for 15 min in buffer containing 6 M urea, 2% SDS, 1.5 M Tris pH 8.8, 30% glycerol and 1% DDT, followed by an additional 15 min in the same buffer containing 2.5% iodoacetamide instead of DTT. Strips were then loaded onto 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels. After running in Protean® II XL Multi-Cell (Bio-Rad, USA) at 60 mA per gel for 5 h, the gels were stained for 48 h with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Bio-Rad, USA). The stained gels were scanned (GS-800™ Calibrated Densitometer) and analysed using the PDQuest™ 2-D Analysis Software Version 8.0.1 (Bio-Rad, USA). The protein spots that were quantitatively altered in response to treatment with EGb were manually excised from the gels, distained in 50% methanol and 2.5% acetic acid for 3 h, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum concentrator. To the dried spots, 10 mM DTT was added, and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature, followed by a 50 mM iodoacetamide addition under the same conditions. The spots were washed and dehydrated with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 100% acetonitrile, respectively, and were dried in vacuum concentrator. Digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC with 20 ng/µL of trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The digested samples were dried and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and were stored at -20 ºC until analysis (Shevchenko et al., 1996). For the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS), peptides from the digested samples were injected onto a trap column (C18 trap column Symmetry 180 m x 20 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and were separated in the analytical column (C18 BEH 75 µm x 200 mm, 1.7 mm, Waters, USA) using a capillary UPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters, USA). The elution gradient of 7-35% phase B (phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water, phase B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was performed in 45 minutes at 275 nL/min. Multiple charged protonated peptides were generated by electrospray ionization and analyzed in a Synapt HDMS G2 mass spectrometer (Waters, USA). Data were acquired in the MSE mode, switching from low (4 eV) to high (ramped from 19 to 45 eV) collision energy with scan times of 1.25 s. An external calibration was performed every 60 s using Glu-fibrinopeptide B (Waters, USA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were processed in the ProteinLynx Global SERVER™ version 3.0.3 (Waters, USA) using low energy threshold of 750 counts and high energy threshold of 50 counts. The MS/MS spectra were exported as a mfg. files to MASCOT Server version 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) for database search. Searches were performed in the UniprotKB (www.uniprot.org, 92378 sequences) and NCBI-nr (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein, 92378 sequences) protein databases. The following parameters were used in the searches: no restrictions on protein molecular weight; trypsin digest with up to one missing cleavage; monoisotopic mass; taxonomy limited to Rattus; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and tryptophan as variable modifications; a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate was estimated by the decoy database approach, and set to a maximum of 1%. Protein matching probabilities were determined using the MASCOT protein scores, with the identification confidence indicated by the number of matches and by the coverage of the protein sequence by the matching peptides. The presence of at least one peptide with a significant ion score was required for positive protein identification. Only statistically significant MASCOT score results (P<0.05) were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously shown that standardized extracts of <i>Ginkgo biloba</i> (EGb) modulate fear memory formation, which is associated with CREB-1 (mRNA and protein) upregulation in the dorsal hippocampal formation (dHF), in a dose-dependent manner. Here, we employed proteomic analysis to investigate EGb effects on different protein expression patterns in the dHF, which might be involved in the regulation of CREB activity and the synaptic plasticity required for long-term memory (LTM) formation. Adult male Wistar rats were randomly assigned to four groups (<i>n</i> = 6/group) and were submitted to conditioned lick suppression 30 min after vehicle (12% Tween 80) or EGb (0.25, 0.50, and 1.00 g&#x22c5;kg<sup>-1</sup>) administration (p.o). All rats underwent a retention test session 48 h after conditioning. Twenty-four hours after the test session, the rats were euthanized <i>via</i> decapitation, and dHF samples were removed for proteome analysis using two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by peptide mass fingerprinting. In agreement with our previous data, no differences in the suppression ratios (SRs) were identified among the groups during first trial of CS (conditioned stimulus) presentation (<i>P</i> &gt; 0.05). Acute treatment with 0.25 g&#x22c5;kg<sup>-1</sup> EGb significantly resulted in retention of original memory, without prevent acquisition of extinction within-session. In addition, our results showed, for the first time, that 32 proteins were affected in the dHF following treatment with 0.25, 0.50, and 1.00 g&#x22c5;kg<sup>-1</sup> doses of EGb, which upregulated seven, 19, and five proteins, respectively. Additionally, EGb downregulated two proteins at each dose. These proteins are correlated with remodeling of the cytoskeleton; the stability, size, and shape of dendritic spines; myelin sheath formation; and composition proteins of structures found in the membrane of the somatodendritic and axonal compartments. Our findings suggested that EGb modulates conditioned suppression LTM through differential protein expression profiles, which may be a target for cognitive enhancers and for the prevention or treatment of neurocognitive impairments.

### Keywords
Ginkgo biloba, Dhf, Conditioned lick supression

### Affiliations
Federal University of Sao Paulo Department of Biological Science Cellular and Behavioural Pharmacology Laboratory
Universidade Federal de São Paulo

### Submitter
Renan Gaiardo

### Lab Head
Dr Suzete Maria Cerutti
Federal University of Sao Paulo Department of Biological Science Cellular and Behavioural Pharmacology Laboratory


