### Accession
PXD002326

### Title
Panorama of ancient metazoan macromolecular complexes: Xenopus laevis

### Description
By combining extensive biochemical fractionation with quantitative mass spectrometry, we directly examined the composition of soluble multiprotein complexes among diverse animal models. The project has been jointly supervised by Andrew Emili and Edward M. Marcotte. Project website: http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca

### Sample Protocol
Extracts were prepared from 750 stage 15 embryos, from 1,000 dissected animal caps allowed to develop to stage 19-20, or from adult male heart and liver. All steps were on ice or 4°C unless otherwise noted. Embryos were washed in X Buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 20 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, with 50 µg/ml cycloheximide and 1:100 volume of Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set I (Calbiochem) added freshly), and glass dounce homogenized in an equal volume of X Buffer using 20 strokes of loose and tight pestles. After 1000 x g 10 min. initial centrifugation, the supernatant was further clarified by re-centrifugation at 15,000 x g 10 min. Animal caps were washed in Steiner’s medium, liquid was removed, and tissue stored -80°C until use. After dounce homogenization, sample was probe-tip sonicated with 2 pulses (30 sec 30% power) prior to clarification centrifugation as above. Heart and liver were dissected from one frog, minced with a razor blade, disrupted with a Tissue Tearor (BioSpec Products) in an equal volume of X Buffer, glass dounce homogenized with a loose pestle, and large debris was pelleted 1000 x g 1 min. The supernatant was dounced with a tight pestle and then clarified as for embryo extract. In a replicate experiment, clarified heart and liver homogenates were frozen, and subsequently pooled, depleted of hemoglobin using HemogloBind (Biotech Support Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and clarified at 15,000 x g 10 min. prior to sucrose gradient fractionation. Protein concentration was determined with BioRad Protein Assay, using BSA as a standard.Gradients were formed by layering 3.5 ml / 3.9ml / 3.9 ml respectively of 47 / 26.5 / 7% sucrose in X Buffer without protease inhibitors and were allowed to equilibrate during horizontal storage at 4°C for 1.5-3 hours prior to loading. [Gradients used in fractionating X. laevis heart/liver homogenate containing hemoglobin underwent minor mixing.] After loading 200-500 µl extract (containing 1.8 mg embryo, 0.6 mg animal cap, 2.5 mg each pooled heart/liver extract, or 2 mg hemoglobin-depleted pooled heart/liver) the gradients were centrifuged 35,000 rpm 1.5 h 4°C in an SW41 rotor with braking to 800 rpm. Fractions were collected by volume displacement through a UV flow cell monitoring absorbance at 254 nm. Proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid, or (for more dilute animal cap gradient fractions) UPPA-Protein-Concentrate (G Biosciences), and washed with ice cold acetone, and the air dried pellets re-suspended in 0.1 M Tris pH 8.1 for in-solution digestion with trypsin, then analysis with LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
FASTA file was downloaded as described in the manuscript and processed to retain only the longest sequence for each gene, to simplify orthology mapping between species, as the project was focused on conserved complexes. Samples were searched using 3 search engines: Tide, INSPECT, and MSGFDB and combined to create quantification using MSblender (Kwon, Choi et. al. J. Proteome Research 2011). Tide search output is provided in a form processed for best hits with MSblender; MSGFDB and INSPECT search output is provided directly, when available.

### Publication Abstract
Our analysis examines the conservation of multiprotein complexes among metazoa through use of high resolution biochemical fractionation and precision mass spectrometry applied to soluble cell extracts from 5 representative model organisms Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, Mus musculus, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and Homo sapiens. The interaction network obtained from the data was validated globally in 4 distant species (Xenopus laevis, Nematostella vectensis, Dictyostelium discoideum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and locally by targeted affinity-purification experiments. Here we provide details of our massive set of supporting biochemical fractionation data available via ProteomeXchange (PXD002319-PXD002328), PPIs via BioGRID (185267); and interaction network projections via (http://metazoa.med.utoronto.ca) made fully accessible to allow further exploration. The datasets here are related to the research article on metazoan macromolecular complexes in Nature [1].

### Keywords
Across species, Lc-msms, Metazoan, Conservation, Biofractionation

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin 
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Blake borgeson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


