### Accession
PXD018923

### Title
Circulating protein aggregates in ALS

### Description
the project aim was to evaluate the composition of circulating protein aggregates and compare it between patients affectd with ALS and healthy controls

### Sample Protocol
human plasma was processed by ultracentrifugation with a sucrose cuschon as described in Adiutori et al. 2018

### Data Protocol
MS spectra ranging from 350 to 1500 m/z values were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 k resolution and the most intense ions with a minimal required signal of 10,000 were subjected to MS/MS by HCD fragmentation in the Orbitrap at 30 k resolution. Protein identification was carried out with Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 1.4. LC-MS/MS analysis generated 32 files that were processed by Proteome Sciences’ proprietary workflows for TMTcalibrator™ including: Calibrator Data Integration Tool (CalDIT), Feature Selection Tool (FeaST) and Functional Analysis Tool (FAT) (Zubiri et al. 2018; Leoni et al. 2019) (Figure S2). All raw spectra were searched against the human FASTA UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot using SEQUEST-HT and raw intensity values were measured through the TMT reporter ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregates, Neurodegeneration, Tmt

### Affiliations
blizard institute, school of medicine and dentistry, queen mary university of london
Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street, London, E1 2AT, UK.

### Submitter
rocco adiutori

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Malaspina
Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street, London, E1 2AT, UK.


