### Accession
PXD012856

### Title
Moorella thermoacetica LC-MSMS

### Description
Moorella thermoacetica-CdS hybrid system have been proven capable of efficiently harnessing solar energy into chemical energy. This project aims to make clear the concrete electron transport pathway, CO2 fixation process and energy production for this photosynthetic biobybrid system with the help of quanlitative and label free quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proeins were extracted by widely used detergent and chaotrope, i.e., 1% SDS and 8M Urea. Samples were sonicated with the working power less than 47.5 W to inhibit generation of bubbles. Proteins were then digested by trypsin and purified with Pierce C18 spin column. Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nano-LC 1200 system was utilized for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). MS1 signal intensities resulted from DDA acqusition were applied to label free relative quantification. Statistical analysis was performed using Metaboanalyst 4.0 and ggplot2 (R package). Functional annotation and Network analysis were carried out based on COG and STRING databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Moorella thermoacetica

### Affiliations
Fudan University
Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, China

### Submitter
Rutan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Qiao
Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, China


