### Accession
PXD022109

### Title
Parkin is an E3 ligase for the ubiquitin-like modifier Fat10 which inhibits Parkin activation and mitophagy

### Description
Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase belonging to the RING-between-RING family. Mutations in the Parkin-encoding gene PARK2 are associated with familial Parkinson’s Disease. Here, we investigate the interplay between Parkin / Parkin-S65P and the inflammatory cytokine-induced ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry (XL-MS): For XL-MS, a molar ratio of Parkin / Parkin-S65P : FAT10 of approximately 1 : 3.5 were incubated as follows: FAT10 (1.5 µg/µl stored in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1 mM TCEP) and 50 µg of Parkin or Parkin-S65P (0.9 µg/µl or 0.65 µg/µl; purchased from BostonBiochem; stored in 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 200 mM NaCl, 0.03 % Brj35, 10 % glycerol, 5 mM TCEP), were incubated for 15 min on ice. Proteins were crosslinked by addition of H12/D12 BS3 (Creative Molecules) at a final ratio of 1 nmol BS3/1 µg protein for 30 min at 37 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 37 °C, samples were dried, dissolved in 8M urea to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml, reduced with TCEP at a final concentration of 2.5 mM, alkylated with iodoacetamid at a final concentration of 5 mM and digested over night with trypsin (Promega V5113) in 1 M urea (diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:40. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters) and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; details see below).  Quantitative chemical crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry (q-XL-MS): For quantitative XL-MS analysis approximately 50 µg of Parkin or Parkin-S65P were incubated either on their own or together with FAT10 (molar ratio 1 : 3.5) for 15 min on ice prior to crosslinking by addition of H12/D12 BS3 (Creative Molecules) at a ratio of 1 nmol / 1 µg protein for 30 min at 37 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 37 °C, samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (details see above). Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters), and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; details see below). Amounts of potential crosslinks were normalized prior to MS by measuring peptide bond absorption at 215 nm for each fraction. Crosslinked samples were prepared in triplicates and each of these was measured as technical duplicates. Crosslinks which were identified with deltaS < 0.95 and ID-Score ≥ 20 were used as input for q-XL-MS analysis with xTract.  Enrichment of crosslinked peptides by size exclusion chromatography (SEC): Crosslinked peptides were enriched by size exclusion chromatography on an ÄKTAmicro chromatography system (GE Healthcare) using a SuperdexTM Increase 3.2/30 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 µl/min of the mobile phase (water/acetonitrile/trifluoroacetic acid 70 %/30 %/0.1 %, vol/vol/vol). UV absorption at a wavelength of 215 nm was used for monitoring the separation. The eluent was collected in fractions of 100 µl in a 96-well plate. The four fractions 1.0 - 1.1 ml, 1.1 – 1.2 ml, 1.2 – 1.3 ml and a pooled fraction of 1.3 – 1.5 ml were collected, dried and further analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis: Samples fractionated by SEC were re-dissolved in an appropriate volume of MS buffer (acetonitrile/formic acid 5 %/0.1 %, vol/vol) according to their UV signal. Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) system equipped with a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100 RSLC, length 15 cm, inner diameter 50 µm, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a 60 min gradient starting at 94 % solvent A (water/acetonitrile/formic acid 100 %/0 %/0.1 %, vol/vol/vol) and 6 % solvent B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid 20 %/80 %/0.1 %, vol/vol/vol) for 4 min, then increasing the percentage of solvent B to 44 % within 45 min followed by a 1 min step to 100 % B for additional 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent-mode with dynamic exclusion set to 60s and a total cycle time of 3s. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (120.000 resolution, 400-1500 m/z scan range, AGC target of 50 %, 50 ms maximum injection time, ‚profile’ data type). Most intense precursor ions with charge states 3-8 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for fragmentation using CID with 35 % collision energy. Monoisotopic peak determination was set to peptide and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan rate, ‚standard’ AGC target).

### Data Protocol
For XL-MS, data were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Crosslinked samples were prepared in triplicates and measured with technical duplicates. Crosslinks which were identified with deltaS < 0.95, two high-confidence crosslinks per unique crosslinking site (uxID n=2) with at least one ld-Score ≥ 25 and an assigned FDR as calculated by xProphet below 0.05 were visualized by xiNET software.  For q-XL-MS analysis with xTract, the chromatographic peaks of identified crosslinks in the samples with Parkin, Parkin-S65P, Parkin/FAT10 or Parkin-S65P/FAT10 (n=3, each sample analyzed additionally as technical duplicate) were integrated and summed up over different peak groups (taking different charge states and different unique crosslinked peptides for one unique crosslinking site into account). Only high-confidence crosslinks that were identified consistently in both, light and heavy labeled states (xTract settings violations was set to 0), were selected for further quantitative analysis. If a peptide was detected in only one condition (e.g. only in the reference experiment), the fold change was estimated on the basis of the minimum detectable signal intensity (1e3 for Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer), and instead of the area, the intensity of the first isotope was used for the comparison. This is indicated in Supplementary Data in the column ‘imputed values’. Changes in crosslinking abundance are expressed as log2 ratio (e.g. abundance state 1, Parkin-S65P was quantified versus abundance state 2, Parkin). The p value indicates the regression between the two conditions. In this study, only links with an lD-Score ≥ 25 and an assigned FDR as calculated by xProphet below 0.056 that showed a change of log2ratio ≥ ±1 and a p-value of ≤ 0.05 were considered significant changes in abundances and are shown in green and red in the 2D visualizations. All other changes were considered insignificant and are shown in grey. Crosslinks were visualized by xiNET software using additional in-house scripts for the analysis and representation of quantitative crosslink information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fat10, Ubiquitin, Mitophagy, Parkinson’s disease, Parkin

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, 78457 Konstanz, Germany


