### Accession
PXD004473

### Title
The influence of sporulation medium on the spore coat protein composition of Bacillus subtilis spores.

### Description
Spores are of high interest to the food and health sectors because of their extreme resistance to harsh conditions especially against heat. Earlier research has shown that spores prepared on solid agar plates have a higher heat resistance than those prepared in a liquid medium. It has also been shown that the more mature a spore is the higher is its heat resistance contributed most likely by the progressive cross-linking of  coat proteins. The current study for the first time enlightens the effect of sporulation medium on spore proteins. The 14N spores prepared on solid agar medium and  15N metabolically labelled spores prepared in liquid medium differ in their coat protein composition as revealed by LC-FT-MS/MS analyses. The 14N:15N isotopic ratio of the 1:1 mixture of liquid and solid medium cultured spores exposes that most of the identified inner coat and crust proteins are significantly upregulated while most of the outer coat proteins are significantly downregulated for the spores prepared on solid medium relative to the spores prepared in the liquid medium. Medium specific differences in isotopic ratios between the tryptic peptides  of expected cross-linked  proteins  suggest that also the coat protein cross-linking may be medium specific. The spores prepared on solid medium show a higher thermal resistance than the spores prepared in liquid medium. Since the core DPA content is found to be similar in both the spore populations, it appears that the difference in wet heat resistance is connected to the differences in the coat protein composition and assembly. Supporting the proteomic analyses, the electron microscopy analyses show a significantly thinner outer coat layer of the spores cultures on the solid medium.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were acquired with an Bruker ApexUltra Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 7T magnet and a nano-electrospray Apollo II DualSource™ coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) High-Performance Liquid Chromatography system. For each digest, samples containing up to 200 ng of tryptic peptides were injected as a 20 μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 3% acetonitrile aqueous solution and loaded onto a PepMap100 C18 (5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm length) precolumn. Following injection, the peptides were eluted via an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter x 500 mm length.) analytical column (Thermo Scientific, Etten-Leur, The Netherlands) to the nano-electrospray source. LC Gradient profiles of up to 120 minutes were used with 0.1% formic acid / 99.9% H2O (A) and 0.1% formic acid / 80% acetonitrile / 19.9% H2O (B) (0 min 97%A/3%B, 2 min 94%A/6%B, 110 min 70%A/30%B, 120 min 60%A/40%B, 125 min 100%B) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at a column temperature of 60°C. Data dependent Q-selected peptide ions were fragmented in the hexapole collision cell at an Argon pressure of 6x10-6 mbar (measured at the ion gauge) and the fragment ions were detected in the ICR cell at a resolution of up to 60000. In the MS/MS duty cycle, 3 different precursor peptide ions were selected from each survey MS. The MS/MS duty cycle time for 1 survey MS and 3 MS/MS acquisitions was about 2 s. Instrument mass calibration was better than 2 ppm over an m/z range of 250 to 1500.

### Data Protocol
Raw FT-MS/MS data were processed with the MASCOT DISTILLER program, version 2.4.3.1 (64bits), MDRO 2 .4.3.0 (MATRIX science, London, UK), including the Search toolbox and the Quantification toolbox. Peak-picking for both MS and MS/MS spectra were optimized for the mass resolution of up to 60000. Peaks were fitted to a simulated isotope distribution with a correlation threshold of 0.7, with minimum signal to noise of 2. The processed data, from the four independent biological replicates, were searched with the MASCOT server program 2.3.02 (MATRIX science, London, UK) against a complete B. Subtilis 168 ORF translation database (Uniprot 2011 update, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot) combined with a protein contamination data base (compiled by and downloaded from Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried). Quantification using 15N-Metabolic [MD] labeling was included. Trypsin was used as enzyme and 1 missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and the peptide fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.03 Dalton. MASCOT MudPIT peptide identification score was set to a cut-off of 18.

### Publication Abstract
Spores are of high interest to the food and health sectors because of their extreme resistance to harsh conditions, especially against heat. Earlier research has shown that spores prepared on solid agar plates have a higher heat resistance than those prepared under a liquid medium condition. It has also been shown that the more mature a spore is, the higher is its heat resistance most likely mediated, at least in part, by the progressive cross-linking of coat proteins. The current study for the first time assesses, at the proteomic level, the effect of two commonly used sporulation conditions on spore protein presence. <sup>14</sup>N spores prepared on solid Schaeffer's-glucose (SG) agar plates and <sup>15</sup>N metabolically labeled spores prepared in shake flasks containing 3-(<i>N</i>-morpholino) propane sulfonic acid (MOPS) buffered defined liquid medium differ in their coat protein composition as revealed by LC-FT-MS/MS analyses. The former condition mimics the industrial settings while the latter conditions mimic the routine laboratory environment wherein spores are developed. As seen previously in many studies, the spores prepared on the solid agar plates show a higher thermal resistance than the spores prepared under liquid culture conditions. The <sup>14</sup>N:<sup>15</sup>N isotopic ratio of the 1:1 mixture of the spore suspensions exposes that most of the identified inner coat and crust proteins are significantly more abundant while most of the outer coat proteins are significantly less abundant for the spores prepared on solid SG agar plates relative to the spores prepared in the liquid MOPS buffered defined medium. Sporulation condition-specific differences and variation in isotopic ratios between the tryptic peptides of expected cross-linked proteins suggest that the coat protein cross-linking may also be condition specific. Since the core dipicolinic acid content is found to be similar in both the spore populations, it appears that the difference in wet heat resistance is connected to the differences in the coat protein composition and assembly. Corroborating the proteomic analyses, electron microscopy analyses show a significantly thinner outer coat layer of the spores cultured on the solid agar medium.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Proteomics, Bacillus, Sporulation medium, Spores

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
Head Department of Mass spectrometry of BioMacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098XH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Wishwas R. Abhyankar

### Lab Head
Dr Chris G. de Koster
Head Department of Mass spectrometry of BioMacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098XH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


