### Accession
PXD008153

### Title
Integration of multilevel OMICs data based on the identification of regulatory modules from protein-protein interaction networks

### Description
Complex scientific experiments provide researchers with a wealth of data and knowledge from heterogeneous sources. Analyzed in its entirety, OMICs data provide a deep insight into the overall biological processes of organisms. However, the integration of data from different cellular levels (e.g., transcriptomics and proteomics) is challenging. Analyzing lists of differentially abundant molecules from different cellular levels often results in a small overlap, which can be accounted to, e.g., different regulatory mechanisms, different temporal scales as well as inherent properties of the measurement method. Thus, there is a need for approaches that allow efficient integration of OMICs data from different cellular levels. In this study, we make use of transcriptome, proteome and secretome data from the human pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus challenged with the antifungal drug caspofungin. Caspofungin targets the fungal cell wall leading to a compensatory stress response. We analyze the experimental data based on two different approaches. First, we apply a simple approach based on the comparison of differentially regulated genes and proteins with subsequent pathway analysis. Second, we compare the cellular levels based on the identification of regulatory or functional modules by two module-detecting algorithms from protein-protein interaction networks in conjunction with transcriptomic and proteomic data. Our results show that both approaches associate the fungal caspofungin response with biological pathways like cell wall biosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism as well as carbohydrate metabolism. Compared to results of the simple approach, the use of regulatory modules shows a notably higher agreement between the different cellular levels. The additional structural information of the networks provided by the module-based approach allows for topological analysis as well as the analysis of the temporal evolution of cellular response at a molecular level. However, we also found that quality of the module-based results depends on the comprehensiveness of the underlying protein-protein interaction network itself. Thus, while our results highlight the benefits and potential provided by a module-based analysis of OMICs data from different cellular levels, future studies will have to focus on the expansion of organism specific protein-protein interaction networks.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for the cellular proteome analysis was performed as previously described in Baldin et al. 2015, Proteomics, 15:2230–2243 (DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400584). Sample preparation of the secretome analysis was performed as follows: Cell free filtered liquid AMM medium of exponentially (37°C) growing A. fumigatus was precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 15% (w/v) final concentration (4°C, overnight). Precipitates were washed with acetone and resolubilized in trifluoroethanol (TFE) mixed 1:1 with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples containing 100 µg total protein (in 100 µl) were reduced with 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 55°C and subsequently cysteine thiols were alkylated with 12.5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested at 37°C for 18 h with trypsin+LysC mix (Promega) at 1:25 protease:protein. Proteome samples were labeled with TMT6plex (WT-t0=126; WT-t4=127; WT-t8=128; ΔsakA-t0=129; ΔsakA-t4=130; ΔsakA1-t8=131) and secretome samples were labeled with iTRAQ4plex (WT=114; ΔsakA=115; WT+caspofungin=116; ΔsakA+caspofungin=117) according to the manufacturer's protocols.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described in Baldin et al. 2015, Proteomics, 15:2230–2243 (DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400584) except the following parameters were modified as follows: Eluents A (0.1% v/v formic acid in H2O) and B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O v/v) were mixed for 10h gradient elution: 0–4 min at 4% B, 15 min at 5.5% B, 30 min at 6.5%, 220 min at 12.5% B, 300 min at 17% B, 400 min at 26% B, 450 min at 35% B, 475 min at 42% B, 490 min at 51% B, 500 min at 60% B, 515–529 min at 96% B, 530–600 min at 4% B. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300–1500, R=140k (FWHM), 3e6 AGC (automatic gain control) target, and 120 maximum injection time. Top10 precursor ions (isolation width of 0.8 Da; z=2-5) underwent data-dependent HCD fragmentation at NCE 36% using N2 gas. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 spectra were monitored at R=17.5k (FWHM), 2e5 AGC target, and 120 maximum injection time. The fixed first mass was set to m/z 110 to match the iTRAQ reporter ions (m/z 114–117).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo) using the AspGD protein database of A. fumigatus Af293 (www.aspergillusgenome.org/download/sequence/A_fumigatus_Af293/current/A_fumigatus_Af293_current_ orf_trans_all.fasta.gz; status: 2015/09/27) and the algorithms of MASCOT 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), SEQUEST HT, and MS Amanda (1.0.0.4756). Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance and the integration tolerance (most confident centroid) was set to 5 ppm and the MS2 tolerance was 0.02 Da. Static modifications were carbamidomethylation of Cys and either TMT6plex (proteome) or iTRAQ4plex (secretome) at Lys residues and the peptide N-terminus. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of Met and either TMT6plex of Thr or iTRAQ4plex of Tyr. Percolator and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of the spectral matches (ΔCn<0.05). At least two peptides per protein and a strict target false discovery rate <1% was required for confident protein hits. The significance threshold for differential protein abundances for TMT and iTRAQ experiments was set to factor 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Caspofungin, Proteomics, Secretome, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Stress- and Immunoproteomics group
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Kniemeyer
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Stress- and Immunoproteomics group


