### Accession
PXD019257

### Title
Peptide profile of the storage proteins of chickpea, wheat, soybean analyzed with LC-MS/MS

### Description
Aiming to reduce food spoilage, the present study developed novel highly active food-grade preservatives affecting a wide range of bacteria. For this purpose, storage proteins were extracted from food plants. After enzymatic hydrolysis by the digestive protease chymotrypsin, the peptide profiles were analyzed by ultrahigh-performance micro-liquid chromatography–triple quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry. Virtual screening identified 21 potential antimicrobial peptides in chickpea legumin. Among those, the peptides Leg1 (RIKTVTSFDLPALRFLKL) and Leg2 (RIKTVTSFDLPALRWLKL) exhibited antimicrobial activity against 16 different bacteria, including pathogens, spoilage-causing bacteria and two antibiotic-resistant strains. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) down to 15.6 µM indicated 10–1,000-fold higher activity of the novel antimicrobial peptides compared to conventional food preservatives. Moreover, Leg1 and Leg2 showed bactericidal activity in bacterial suspension and during the storage of raw pork meat.

### Sample Protocol
First the storage proteins were extracted from dried crop plant powder and afterwards a chymotryptic digestion was conducted. MicroLC–ESI–QTOF-MS/MS analysis was performed with a ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (UHLPC) system (Ultimate 3000 RS, ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex Germany GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) with a Duospray Ion Source. A C18 column (YMC Triart; 500 µm × 100 mm, 3 μm, 12 nm, 1/16") was used at a flow rate of 30 µL/min and a column oven temperature of 35 °C. The peptides were separated by a gradient of 0.1% formic acid as eluent A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as eluent B (−15 min 2% B, 5 min 2% B, 55 min 42.5% B, 55.5 min 95% B, and 65 min 95% B). The sample (5 µL) was injected in full-loop mode and the cutoff valve was set after 2.5 min and 55 min. The ion source operated at 350 °C with 5,000 V. The curtain gas was set to 40 psig, nebulizer gas to 40 psig and heating gas to 60 psig. Information-dependent acquisition (IDA) ran in positive mode with a mass range of 230–1600 Da. The declustering potential was set to 80 V, ion release delay 30 V, and ion release width 15 V. Ions exceeding 150 cps with a charge state of 1–5 were included with the ion tolerance of 50 ppm. Thirty spectra were collected as maximum number of candidate ions to monitor per cycle. Rolling collision energy was set “on”.

### Data Protocol
Results from IDA experiments were evaluated using the software ProteinPilot version 5.0. The parameters “cysteine alkylation, chymotrypsin digestion, species Cicer arietinum (Proteome fasta file obtained from UniProt, Proteome ID UP000087171), Glycine max (UP000008827) and Triticum aestivum (UP000280104), and biological modifications” were used for peptide identification. The false discovery rate threshold was set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chymotryptic digestion, Lc-ms/ms, Chickpea, Soybean, Wheat, Storage proteins

### Affiliations
Food Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg
Chair of Food Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Germany

### Submitter
Marie-Louise  Heymich

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Pischetsrieder
Chair of Food Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Germany


