### Accession
PXD022732

### Title
Amino acid substitutions in ribosomal protein RpsU enable switching between high fitness and multiple-stress resistance in Listeria monocytogenes

### Description
A previously described low-fitness, high stress-resistant, variant of Listeria monocytogenes LO28 WT was subjected to an experimental evolution regime, selecting (in two parallel lines) for increased fitness in unstressed conditions.  Evolved variants with increased fitness reverted to WT-like stress resistance. Whole genome sequencing and proteomics were used to identify differences between the ancestral and evolved strains.

### Sample Protocol
L. monocytogenes cells (WT and Evolved lines (EV)) were revived from -80°C stocks, and were grown at 30°C for 48 hours on brain heart infusion (BHI, Oxoid, Hampshire) agar (1.5 % [w/w], bacteriological agar no. 1 Oxoid, Hampshire). A single colony was inoculated into 20 ml of BHI broth in a 100 ml Erlenmeyer flask (Fisher, USA), and grown overnight (18-22 hours) at 30°C under shaking at 160 rpm. Fresh BHI broth was inoculated with 0.5% (v/v) of the overnight culture, and cells were grown under shaking at 160 rpm in BHI at 30°C until the late-exponential growth phase (OD600 = 0.4-0.5).  2 ml of sample was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until further processing. Samples were thawed on ice, and subsequently pelleted at 17,000 x g. Pellets were washed twice with 100 mM Tris (pH 8) and were lysed by sonication. Samples were prepared using the filter assisted sample preparation protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial population heterogeneity contributes to differences in stress response between individual cells in a population, and can lead to the selection of genetically stable variants with increased stress resistance. We previously provided evidence that the multiple-stress resistant Listeria monocytogenes LO28 variant 15, carries a point mutation in the rpsU gene, resulting in an arginine-proline substitution in ribosomal protein RpsU (RpsU<sup>17Arg-Pro</sup>). Here, we investigated the trade-off between general stress sigma factor SigB-mediated stress resistance and fitness in variant 15 using experimental evolution. By selecting for higher fitness in two parallel evolving cultures, we identified two evolved variants: 15EV1 and 15EV2. Whole genome sequencing and SNP analysis showed that both parallel lines mutated in the same codon in rpsU as the original mutation resulting in RpsU<sup>17Pro-His</sup> (15EV1) and RpsU<sup>17Pro-Thr</sup> (15EV2). Using a combined phenotyping and proteomics approach, we assessed the resistance of the evolved variants to both heat and acid stress, and found that in both lines reversion to WT-like fitness also resulted in WT-like stress sensitivity. Proteome analysis of L. monocytogenes LO28 WT, variant 15, 15EV1, and 15EV2 revealed high level expression of SigB regulon members only in variant 15, whereas protein profiles of both evolved variants were highly similar to that of the LO28 WT. Experiments with constructed RpsU<sup>17Arg-Pro</sup> mutants in L. monocytogenes LO28 and EGDe, and RpsU<sup>17Arg-His</sup> and RpsU<sup>17Arg-Thr</sup> in LO28, confirmed that single amino acid substitutions in RpsU enable switching between multiple-stress resistant and high fitness states in L. monocytogenes.

### Keywords
Persistence, Sigma b, Food safety, Experimental evolution, Pathogen

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


