### Accession
PXD023998

### Title
Uropathogenic Escherichia coli biofilm proteomics

### Description
We previously determined that loss of respiratory quinol oxidase cytochrome bd disrupts biofilm formation in uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC). In this study, we extracted and interrogated the outer membrane and extracellular matrix of colony biofilms formed by UPEC isolate UTI89 and an isogenic mutant lacking cytochrome bd (∆cydAB).

### Sample Protocol
Biofilms were grown for 11 days on 1.2x YESCA agar containing 40 µg/mL Congo Red. Biofilms were homogenized in cold 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 using an Omni Tissue Homogenizer five times for one minute per cycle. To increase yield and robustness, each sample is a pooled collection of 100 individually grown biofilms. Data is representative of three pooled replicates per strain. The homogenate was centrifuged three times for 10 minutes at 5,000 x g to remove cells. NaCl was added to the supernatant (final concentration 170 mM) and centrifuged for one hour at 13,000 x g to pellet the ECM. The ECM pellet was washed in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 with 4% SDS and incubated at room temperature rocking overnight. 25 ug of protein was precipitated by adding 1/3 volume of 100 percent w/v trichloroacetic acid (TCA). After washing 2 times with ice cold acetone, the protein pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea 100 mM tris pH 8.5, reduced using TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, diluted back to 2 M urea and digested with 0.5 ug of trypsin overnight at 37 ˚C. Resulting peptides were analyzed by high resolution data dependent LC-MS/MS. Briefly, peptides were autosampled onto a 200 mm by 0.1 mm (Jupiter 3 micron, 300A), self-packed analytical column coupled directly to a Q-exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using a nanoelectrospray source and resolved using an aqueous to organic gradient. Both the intact masses (MS) and fragmentation patters (MS/MS) of the peptides were collected in a data dependent manner utilizing dynamic exclusion to maximize depth of proteome coverage.

### Data Protocol
Resulting peptide MS/MS spectral data were searched against the bacterial protein database using MaxQuant-LFQ along with subsequent MS1-based integrations and normalizations. Statistical comparisons of resulting normalized protein quantitative values were performed using ProStaR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Upec, Escherichia coli, Biofilm

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology; Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Nashville, TN, USA

### Submitter
Connor Beebout

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Hadjifrangiskou
Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology; Vanderbilt University Medical Center; Nashville, TN, USA


