### Accession
PXD037142

### Title
Amuc_2172 tandem affinity purification LCMSMS

### Description
Histone lysine lactylation (Klac) is a new posttranslational modification (PTM) that is installed by acetyltransferase to modulate specific immune responses1 and oncogenesis2,3. Akkermansia muciniphila (A. muciniphila) is a beneficial bacterium that blunts ulcerative colitis (UC) in a mouse model by secreting extracellular vesicles (SEVs)4. Although many histone sites are known to contain lysine lactylation, whether this modification is regulated to modulate specific biological functions by exogenous acetyltransferase or intestinal microbiota is not well understood. Here, we discovered that SEV from A. muciniphila, rather than A. muciniphila per se, has anti-Th17 (T helper 17) differentiation activity. We further screened the composition of SEV and found that Amuc_2172 is the key active component. As a GCN5-related acetyltransferase of A. muciniphila, Amuc_2172 is accessible to naïve T cells and functions as a lactylation transferase on Lys4 of histone H3. Accelerated histone H3 lactylation (H3Klac) on Lys4 competitively blocks trimethylation (H3Kme3) on Il17a loci in the process of Th17-cell differentiation. Additionally, intraperitoneal application of recombinant Amuc_2172 also inhibited Th17 and dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced UC phenotypes in vivo; moreover, bioengineered Amuc_2172 showed improved colitis site delivery and higher Th17 inhibition potential compared to Amuc_2172 alone. Our study reveals not only a potential therapeutic strategy for treating colitis but also a model via which lysine lactylation is regulated by the intestinal microbiota, which may be broadly applicable to understand the crosstalk of bacteria and immunity.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were overexpressed with Flag-tagged eukaryotic Amuc_2172 vector and control counterpart, respectively, cells were harvested, and proteins physically associated with Flag-tagged Amuc_2172 were immunoprecipitated by magnetic beads and sent for LC-MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were searched using Protein Discoverer(version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific）with Mascot (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science). The data were processed with UniProt Human protein database (70727 entries, download in 20161202). The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor and fragment Mass Tolerance 0.05 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aamuc_2172 tap lc/msms

### Affiliations
86-13162869989
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology; Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease; NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases; State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes; Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200001, China

### Submitter
Qian Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Mingming Zhang
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology; Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease; NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases; State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes; Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200001, China


