### Accession
PXD017542

### Title
Production and application of recombinant extracellular vesicles for method development, data normalization and assessment of pre-analytical variables

### Description
The diagnostic and therapeutic use of extracellular vesicles (EV) is under intense investigation and may lead to societal benefits. Reference materials are an invaluable resource for developing, improving and assessing the performance of regulated EV applications and for quantitative and objective data interpretation. We have engineered recombinant extracellular vesicles (rEV) as a biological reference material. rEV have similar biochemical and biophysical characteristics as sample EV and function as an internal quantitative and qualitative control throughout analysis. Spike-in applications of rEV in bodily fluids prior to EV analysis map technical variability of EV applications and promote intra and inter laboratory studies. This protocol describes the production, recovery and quality assurance of rEV, their dilution and addition to bodily fluids, and the detection steps based on fluorescence-, nucleic acid- and protein measurements. Multiple application potentials for rEV are exemplified, including method development, big data normalization and assessment of pre-analytical variables. The protocol can be adopted by researchers with standard laboratory and basic EV separation/characterization experience and requires ~4–5 d.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed for LC-MS/MS by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Lysates were prepared by mixing samples with SDT-lysis buffer (2 % SDS, 500 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.6), 0.5 M DTT) at a 4:1 sample to buffer ratio and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. After clarification of lysates by centrifugation (16,000 g for 5 min), samples were mixed with 300 μL UA (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) in a Microcon YM-10 centrifugal filter device (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). Filters were centrifuged twice (14,000 g for 40 min at 20 °C) with the addition of 200 µL UA in between. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μL IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, followed by centrifugation. This was followed twice by addition of 100 µL UA and twice by addition of 100 µL DB buffer (1 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), with centrifugation in between. Filter units were transferred to new collection tubes and proteins were resuspended in 40 µL DB with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for overnight proteolytic digestion at 37 °C. Digests were collected by addition of 100 µL DB and centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g. This step was repeated once. Collected peptides were acidified with 0.6 % trifluoroacetic acid to a pH of 2-3, followed by desalting with Peptide Cleanup C18 Spin Tubes (Agilent). Desalted peptides were vacuum dried, dissolved in 1 % formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The peptides were loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy- nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nano‐electrospray ionization source. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.1 % formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were separated with a 40 min gradient from 8 to 35 % of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Full MS scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300-1750 with a resolution of 120,000, followed by data dependent acquisition with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was performed. The top 12 ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 % and scanned over the m/z range of 200-2000 with a resolution of 15,000. After the MS2 scan for each of the top 12 ions had been obtained, a new full mass spectrum scan was acquired and the process repeated until the end of the 60 min run. Three repeated runs per sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) against a database containing reviewed (SwissProt) human sequences of UniProtKB release 2019_11. Peptide-spectrum-match- and protein-level false discovery rates were set at 0.01. Carbamidomethyl (C), as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications were included. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The LC-MS profiles were aligned, and the identifications were transferred to non-sequenced or non-identified MS features in other LC-MS runs (matching between runs). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
The diagnostic and therapeutic use of extracellular vesicles (EV) is under intense investigation and may lead to societal benefits. Reference materials are an invaluable resource for developing, improving and assessing the performance of regulated EV applications and for quantitative and objective data interpretation. We have engineered recombinant EV (rEV) as a biological reference material. rEV have similar biochemical and biophysical characteristics to sample EV and function as an internal quantitative and qualitative control throughout analysis. Spiking rEV in bodily fluids prior to EV analysis maps technical variability of EV applications and promotes intra- and inter-laboratory studies. This protocol, which is an Extension to our previously published protocol (Tulkens et al., 2020), describes the production, separation and quality assurance of rEV, their dilution and addition to bodily fluids, and the detection steps based on complementary fluorescence, nucleic acid and protein measurements. We demonstrate the use of rEV for method development, data normalization and assessment of pre-analytical variables. The protocol can be adopted by researchers with standard laboratory and basic EV separation/characterization experience and requires ~4-5 d.

### Keywords
Urine, Human, Plasma, Extracellular vesicles, Recombinant

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier De Wever
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


