### Accession
PXD005285

### Title
SMAD2/3 interactome in human pluripotent stem cells

### Description
This experiment was designed to determine the interactome of SMAD2/3 in human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). hPSCs were cultured in standard pluripotency-promoting conditions, or induced to differentiate towards the definitive endoderm lineage for 36h. Endogenous SMAD2/3 was immunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts in these two conditions using a specific antibody. Non-immune IgG immunoprecipitations were performed as negative controls. Three biological replicates per conditions were analyzed by quantitative label-free mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Feeder- and serum-free hESC (H9 line; WiCell) culture was previously described (Vallier, 2011). Cells were plated on gelatin- and MEF medium-coated plates, and cultured in chemically defined medium (CDM) containing bovine serum albumin (BSA). CDM was supplemented with 10ng/ml Activin-A and 12ng/ml FGF2 (both from Dr Marko Hyvonen, Dept. of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge). Endoderm differentiation was initiated in adherent hESC cultures 48h following passaging by culturing cells for 36h in CDM (without insulin) with 20ng/ml FGF2, 10μM LY294002, 100ng/ml Activin-A, and 10ng/ml BMP4. Approximately 2E07 cells were used for each immunoprecipitation (IP). Unless stated otherwise, all biochemical steps were performed on ice or at 4°C and ice-cold buffers were supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitors (Roche), PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1mg/ml Leupeptin, 0.2mM DTT, 0.2mM PMSF, and 10mM sodium butyrate (all from Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were fed with fresh medium for 2h before being washed with PBS, scraped in cell dissociation buffer (CDB, Gibco), and pelleted at 250g for 10’. The cell pellet was then washed once with 10 volumes of PBS and once with 10 volumes of hypotonic lysis buffer (HLB: 10mM HEPES pH 7.6; 10mM KCl; 2mM MgCl2; 0.2mM EDTA; 0.2mM EGTA). The pellet was re-suspended in 5 volumes of HLB and incubated for 5’ to induce cell swelling. The resulting cell suspension was homogenized using the “loose” pestle of a Dounce homogenizer (Jencons Scientific) for 35-50 strokes until plasma membrane lysis was complete (as judged by microscopic inspection). The nuclei were pelleted at 800g for 5’, washed once with 10 volumes of HLB, and resuspended in 1.5 volumes of high-salt nuclear lysis buffer (HSNLB: 20mM HEPES pH 7.6; 420mM NaCl; 2mM MgCl2; 25% glycerol; 0.2mM EDTA; 0.2mM EGTA). High-salt nuclear extraction was performed by homogenizing the nuclei using the “tight” pestle of a Dounce homogenizer for 70 strokes, followed by 45’ of incubation in rotation. The resulting lysate was clarified for 30’ at 16,000g and transferred to a dialysis cassette using a 19-gauge syringe. Dialysis was performed for 4h in 1l of dialysis buffer (DB: 20mM HEPES pH 7.6; 50mM KCl; 100mM NaCl; 2mM MgCl2; 10% glycerol; 0.2mM EDTA; 0.2mM EGTA) under gentle stirring, and the buffer was changed once after 2h. After the dialysis, the sample was clarified from minor protein precipitates for 10’ at 17,000g, and the protein concentration was assessed. Immunoprecipitations were performed by incubating 0.5mg of protein with 5μg of goat polyclonal SMAD2/3 antibody (R&D systems; catalogue number: AF3797) or goat IgG negative control antibody (R&D systems: catalogue number: AB-108-C) for 3h at 4°C in rotation. This was followed by incubation with 10μl of Protein G-Agarose for 1h. Beads were finally washed three times with DB and processed for mass spectrometry. Label-free quantitative mass spectrometric analysis was performed on triplicate immunoprecipitations for each condition. After immunoprecipitation, samples were prepared as described in (Hubner & Mann 2011), with minor modifications. Proteins were eluted by incubation with 50μl of 2M urea and 10mM DTT for 30’ at RT in agitation. Then, 55mM chloroacetamide was added for 20’ to alkylate reduced disulphide bonds. Proteins were pre-digested on the beads with 0.4μg of mass spectrometry-quality trypsin (Promega) for 1h at RT in agitation. The suspension was cleared from the beads by centrifugation, the beads were washed with 50ul of 2M Urea, and the merged supernatants were incubated overnight at RT in agitation to complete digestion. 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was then added to inactivate trypsin, and peptides were loaded on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). Tips were prepared for binding by sequential equilibration for 2’ at 800g with 50μl methanol, 50μl Solvent B (0.5% acetic Acid; 80% acetonitrile), and 50μl Solvent A (0.5% acetic Acid). Subsequently, peptides were loaded, and washed twice with Solvent A. Tips were dry-stored until analysis.Peptides were eluted from the StageTips and separated by reversed phase liquid chromatography on a 2.5h long segmented gradient using EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluting peptides were ionized and injected directly into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a TOP10 sequencing mode, meaning that one full mass spectrometry (MS) scan was followed by higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and subsequent detection of the fragmentation spectra of the 10 most abundant peptide ions (tandem mass spectrometry; MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analysed using the MaxQuant software suite (Cox & Mann 2008). Peptide spectra were searched against the human database (Uniprot) using the integrated Andromeda search engine, and peptides were identified with an FDR<0.01 determined by false matches against a reverse decoy database. Peptides were assembled into protein groups with an FDR<0.01. Protein quantification was performed using the MaxQuant label-free quantification algorithm requiring at least 2 ratio counts, in order to obtain label free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
The TGF&#x3b2; pathway has essential roles in embryonic development, organ homeostasis, tissue repair and disease. These diverse effects are mediated through the intracellular effectors SMAD2 and SMAD3 (hereafter SMAD2/3), whose canonical function is to control the activity of target genes by interacting with transcriptional regulators. Therefore, a complete description of the factors that interact with SMAD2/3 in a given cell type would have broad implications for many areas of cell biology. Here we describe the interactome of SMAD2/3 in human pluripotent stem cells. This analysis reveals that SMAD2/3 is involved in multiple molecular processes in addition to its role in transcription. In particular, we identify a functional interaction with the METTL3-METTL14-WTAP complex, which mediates the conversion of adenosine to N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) on RNA. We show that SMAD2/3 promotes binding of the m<sup>6</sup>A methyltransferase complex to a subset of transcripts involved in early cell fate decisions. This mechanism destabilizes specific SMAD2/3 transcriptional targets, including the pluripotency factor gene NANOG, priming them for rapid downregulation upon differentiation to enable timely exit from pluripotency. Collectively, these findings reveal the mechanism by which extracellular signalling can induce rapid cellular responses through regulation of the epitranscriptome. These aspects of TGF&#x3b2; signalling could have far-reaching implications in many other cell types and in diseases such as cancer.

### Keywords
Smad2/3, Human pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Wellcome Trust - MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute Anne McLaren Laboratory and Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, UK. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton UK.

### Submitter
Alessandro Bertero

### Lab Head
Dr Ludovic Vallier
Wellcome Trust - MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute Anne McLaren Laboratory and Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, UK. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton UK.


