### Accession
PXD014044

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics reveal that PIM3 modulates cell migration via regulating Rho GTPase signaling

### Description
For the phosphoproteomic analysis, three biological replicates and two technical replicates were analyzed, resulting in twelve data for quantification. Statistical analysis was performed using student’s t-test as described in details in the “LC-MS/MS and data analysis” section

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 chromatography – Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2-coated magnetic beads (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 20 µL of TiO2 beads was used for 200 µg of tryptic peptide mixturein each assay. TiO2 beads were washed three times with 400 µL of binding buffer and incubated with the peptide samples for 1 min. Non-phosphorylated peptides were removed by washing the beads three times with 400 µL of binding buffer and once with 400 µL of washing buffer. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 60 µL of elution buffer. Eluted phosphopeptides were dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% FA for the following liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
For quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis, peptide and fragment ion mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm and 0.6Da respectively. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidized methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, or tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with up to three missed cleavage sites. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications. The positions of phosphorylation sites were determined by site probabilities calculated by PTM score. Only phosphorylation sites with a localization probability of at least 0.75 were considered. Total ion current of each sample was used for normalization. Student’s t- test was performed to identify significantly changed phosphopeptides (P <0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The proto-oncogene serine/threonine-protein kinase PIM3 plays critical roles in cancer, and it has been extensively exploited as a drug target. Here, we investigated the quantitative changes in the cellular proteome and phosphoproteome in liver cancer cells overexpressing PIM3 to obtain a better understanding of the regulatory functions of PIM3 and the underlying molecular mechanisms. This work depicted the landscape of gene expression and protein phosphorylation potentially regulated by PIM3. A signaling network analysis showed that PIM3 may coordinate various cellular processes, for example, signal transduction, cell cycle, apoptosis, and so forth. Intriguingly, quantitative phosphoproteomics revealed that the PIM3 overexpression elevated the phosphorylation of multiple Rho GTPase modulators that target RhoA, a central modulator of cell movement. Further investigations confirmed that PIM3 activated RhoA to subsequently regulate cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell migration. Taken together, this study comprehensively mapped the proteome and phosphoproteome regulated by PIM3 and revealed its role in promoting liver cancer cell migration and invasion by modulating Rho GTPase signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Cell

### Affiliations
Tianjin University
Department of Pathogen Biology and Department of Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China. School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Health Science Platform, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China

### Submitter
Na  Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr ruibing chen
Department of Pathogen Biology and Department of Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China. School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Health Science Platform, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China


