### Accession
PXD027061

### Title
Identification of candidate genes that specifically regulate subcutaneous and intramuscular fat deposition from transcriptomic and proteomic profiles in Dingyuan pigs

### Description
we collected tissues of subcutaneous fat and longissimus dorsi (LD) muscle from individuals that have divergent of backfat thickness and intramuscular fat content, and have similar age and body weight. The transcriptomic and proteomic data were gained using RNA-Seq and TMT to identify the key genes and pathways that specifically regulate the subcutaneous fat and intramuscular fat deposition in Dingyuan pig.

### Sample Protocol
ake an appropriate amount of sample and add protein lysis solution (Mammal Tissue Total Protein Extraction Kit AP0601-50). After sonication, place on ice for 20 minutes, then centrifuge at 10,000 g at 4°C for 30 minutes, transfer the supernatant to a new tube, and store at -80°C. Protein concentrations of the samples were determined by the BCA kit (Thermo, 23225, USA)，and the protein quality is detected by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. The peptides were labeled with TMT isobaric tags (Thermo, 90066, USA) at RT for 1 h.  The TMT‐labeled samples were fractionated with a high‐pH peptide fractionation protocol. The sample was fractionated into 60 fractions by step gradients from 0% to 95% acetonitrile. Then, 60fractions were noncontiguously pooled into 10 fractions. Each sample was separated using a nanoliter flow rate HPLC liquid phase system. The chromatographic column is balanced with 95% solution A (98% H2O, pH10), and then loaded onto the mass spectrometer (MS) pre-column by the autosampler, and then separated by the analytical column. The separated samples are analyzed in Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
After MS analysis, Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software was used to process all the original files against the Sus_scrofa.Sscrofa11.1.pep.all.fa database. The peptide confidence was set to a high level (q-value < 0.01) for peptide filtering. Quantification experimental bias was set as normalize on total peptide amount. FC ≥ 1.2 or FC ≤ 0.833 and P value ≤ 0.05 were set as thresholds for identifying differential abundance protein (DAPs).

### Publication Abstract
Subcutaneous fat and intramuscular fat (IMF) deposition are closely related to meat production and pork quality. Dingyuan pig, as a native pig breed in China, low selection leads to obvious genetic and phenotypic differences in the population. Individuals with extreme fat content in the population are ideal models for studying the mechanism of fat deposition. In this study, we used RNA-Seq and tandem mass tags-based (TMT) proteomics to analyze the key pathways and genes that specifically regulate subcutaneous fat and IMF deposition in Dingyuan pigs. We identified 191 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 61 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in the high and low back fat thickness (HBF, LBF) groups, 85 DEGs and 12 DAPs were obtained in the high and low intramuscular fat (HIMF, LIMF) groups. The functional analysis showed that the DEGs and DAPs in the backfat groups were mainly involved in carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids metabolism, whereas the IMF groups were involved in the insulin pathway, longevity, and some disease-related pathways. We found 40 candidate genes that might tissue-specifically lipids deposition for subcutaneous and intramuscular fat. Our research provides theoretical reference materials for the improvement of fat deposition traits of local pig breeds in my country.

### Keywords
Tmt; pig; subcutaneous fat; intramuscular fat

### Affiliations
National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, China Agricultural University,No. 2 Yuanmingyuan West Rd., Beijing 100193, China
zhangoan95@163.com

### Submitter
pan zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Zhang
National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, China Agricultural University,No. 2 Yuanmingyuan West Rd., Beijing 100193, China


