### Accession
PXD041701

### Title
Platelet proteomic analysis of exercising and standard-housed aged C57BL/6J mice

### Description
Platelets were isolated from standard-housed and exercising (4 days and 28 days) 18-month-old C57BL/6J mice and mass spectrometry performed. This analysis revealed differential proteomic signatures between platelets from exercsising and standard-housed mice.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet lysate was prepared by three repeated freeze-thaw cycles. Samples (6 mice per running time point and 7 standard-housed mice) were digested using commercially procured S-Traps (Protifi) and equal total peptide quantities were prepared for mass spectrometry using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT; Thermo Scientific) reagent labelling. The TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using Offline Basic pH reversed-phase fractionation, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, which was performed using the UltiMate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, v2.1.0.81). The data were searched using the search engines SequestHT and Mascot against a sequence database for Mus musculus.

### Publication Abstract
The beneficial effects of physical activity on brain ageing are well recognised, with exerkines, factors that are secreted into the circulation in response to exercise, emerging as likely mediators of this response. However, the source and identity of these exerkines remain unclear. Here we provide evidence that an anti-geronic exerkine is secreted by platelets. We show that platelets are activated by exercise and are required for the exercise-induced increase in hippocampal precursor cell proliferation in aged mice. We also demonstrate that increasing the systemic levels of the platelet-derived exerkine CXCL4/platelet factor 4 (PF4) ameliorates age-related regenerative and cognitive impairments in a hippocampal neurogenesis-dependent manner. Together these findings highlight the role of platelets in mediating the rejuvenating effects of exercise during physiological brain ageing.

### Keywords
Exercise, Mouse, Ageing, Lc-ms/ms, Platelets

### Affiliations
Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 4072, Australia
Postdoctoral Research Fellow

### Submitter
Odette Leiter

### Lab Head
Dr Tara Louise Walker
Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 4072, Australia


