### Accession
PXD020913

### Title
An Integrative Omics Approach Reveals Involvement of BRCA1 in Hepatic Metastatic Progression of Colorectal Cancer

### Description
The role of different cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) is critical to the metastatic process. Phenotypic transformation of the liver cells is one of the most important stages of hepatic metastasis progression of colorectal cancer (CRC). Our aim was to identify the major molecules (i.e. genes, miRNAs and proteins) involved in this process.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated three types of liver cells (Ito cells, Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells) from the TME of a murine model of CRC liver metastasis. Proteins were extracted and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by in-gel digestion with trypsin as described (PMID 24646099).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 for peptide and protein identification and quantification. Searches were carried out on the basis of Mus musculus sequences downloaded from UniProt KB on 10th October 2013.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotypic transformation of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells is one of the most important stages of liver metastasis progression. The miRNA effects on liver sinusoidal endothelial cells during liver metastasis have not yet been studied. Herein, whole genome analysis of miRNA expression in these cells during colorectal liver metastasis revealed repressed expression of microRNA-20a. Importantly, downregulation of miR-20a occurs in parallel with upregulation of its known protein targets. To restore normal miR-20a levels in liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, we developed chondroitin sulfate-sorbitan ester nanoparticles conjugated with miR-20a in a delivery system that specifically targets liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. The restoration of normal mir-20a levels in these cells induced downregulation of the expression of its protein targets, and this also resulted in a reduction of in vitro LSEC migration and a reduction of in vivo activation and tumor-infiltrating capacity and ability of the tumor decreased by &#x223c;80% in a murine liver metastasis model.

### Keywords
Brca1, Tumor microenvironment, Colorectal cancer, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf


