### Accession
PXD036528

### Title
The transcriptional coactivator RUVBL2 regulates Pol II clustering with diverse transcription factors

### Description
RUVBL2 is most important AAA+ ATPase for RNA polymerase II assembly and transcription regulation, through DNA remodeling or by directly interaction with PIC，this study will comprehensively to study the promiscuous functions of this proteins through the ChIP-MS, ChIP-seq, RNA-seq and nascent RNA seq and biochemistry analysis. Our study would provide more systematic and novel responsibility of this molecule, especially for the development and carcinomas.

### Sample Protocol
RUVBL2-mAID-GFP degron mESCs dispersed by trypsinization and collected for crosslinking, formaldehyde (final concentration 1% (wt/vol)) was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature (RT), then quenched by 0.125 M glycine (final concentration) for 5 min at RT. Cells were pelleted through 3,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C, washed twice with ice-cold PBS, split to 20 million aliquots per 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube, and then stored at -80 °C. For chromatin immunoprecipitation, 20 million crosslinked cells were lysed gently with 0.5 ml of ice-cold NP-40 lysis buffer (10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% Nonidet P-40) on ice for 5 min, the cell lysates were then transferred on top of 1.25 ml sucrose cushion (24% sucrose (wt/vol) in NP-40 lysis buffer), centrifugated at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, discarded the supernatant of cytoplasmic fraction, the nuclei pellets were washed once with 1 ml PBS/1 mM EDTA. Resuspended the nuclei pellet gently with 0.5 ml glycerol buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0), 75 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.85 mM DTT, 50% glycerol (vol/vol)), then 0.5 ml nuclei lysis buffer (10 mM Hepes (pH 7.6), 1 mM DTT, 7.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.3 M NaCl, 1 M urea, 1% Nonidet P-40) were added and incubated on ice for 2 min. Centrifugated at 12,000 rpm for 2 min at 4 °C, discard the supernatant represented the soluble nuclear fraction. Washed the chromatin pellet twice with 1 ml PBS/1 mM EDTA, centrifugated at 12,000 rpm for 1 min at 4 °C, discarded the supernatant. The isolated chromatin was dissolved in 1 ml sonication buffer (20 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0) ,150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA (pH 8.0),0.1% SDS,1% Triton X-100) with 5 mM CaCl2, 200 U MNase (NEB, M0247) were added and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C with 700 rpm shaking, then 20 μl 0.5 M EDTA and 40 μl 0.5 M EGTA were added and mixed thoroughly on ice to inactivate MNase. The MNase digested chromatin fractions were divided into 300 μl per tube and sonicated using the bioruptor system (Diagenode, Bioruptor Plus) with high energy, 30 s ON, 60 s OFF for 20 cycles. Lysates were centrifugated twice at 1,2000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, 20 μl supernatant were sampled as input, the rest supernatant was transferred into 2 new DNase free tube (500 μl/ tube), then 1 μl GFP abs (Abcam, ab290), and equal isotype IgG control normal rabbit IgG (Merck Millipore, 12-370), were added for each ChIP reaction, respectively, and incubated overnight at 4 °C with low-speed rotation. Pre-washed 30 μl Protein G magnetic beads with sonication buffer were added into the mixture and incubated for another 4 h, then washed the beads through Magnetic frame once with sonication buffer, twice with high-salt wash buffer (20 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0), 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS,1% Triton X-100), once with LiCl wash buffer (10 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 250 mM LiCl,1 mM EDTA,1% NP-40), three times with TE buffer (1 mM EDTA,10 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0)). 1/10 beads were eluted with 300 μl elution buffer (50 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0),10 mM EDTA,1% SDS) at 65 °C for 30 min with vigorously shake and then decrosslinked and purified for ChIP-qPCR validation of enrichment. For ChIP-MS, the beads and input were directly boiled twice using the SDS-PAGE loading buffer for 12 min, then the samples were separated with SDS-PAGE, the separated sample gels were cut (IgG bands were analyzed alone) and subjected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer analysis.

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer analysis data were used for peptides searching in Uniprot database(at least one unique peptide was identified for one protein), then the enrichment proteins were identified using unique peptide and PSI compared to the input using R.

### Publication Abstract
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) apparatuses are compartmentalized into transcriptional clusters. Whether protein factors control these clusters remains unknown. In this study, we find that the ATPase-associated with diverse cellular activities (AAA&#x2009;+&#x2009;) ATPase RUVBL2 co-occupies promoters with Pol II and various transcription factors. RUVBL2 interacts with unphosphorylated Pol II in chromatin to promote RPB1 carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) clustering and transcription initiation. Rapid depletion of RUVBL2 leads to a decrease in the number of Pol II clusters and inhibits nascent RNA synthesis, and tethering RUVBL2 to an active promoter enhances Pol II clustering at the promoter. We also identify target genes that are directly linked to the RUVBL2-Pol II axis. Many of these genes are hallmarks of cancers and encode proteins with diverse cellular functions. Our results demonstrate an emerging activity for RUVBL2 in regulating Pol II cluster formation in the nucleus.

### Keywords
Mesc v6.5 ruvbl2 chip-ms

### Affiliations
Peking university
Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

### Submitter
Hui Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiong Ji
Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China


