### Accession
PXD029952

### Title
Cas1 and Fen1 Display Commutable Functions During Archaeal DNA Damage Repair

### Description
CRISPR-Cas constitutes an adaptive prokaryotic defence system against invasive nucleic acids like viruses and plasmids. Beyond their role in immunity, CRISPR-Cas systems have been shown to closely interact with components of cellular DNA repair pathways either by regulating their expression or via direct protein-protein contact or enzymatic activity. The integrase Cas1 is usually involved in the adaptation phase of CRISPR-Cas immunity but its function in cellular DNA repair pathways has been proposed before. Here, we analysed the capacity of an archaeal Cas1 from Haloferax volcanii to compensate DNA damage induced by oxidative stress and found that a deletion of the cas1 gene led to severe growth defects after stress induction. In addition, our results indicate that Cas1 is directly involved in DNA damage repair as the enzymatically active site of the protein is crucial for growth rescue under oxidative conditions. Based on biochemical cleavage assays, we propose a mechanism in which Cas1 exerts a similar function like the DNA repair protein Fen1 by resolving branched repair intermediate structures. Overall, the present study broadens our understanding of the functional link between CRISPR-Cas immunity and DNA repair by demonstrating that Cas1 and Fen1 display commutable roles during archaeal DNA damage repair.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE-separated protein samples were processed as described by Shevchenko et al. (1996). The resulting peptides were loaded to nano HPLC coupled with Exploris Orbitrap Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 5–40% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at flow rate of 300 nL/min over 48 min total gradient time. The MS data was aquired by scanning the precursors in mass range from 350 to 1400 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Top30 precursor ion were chosen for MS2 by using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with auto IT.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and search was performed against Uniprot_Haloferax_volcanii database (July 2021, 3911 entries) using Maxquant Software (1.6.17.0 ) and results were annotated with Scaffold5 software.  Search parameters were 0.1 FDR on peptide and protein level; Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus of the protein as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
CRISPR-Cas constitutes an adaptive prokaryotic defence system against invasive nucleic acids like viruses and plasmids. Beyond their role in immunity, CRISPR-Cas systems have been shown to closely interact with components of cellular DNA repair pathways, either by regulating their expression or via direct protein-protein contact and enzymatic activity. The integrase Cas1 is usually involved in the adaptation phase of CRISPR-Cas immunity but an additional role in cellular DNA repair pathways has been proposed previously. Here, we analysed the capacity of an archaeal Cas1 from <i>Haloferax volcanii</i> to act upon DNA damage induced by oxidative stress and found that a deletion of the <i>cas1</i> gene led to reduced survival rates following stress induction. In addition, our results indicate that Cas1 is directly involved in DNA repair as the enzymatically active site of the protein is crucial for growth under oxidative conditions. Based on biochemical assays, we propose a mechanism by which Cas1 plays a similar function to DNA repair protein Fen1 by cleaving branched intermediate structures. The present study broadens our understanding of the functional link between CRISPR-Cas immunity and DNA repair by demonstrating that Cas1 and Fen1 display equivalent roles during archaeal DNA damage repair.

### Keywords
Fen1, Cas1, Archaea, Crispr, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry


