### Accession
PXD001255

### Title
Sequential elution interactome analysis of Mind bomb 1 and a novel role in dendritic spine outgrowth

### Description
Mind bomb 1 (Mib1) is an E3 ubiquitin-ligase that is essential for overall metazoan development, including multiple stages of neuronal development. It is located in puncta throughout neurons, including near post synaptic densities (PSD), and has been shown to participate in several signaling pathways via its E3 ligase catalytic activity. The most well-characterized of these is the Notch signaling pathway, in which Mib1 facilitates Delta/Serrate/LAG-2 (DSL) ligand endocytosis and activation, allowing cell-cell communication to determine neuronal versus glial cell fate. This, however, is not the limit of Mib1 activity in the developing nervous system, as it also contributes to cell polarity, neurite outgrowth, and long-term potentiation (LTP), but it has not been demonstrated to affect dendritic spine development. We therefore sought to comprehensively characterize the Mib1 interactome and study its potential function in dendritic spine morphogenesis. We utilized a novel sequential elution method from Mib1 affinity purification to recover Mib1 binding proteins with both deep coverage and the ability to distinguish between high affinity binding partners from low affinity binding partners. This procedure revealed 837 potential binding partners, distinguished 72 from these as very-high confidence, and a further 387 as high confidence of interaction. Included in these were many proteins previously demonstrated to interact with Mib1, as well as 5 proteins of particular interest to us: Usp9x, a deubiquitinase; alpha-, beta-, and delta-catenins; regulators of Wnt signaling; and CDKL5, which is mutated in EIEE2, a severe form of mental retardation. We demonstrated that Mib1 downregulates CDKL5, limits its effects on dendritic spine outgrowth, and inhibits spine outgrowth itself. These data further elaborate upon the signaling networks and biological functions influenced by this critical protein and expand our understanding of the signaling networks involved in neuronal development.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeled peptides were loaded on a C18 column (~1 m x 75 µm ID) packed with 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Amish GmbH, Germany), and eluted during a 9 hr. gradient (~0.15 µl/min; 20% -55%; buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% ACN). The column was heated to 65oC by a butterfly portfolio heater (Phoenix S&T, Chester, PA) to reduce backpressure. The eluted peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Elite MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with one MS scan (30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 automatic gain control, and 100 ms maximal ion time) and top 10 high resolution MS/MS scans (HCD, 50,000 automatic gain control, 100 ms maximal ion time, 2 m/z isolation window, 37 normalized collision energy, and 30 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS raw files were converted into mzXML format and searched by Sequest algorithm (version 28 revision 13) against a composite target/decoy database to estimate false discovery rate (FDR). The target protein database was generated from the Uniprot rat database (28863 protein entries) and the decoy protein database was generated by reversing all target protein sequences. Spectra were searched with ± 20 ppm for precursor ion mass tolerance, ± 0.8 ppm for product ion mass tolerance, fully tryptic restriction, static mass shift for alkylated Cys  (+57.02146) and TMT-tagged N-term and Lys (+229.162932), two maximal missed cleavages, and three maximal modification sites. Only a, b, and y ions were considered during the search. Assigned peptide spectra matches were first filtered by MS mass accuracy (± 6 standard deviations, which was determined by all empirical good matches of doubly charged peptides with XCorr at least 2.5). These good matches were also used for global mass recalibration prior to the filtering. The survived matches were grouped by precursor ion charge state and further filtered by Xcorr and ΔCn value. The cutoff values for XCorr and ΔCn were adjusted until a peptide FDR lower than 1% was achieved. If one peptide was matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was represented by the protein with the highest spectral counts according to the rule of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The mind bomb 1 (Mib1) ubiquitin ligase is essential for controlling metazoan development by Notch signaling and possibly the Wnt pathway. It is also expressed in postmitotic neurons and regulates neuronal morphogenesis and synaptic activity by mechanisms that are largely unknown. We sought to comprehensively characterize the Mib1 interactome and study its potential function in neuron development utilizing a novel sequential elution strategy for affinity purification, in which Mib1 binding proteins were eluted under different stringency and then quantified by the isobaric labeling method. The strategy identified the Mib1 interactome with both deep coverage and the ability to distinguish high-affinity partners from low-affinity partners. A total of 817 proteins were identified during the Mib1 affinity purification, including 56 high-affinity partners and 335 low-affinity partners, whereas the remaining 426 proteins are likely copurified contaminants or extremely weak binding proteins. The analysis detected all previously known Mib1-interacting proteins and revealed a large number of novel components involved in Notch and Wnt pathways, endocytosis and vesicle transport, the ubiquitin-proteasome system, cellular morphogenesis, and synaptic activities. Immunofluorescence studies further showed colocalization of Mib1 with five selected proteins: the Usp9x (FAM) deubiquitinating enzyme, alpha-, beta-, and delta-catenins, and CDKL5. Mutations of CDKL5 are associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy-2 (EIEE2), a severe form of mental retardation. We found that the expression of Mib1 down-regulated the protein level of CDKL5 by ubiquitination, and antagonized CDKL5 function during the formation of dendritic spines. Thus, the sequential elution strategy enables biochemical characterization of protein interactomes; and Mib1 analysis provides a comprehensive interactome for investigating its role in signaling networks and neuronal development.

### Keywords
Dendritic spines, Wnt signaling, Neuronal morphogenesis, Endocytosis, E3 ligase, Notch signaling, Interactome, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


