### Accession
PXD013742

### Title
L-Bodies are Novel RNA-Protein Condensates Driving RNA Transport in Xenopus Oocytes

### Description
Isolation and proteomic characterization of L-Bodies, a novel RNA-Protein condensate.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate from stage II Xenopus oocytes were formaldehyde cross-linked and subjected to size-exclusion chromatography on a Sephacryl S400 column. A subset of fractions contained in the void volume were subjected immunoprecipitation.  IP samples were subjected to lysis buffer, sonicated and c lared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was measured with a BCA Protein Assay.  LC-MS/MS was performed ona fully automated proteomic technology platform that includes an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The peptides were separated through a linear reversed-phase 90 min gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 3 ul/min through a 3 um 20 cm C18 column. Typtic peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges and were lyophilized for 48 hours to dryness. Eluted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 M acetic acid at a concentration of 1 ug/ul and 5 ul was injected for each analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra of each file was searched against a Xenopus laevis database (Uniprot) using MASCOT. A concatenated database containing "target" and "decoy" sequences was employed to estimate the FDR. Msconvert from ProteoWizard using default parameters wit hthe MS2Deisotope filter on was used to create peak lists for MASCOT.

### Publication Abstract
Ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules are membraneless compartments within cells, formed by phase separation, that function as regulatory hubs for diverse biological processes. However, the mechanisms by which RNAs and proteins interact to promote RNP granule structure and function in vivo remain unclear. In <i>Xenopus laevis</i> oocytes, maternal mRNAs are localized as large RNPs to the vegetal hemisphere of the developing oocyte, where local translation is critical for proper embryonic patterning. Here we demonstrate that RNPs containing vegetally localized RNAs represent a new class of cytoplasmic RNP granule, termed localization-bodies (L-bodies). We show that L-bodies contain a dynamic protein-containing phase surrounding a nondynamic RNA-containing phase. Our results support a role for RNA as a critical component within these RNP granules and suggest that <i>cis</i>-elements within localized mRNAs may drive subcellular RNA localization through control over phase behavior.

### Keywords
Rna localization, Xenopus, Rnp granule, Rnp

### Affiliations
Brown University
Dr. Kim Mowry (kimberly_mowry@brown.edu) Brown University MCB Department

### Submitter
Samantha Jeschonek

### Lab Head
Dr Samantha Jeschonek
Dr. Kim Mowry (kimberly_mowry@brown.edu) Brown University MCB Department


