### Accession
PXD008203

### Title
Receptor-mediated recruitment of cytosolic J-proteins to the mitochondrial outer membrane promotes assembly of preprotein translocases

### Description
Mitochondria possess elaborate machineries for the import of preproteins from the cytosol. Cytosolic factors like Hsp70 chaperones and their co-chaperones, the J-proteins, guide preproteins to the mitochondrial surface. The translocase of the mitochondrial outer membrane (TOM) forms the entry gate for precursor proteins. How proteins are delivered to the receptors Tom20, Tom22 and Tom70 is only understood in part. We identified the cytosolic J-protein Xdj1 as a specific interaction partner of the central receptor Tom22. Tom22 recruits Xdj1 to the mitochondrial surface to promote assembly of the TOM complex. A second J-protein of the cytosol, Djp1, binds to Tom70 to mediate biogenesis of the mitochondrial import (MIM) complex. Thus, by targeting distinct TOM receptors, cytosolic J-proteins promote the biogenesis of different mitochondrial preprotein translocases.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Tom22-His arg4-delta cells and the corresponding YPH499 arg4-delta (wild-type) cells were grown on minimal medium (0.067% (w/v) bacto-yeast nitrogen base, amino acid mix) containing 3% (v/v) glycerol and 0.2 % (w/v) glucose as carbon source. For differential labeling with amino acids, the media were supplemented either with 14N2/12C6-lysine and 14N4/12C6-arginine (Tom22-His) or with 15N2/13C6-lysine and 15N4/13C6-arginine (wild-type). Mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation following standard procedure (Wenz et al. 2015, J. Cell Biol. 210, 1047-1054). Isolated mitochondria were lysed with digitonin buffer containing 1% (w/v) digitonin and 10 mM imidazole. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. The supernatant was incubated with Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen) for 1 h at 4°C under constant rotation. The affinity matrix was washed with an excess amount of digitonin buffer containing 0.1% (w/v) digitonin and 40 mM imidazole. Bound proteins were eluted with digitonin buffer containing 0.1% (w/v) digitonin and 250 mM imidazole. The elution fractions of wild-type and Tom22-His mitochondria were pooled and subjected to mass spectrometry. The experiment was performed in three biological replicates. Proteins were precipitated using acetone and resuspended in 60% (v/v) methanol/20 mM NH4HCO3 followed by reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues with 100 mM DTT (30 min at 65°C) and 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature in the dark), respectively, and tryptic digestion (37°C, overnight).  LC/MS analysis: Peptides were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) directly coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) essentially as described before (Lytovchenko et al. 2014, EMBO J. 33, 1624-1638 ).

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: The software MaxQuant with its integrated search engine Andromeda (version 1.2.0.18; Cox & Mann 2008, Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372; Cox et al. 2011, J Proteome Res 10, 1794- 1805) was used for protein identification and SILAC-based quantification as described previously (Lytovchenko et al. 2014, EMBO J. 33, 1624-1638). Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide (≥ 6 amino acids) and a false discovery rate of < 1% applied to peptides and proteins. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides with at least one ratio count. The mean of log10-transformed Tom22-His/wild-type ratios was calculated (n ≥ 2) and the corresponding p-value was determined using a one-sided Student's t-test. Proteins with a mean Tom22-His/wild-type ratio > 10 and a p-value < 0.05 were considered specifically enriched with the bait.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria possess elaborate machineries for the import of proteins from the cytosol. Cytosolic factors like Hsp70 chaperones and their co-chaperones, the J-proteins, guide proteins to the mitochondrial surface. The translocase of the mitochondrial outer membrane (TOM) forms the entry gate for preproteins. How the proteins are delivered to mitochondrial preprotein receptors is poorly understood. We identify the cytosolic J-protein Xdj1 as a specific interaction partner of the central receptor Tom22. Tom22 recruits Xdj1 to the mitochondrial surface to promote import of preproteins and assembly of the TOM complex. Additionally, we find that the receptor Tom70 binds a different cytosolic J-protein, Djp1. Our findings suggest that cytosolic J-proteins target distinct TOM receptors and promote the biogenesis of mitochondrial proteins.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Proteomics, Cytosolic j-proteins, Silac

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.


