### Accession
PXD040913

### Title
Elevated plasma Complement Factor H Regulating Protein 5 is associated  with venous thromboembolism

### Description
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common, multi-causal disease with potentially serious short- and long-term complications. In clinical practice, there is a need for improved plasma biomarker-based tools for VTE diagnosis and risk prediction. We use multiplex proteomics profiling to screen plasma from patients with suspected acute VTE, and several case-control studies for VTE, to identify Complement Factor H Related Protein 5 (CFHR5), a regulator of the alternative pathway of complement activation, as a novel VTE associated plasma biomarker. In plasma, higher CFHR5 levels are associated with increased thrombin generation potential and recombinant CFHR5 enhanced platelet activation in vitro. GWAS analysis of ~52,000 participants identifies six loci associated with CFHR5 plasma levels, but Mendelian randomization do not demonstrate causality between CFHR5 and VTE. Our results indicate an important role for the regulation of the alternative pathway of complement activation in VTE and that CFHR5 represents a potential diagnostic and/or risk predictive plasma biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
Blood plasma was diluted 10 times with 1x PBS, 1% sodium deoxycholate, reduced, alkylated and digested over night with trypsin. The digested samples were desalted using in-house prepared StageTips packed with Empore C18 Bonded Silica matrix (CDS Analytical, CN: 98-0604-0217-3). Desalted peptides were vacuum‐dried and stored at -20°C prior to LC‐MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
DDA data were searched using the engine Sequest and Proteome Discoverer platform (PD, v1.4.0.339, Thermo Scientific and Uniprot whole human proteome [20180131, for HPA058337], or MaxQuant (v. 2.1.4.0) against whole human proteome (UniProt,20210811, for MAB3845) using default settings and label-free quantification. DIA data were converted to mzML format using peak picking filter within ProteoWizard provided software tool msConvert (version 3.0.20321-6df943caa). Resulting mzML files were searched using EncyclopeDIA against a spectral library generated with a deep learning network Prosit, which is integrated into ProteomicsDB (version 1.1) [96]. A whole human proteome (Homo Sapiens UniProt ID: #UP000009606, 20,205 entries, accessed 20170918) was used as a background proteome. Finally, the quantification reports were saved, and the protein quantities calculated using top3 method from the peptide intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Complement factor, Venous thromboelism, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Protein Science, CBH, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-171 21 Stockholm, Sweden
KTH - SciLifeLab

### Submitter
David Kotol

### Lab Head
Dr Jacob Odeberg
Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Protein Science, CBH, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-171 21 Stockholm, Sweden


