### Accession
PXD023687

### Title
Characterization of PEAK3 pseudokinase as a pro-migratory and -invasive member of New Kinase Family 3

### Description
The New Kinase Family 3 (NKF3) of pseudokinases comprises PEAK1 and PEAK2 as well as the recently-identified PEAK3. PEAK1/2 play fundamental roles in regulating tyrosine kinase signal output and oncogenesis, while PEAK3 remains poorly-characterized. Here we demonstrate that PEAK3 undergoes homotypic association as well as heterotypic interaction with PEAK1/2. PEAK3 also recruits ASAP1/2, Grb2, CrkII, Cbl and PYK2 with effector recruitment being dependent on PEAK3 dimerization. PEAK3 tyrosine phosphorylation on Y24 is also dependent on dimerization as well as Src family kinase activity, and interestingly, is decreased via PTPN12 in response to EGF treatment. Both phosphorylation of Y24 and an intact N-terminal SH3 binding motif are required for optimal binding of Grb2, CrkII and ASAP1. Overexpression of PEAK3 in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells enhanced cell elongation and cell motility, while knockdown of endogenous PEAK3 decreased cell migration. In addition, overexpression of PEAK3 in PEAK1/2 compound knock-out MCF-10A breast epithelial cells enhanced acinar growth and invasion in 3D culture, with the latter phenotype dependent on PEAK3 tyrosine phosphorylation and ASAP1 binding. These findings characterize PEAK3 as an integral member of NKF3 with scaffolding roles that promote cell proliferation, migration and invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Control MCF-10A cells or cells expressing HA-tagged PEAK3 cultured in -EGF medium (recipe of the medium, 2% horse serum and no EGF, others are same as full medium) overnight and stimulated or not with EGF (50 ng/ml) for 5 min were lysed in normal lysis buffer (ref). Cell lysate (5 mg) was incubated with 60 l of anti-HA affinity-agarose beads slurry (Sigma, #xxx) for 4 h at 4 °C. Following washing with lysis buffer and then wash buffer (Tris 20 mM, pH=7.4, NaCl=150 mM), the immunocomplex was digested with 1 g trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Tryptic digests were acidified with 10% TFA to pH 2–3, desalted with a C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/40% acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were dried with a SpeedVac and re-suspended in 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA). The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The DDA spectra were analyzed with the MaxQuant analysis software using default settings. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, minimal peptide length of 6, and up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine; acetyl (protein N terminus); and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for the precursor was 4.5 ppm and for the fragment ions was 20 ppm. The DDA files were searched against the human UniProt fasta database (v2015–08, 20,210 entries) and the Biognosys HRM calibration peptides. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The pseudokinase scaffolds PEAK1 and PEAK2 are implicated in cancer cell migration and metastasis. We characterized the regulation and role of the third family member PEAK3 in cell signaling. Similar to PEAK1 and PEAK2, PEAK3 formed both homotypic and heterotypic complexes. In addition, like PEAK1, it bound to the adaptors Grb2 and CrkII. However, unlike PEAK1 and PEAK2, homodimerized PEAK3 also interacted with the ARF GTPase-activating protein ASAP1, the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl, and the kinase PYK2. Dimerization and subsequent phosphorylation on Tyr<sup>24</sup>, likely by a Src family kinase, were required for the binding of PEAK3 to Grb2 and ASAP1. Interactions with Grb2, CrkII, ASAP1, Cbl, and PYK2 exhibited contrasting dynamics upon cell stimulation with epidermal growth factor (EGF), in part due to PEAK3 dephosphorylation mediated by the phosphatase PTPN12. Overexpressing PEAK3 in mesenchymal-like MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells enhanced cell elongation in a manner dependent on PEAK3 dimerization, and manipulation of PEAK3 expression demonstrated a positive role for this scaffold in regulating cell migration. Overexpressing PEAK3 in PEAK1/2 double-knockout MCF-10A breast epithelial cells enhanced acinar growth, impaired basement membrane integrity, and promoted invasion in three-dimensional cultures, with the latter two effects dependent on the binding of PEAK3 to Grb2 and ASAP1. PEAK1 and PEAK2 quantitatively and temporally influenced PEAK3 function. These findings characterize PEAK3 as an integral, signal-diversifying member of the PEAK family with scaffolding roles that promote cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.

### Keywords
Nkf3/ peak1 (sgk269)/ peak2 (sgk223, Pragmin)/ peak3/brest cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Monash University

### Submitter
Hugh Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Roger John Daly
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Monash University


