### Accession
PXD000815

### Title
Breast cancer tumors -  System-wide Clinical Proteomics of Breast Cancer Reveals Global Remodeling of Tissue Homeostasis

### Description
The project analyzed 88 breast cancer clinical samples, including lymph node negative and positive primary tumors, lymph node metastases, and healthy tissue as control. All samples were combined with a super-SILAC mix that served as an internal standard for quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue were extracted and trypsin digested following the FFPE-FASP protocol. Some of the samples were further fractionated using strong anion exchange in a stageTip format. Peptides were separated on C18 50 cm PepMap columns using the EASY nLC1000 UHPLC connected to the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer through the EASY-spray ionization source.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.36. The Andromeda search engine was used for database search against the Human Uniprot database. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The forward/decoy approach was utilized to determine 1% FDR on the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
The genomic and transcriptomic landscapes of breast cancer have been extensively studied, but the proteomes of breast tumors are far less characterized. Here, we use high-resolution, high-accuracy mass spectrometry to perform a deep analysis of luminal-type breast cancer progression using clinical breast samples from primary tumors, matched lymph node metastases, and healthy breast epithelia. We used a super-SILAC mix to quantify over 10,000 proteins with high accuracy, enabling us to identify key proteins and pathways associated with tumorigenesis and metastatic spread. We found high expression levels of proteins associated with protein synthesis and degradation in cancer tissues, accompanied by metabolic alterations that may facilitate energy production in cancer cells within their natural environment. In addition, we found proteomic differences between breast cancer stages and minor differences between primary tumors and their matched lymph node metastases. These results highlight the potential of proteomic technology in the elucidation of clinically relevant cancer signatures.

### Keywords
Lymph node positive, Er positive, Luminal, Lymph node negative, Breast cance

### Affiliations
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemistry, Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of human molecular genetics and biochemistry, Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


### SDRF
- Characteristics[organism: Homo sapiens
- Characteristics[organism part: breast
- cell type: not available
- Characteristics[disease: breast cancer
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1001911;NT=Q Exactive
- separation: NT=High-performance liquid chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000565
- modification parameters: NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.1: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Variable
- modification parameters.2: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed

