### Accession
PXD019470

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa purified outer membrane vesicle (OMV) extracts exposed to sex steroids

### Description
The project aims to elucidate mechanisms driving P. aeruginosa response to sex steroids hormones. An experiment involving outer membrane vesicles (OMV) extraction combined with Mass spectroscopy was performed to identify differences in P. aeruginosa OMVs proteins produced while being exposed to estradiol and testosterone.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PAO1 was cultured in tryptic soy broth supplemented with ethanol (vehicle control), estradiol (25nM) or testosterone (2.5uM) to mid exponential phase, OD600 1.0.  Cell free supernatants were collected by centrifugation of the overnight cultures at 10,000rpm for 10 minutes at room temperature. Residual cells were removed by filtration of the supernatant through a Nalgene™ Rapid-Flow™ Sterile Disposable Filter Unit 500mL with PES Membrane pore size: 0.2µm. Filtration was repeated twice to ensure the supernatants were cell free. Bacterial MVs were pelleted from filtered supernatants by ultracentrifugation at 25,000rpm for 1.5-2 hours at 4˚C using Type 45 Ti rotor. MVs were then resuspended in 1mL 1X Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS, Gibco), at pH 7.  Membrane vesicles (MVs) were next purified using density gradient centrifugation (ranging from 35-60%) with Opti-Prep (Sigma- Aldrich) diluted with 1X PBS. Opti-Prep bands containing MVs were then washed with 1X PBS, twice, to remove Opti-Prep solution.  MVs samples were analysed using the NanoSight NS300 system to quantify the size and particle concentrations and the Malvern Zetasizer DLS instrument used to acquire the hydrodynamic mean vesicle size. Each sample was measured in triplicate and data combined for further analysis. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by the SciLife Facility Uppsala (Sweden). Briefly, total protein concentration was measured by Bradford protein assays (Pierce Kit). For each sample, 15µg of protein was used for digestion. Proteins were digested with trypsin according to a standard operating procedure. The collected peptides were then purified, dried and resolved in 0.1% formic acid and further diluted 4 times.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry was performed applying higher-energy collisional dissociation. Protein identification was based on at least two matching peptides of 95% confidence per protein. Only proteins with a Sequest score above 30 were considered for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen, a major female sex steroid hormone, has been shown to promote the selection of mucoid <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> in the airways of patients with chronic respiratory diseases, including cystic fibrosis. This results in long-term persistence, poorer clinical outcomes, and limited therapeutic options. In this study, we demonstrate that at physiological concentrations, sex steroids, including testosterone and estriol, induce membrane stress responses in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> This is characterized by increased virulence and consequent inflammation and release of proinflammatory outer membrane vesicles promoting <i>in vivo</i> persistence of the bacteria. The steroid-induced <i>P. aeruginosa</i> response correlates with the molecular polarity of the hormones and membrane fluidic properties of the bacteria. This novel mechanism of interaction between sex steroids and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> explicates the reported increased disease severity observed in females with cystic fibrosis and provides evidence for the therapeutic potential of the modulation of sex steroids to achieve better clinical outcomes in patients with hormone-responsive strains.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Molecular mechanisms by which sex steroids interact with <i>P. aeruginosa</i> to modulate its virulence have yet to be reported. Our work provides the first characterization of a steroid-induced membrane stress mechanism promoting <i>P. aeruginosa</i> virulence, which includes the release of proinflammatory outer membrane vesicles, resulting in inflammation, host tissue damage, and reduced bacterial clearance. We further demonstrate that at nanomolar (physiological) concentrations, male and female sex steroids promote virulence in clinical strains of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> based on their dynamic membrane fluidic properties. This work provides, for the first-time, mechanistic insight to better understand and predict the <i>P. aeruginosa</i> related response to sex steroids and explain the interindividual patient variability observed in respiratory diseases such as cystic fibrosis that are complicated by gender differences and chronic <i>P. aeruginosa</i> infection.

### Keywords
Outer membrane vesicles, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Sex steroid

### Affiliations
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Lee kong Chian School of Medicine (LKCSoM)

### Submitter
Valerie Yong

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjay Haresh Chotirmall
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


