### Accession
PXD004001

### Title
Early predictive factors of mortality in onco-hematology patients admitted to the Intensive Care Unit for septic shock: A proteomic approach.

### Description
The number of organ failures at intensive care unit (ICU) admission is the main prognostic factor in septic shock. The aim was to assess classical clinico-biological parameters evaluating organ dysfunctions at ICU admission, combined with proteomics analysis, on day-30 mortality in critically ill onco-hematology patients admitted to the ICU for septic shock.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma preparation and isobaric peptide labelling After 6 hours of optimal management in the ICU, blood samples were collected in order to generate plasma for proteomics analysis. Patients were divided in two groups of 12 patients. The first group was selected by random among day-30 survivors. The second group were selected by random among the decedents before day-13 (median 3 days). The two groups were equilibrated between male and female. Pooled samples were prepared by combining 10 µl of individual delipidated serum. The 14 most abundant serum proteins were depleted using Multiple Affinity Removal MARS-14 cartridges according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Agilent technologies). Protein quantification was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Protein). A volume corresponding to 50 µg for each depleted sample was reduced by TCEP 50 mM (60 min, 60°C), alkylated by iodoacetamide 84 mM (30 min, RT) and digested overnight by adding trypsin (Promega). The ratio enzyme/substrate was 1:5 (w/w) and the pH was checked to ensure an optimal digestion. The two different pathological conditions were duplicated and labelled with the iTRAQ-8plex according to the iTRAQ Reagents Application Kit - Plasma (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies). The study groups, under day-13 decedents and day-30 survivors were tagged as follows: 113, 114, 115, 116 and 117, 118, 119, 121 respectively using four replicats by group.  Peptide fractionation and Mass Spectrometry Isoelectric point (pI) fractionation was done with the Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies).  Peptide samples were desalted onto a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters), dried and solubilized with a carrier focusing buffer (water/glycerol/ampholyte). The 12 cm long IPG gel strip (GE healthcare) with a linear 3-10 pH range was rehydrated for 15 min according to the manufacturer's protocol. 150 µL of sample was loaded into each of the 12 wells. During the run, peptides were focused at a constant intensity of 50 µA, with typical voltages ranging from 0.5 to 8 kV until the 20 kVh level was reached. After focusing, the 12 peptide-fractions were withdrawn and the wells were washed with 200 µL of 49% water (v/v), 50% methanol (v/v) and 1% TFA (v/v). The wash solution was collected and pooled with the corresponding fraction. Fractions corresponding to a 0.6 pH range were dissolved in 100 µL solution of 10% ACN and 0.1% TFA. pI-fractions were analyzed on an nESI HCD-enabled Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (Dionex). Fractions were loaded onto the enrichment column (C18 PepMap100, 100 µm id, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size, Dionex) using 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. After the analytical column (C18 PepMap100, 75 µm id, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) was switched in-line, the nano pump delivered a 180 min linear gradient from 3.2% ACN, 0.1% FA to 37% ACN, 0.1% FA at 300 nL/min flow rate. The instrument method for the LTQ Orbitrap was set up in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30 s). For internal mass calibration the 445.12003 ions was used as lock mass. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400 – 1,700 at a FWHM resolution of 30,000. The 10 abundant precursor ions were selected and HCD (Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation) fragmentation was performed in 2 steps at 45% SNCE (Stepped Normalized Collision Energy) in the HCD collision cell with a normalized collision energy width of 10%. This two-step strategy was used to optimise both low mass range for quantification and high mass range for identification. Fragments were then ejected from the HCD cell and read out in the Orbitrap at a FWHM resolution of 7,500.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. Raw files from mass spectrometry were submitted to Proteome Discoverer software v1.3.0.339 (Thermo Scientific). Data were searched against the swissprot human protein database (v24-05-2012, 20,257 sequences) and using Mascot search engine (http://www.matrixscience.com/). Trypsin was chosen for cleavage specificity and iodoacetamide for cysteine alkylation. A protein was considered to be significantly identified when 2 or more high confidence unique peptides were assigned at 5% global false discovery rate. Differential proteins were selected with a fold change greater than 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Von willebrand factor, Proteomics, Sepsis

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
CRCM, Inserm  U1068, CNRS umr728, institut paoli calmettes

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Camoin Luc
CRCM, Inserm  U1068, CNRS umr728, institut paoli calmettes


