### Accession
PXD023588

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of Elp3 deficient bone marrow derived macrophages aggragates with or without IL-4 treatment

### Description
Alternative macrophages are critical in parasites defense, the resolution of inflammation and wound healing. RNA modifications, which are defined as post-transcriptional changes in the chemical composition of RNA molecules, are involved in the immune response.Among tRNA-modifying enzymes which target the tRNA anticodon, Elongator and Cytosolic thiouridylase (Ctu)-1/2 complexes exclusively modify the wobble uridine (U34) base in cytosolic tRNAs. However, the full picture of how mRNA translational factors maintain protein synthesis accuracy and co-translational protein folding are far from being fully understood.To address this question,we evaluated the role of Elp3 on protein in the IL4 induced alternative bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs). The BMDMs from widetype and Elp3 myeloid specific knockout mice were treated by IL-4 for 24h or not. Then the aggregates were isolated from these BMDMs and performed by MS.

### Sample Protocol
For aggregate isolation, 1x108 BMDMs from ten WT and ten Elp3Mye mice were plated in several 15 cm2 dishes and treated with or without IL-4 for 24 hours. The cells were lysed by CLB solution (tris-HCl PH 7.9 10 mM, sucrose 340 mM, CaCl2  3 mM, EDTA 0.1mM, MgCl2 2mM) for 10 min on the ice, and then centrifuged 15 min at 3500 RPM, the supernatant were collected and centrifuged 10 min at 13500 RPM again. The protein concentration of supernatant were determined by BCA assay and the same amount of protein solutions of each group were sonicated and washed three times. After centrifugation 16000 rcf for 10 min, the pellets were collected and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis.   For LC-MS profiling, Peptides were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and 15,000 FWHM resolution, respectively. APD was turned on. The instrument was run with a 3s cycle for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: enzyme: Trypsin, database: SwissProt Mouse (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants), fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Oxidation (MP), acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), mass values: Monoisotopic, Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da, Max Missed Cleavages: 2. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-edundant list per sample. Data were filtered 1% protein and peptide level FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophage polarization is a process whereby macrophages acquire distinct effector states (M1 or M2) to carry out multiple and sometimes opposite functions. We show here that translational reprogramming occurs during macrophage polarization and that this relies on the Elongator complex subunit Elp3, an enzyme that modifies the wobble uridine base U34 in cytosolic tRNAs. Elp3 expression is downregulated by classical M1-activating signals in myeloid cells, where it limits the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines via FoxO1 phosphorylation, and attenuates experimental colitis in mice. In contrast, alternative M2-activating signals upregulate Elp3 expression through a PI3K- and STAT6-dependent signaling pathway. The metabolic reprogramming linked to M2 macrophage polarization relies on Elp3 and the translation of multiple candidates, including the mitochondrial ribosome large subunit proteins Mrpl3, Mrpl13, and Mrpl47. By promoting translation of its activator Ric8b in a codon-dependent manner, Elp3 also regulates mTORC2 activation. Elp3 expression in myeloid cells further promotes Wnt-driven tumor initiation in the intestine by maintaining a pool of tumor-associated macrophages exhibiting M2 features. Collectively, our data establish a functional link between&#xa0;tRNA modifications, mTORC2 activation, and macrophage polarization.

### Keywords
Aggregates, Mouse bone marrow derived macrophages

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Medical Chemistry, Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics (GIGA) Stem Cells
University of Liège

### Submitter
Dawei Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Alain Chariot
Laboratory of Medical Chemistry, Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics (GIGA) Stem Cells


