### Accession
PXD012854

### Title
Regulation of Borrelia burgdorferi-induced macrophage activity by spirochetal-regulated surface receptors

### Description
Macrophages mediate the elimination of pathogens by phagocytosis resulting in the activation of specific signaling pathways that lead to the production of cytokines, chemokines and other factors. Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative agent of Lyme disease, causes a wide variety of pro-inflammatory symptoms. The proinflammatory capacity of macrophages is intimately related to the internalization of the spirochete. However, most receptors mediating this process are largely unknown. We have applyedapplied a multiomic approach, including the proteomic analysis of B. burgdorferi-containing phagosome-enriched fractions, to identify surface receptors that are involved in the phagocytic capacity of macrophages as well as their inflammatory output. Sucrose gradient protein fractions of human monocyte-derived macrophages exposed to B. burgdorferi contained the phagocytic receptor, CR3/CD14 highlighting the major role played by these proteins in spirochetal phagocytosis. Among others, Other proteins identified proteins include C-type lectins, scavenger receptors or siglecs, and contain uPAR and MARCO. We also identified the Fc gamma receptor pathway as involved both in the phagocytosis of , and TNF induction by B. burgdorferi in the absence of antibodies. The common gamma chain, FcR, mediates the phagocytosis of the spirochete, likely through Fc receptors and C-type lectins, in a process that involves Syk activation. Overall, these findings highlight the complex array of receptors involved in the phagocytic response of macrophages to B. burgdorferi.

### Sample Protocol
Phagosome-enriched proteins were extracted using 7M urea, 2M thiourea and 4% CHAPS. Samples were incubated for 30 min at RT under agitation and digested following the filter-aided FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al (15) with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 ºC, dried in an RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA.The samples were submitted to LC-MS label-free analysis using two different platforms. First, peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters) connected on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) using the same parameters described before (8). In addition, the samples were analyzed in a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). This mass spectrometer takes advantage of a scan mode termed parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity (16) and has been proven to provide outstanding analytical speed and sensibility for proteomics analyses (17) . The samples (200ng) were directly loaded in a 25 cm, 75 μm ID Odyssey C18 nano column with an integrated emitter (IonOpticks, Australia) and resolved at 400 nl/min with a 90 min gradient. The column was heated to 50 ºC using an oven.

### Data Protocol
Searches were carried out using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.) through Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo). Orbitrap RAW files were directly loaded into the program, whereas mgf files generated by DataAnalysis software (Bruker) were used for timsTOF searches. Orbi searches were carried out with precursor and fragment tolerances of 10ppm and 0.5 Da, whereas 50ppm and 0.05Da were used for TIMS TOF runs. A database consisting of human (Uniprot/Swissprot) and Borrelia burgdorferi (Uniprot/Swissprot and Uniprot/TrEMBL) entries (2018_10 release) was used for the searches. Only proteins identified with an FDR < 1% were considered. Spectral counts for each protein (the number of identified spectra matching to peptides from that protein, also named SpC or PSMs) were normalized against protein length. Then, these values were converted to Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) values by normalizing them against the sum of normalized spectral counts in each of the runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lyme disease, Proteomics, Phagosome

### Affiliations
Inflammation and Macrophage Plasticity Lab, CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Platform

### Submitter
Felix Elortza

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Anguita
Inflammation and Macrophage Plasticity Lab, CIC bioGUNE


