### Accession
PXD011146

### Title
Identification and functional annotation of the Src-regulated kinome, part 2

### Description
Despite significant progress, our understanding of how specific oncogenes transform cells is still limited and likely underestimates the complexity of downstream signalling events. Herein, we describe a novel, integrated approach that addresses this knowledge gap. This utilizes mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomics to characterize the global impact of an oncogene on the expressed kinome, and then functionally annotates the regulated kinases. As an example, we identified approximately one hundred protein kinases exhibiting altered expression and/or phosphorylation in Src-transformed mammary epithelial cells. Screening with corresponding siRNAs identified nine kinases, including SGK1, as being essential for Src-induced transformation. In contrast, MAP4K5 suppressed transformation in a manner enhanced by S335 phosphorylation. In triple negative breast cancer cells, Src positively regulated SGK1 expression and combined inhibition of Src and SGK1 was more effective at inhibiting cell proliferation than either treatment alone. Therefore, this approach not only provides major mechanistic insights into oncogenic transformation but also aids the design of improved therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Large scale kinome enrichment and phosphopeptide enrichment were performed as described previously. Briefly, kinases were enriched from 100 mg of light and heavy-labelled protein mixture using 2 429 ml of kinobead cocktail containing immobilised Purvalanol B (Tocris, UK), CTx-0294885 (also known as KiNet-1, SYNkinase, Australia), SU6668 (Biochempartner Chemical, China) and VI16832 (Evotec, Germany). The resin-bound proteins were eluted and separated into two fractions, for in-gel and in-solution tryptic digestion respectively. 10% of the in-gel extracts were subsequently used for total protein identification. The remaining 90% and all peptides yielded from the in-solution digestion were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 (GL Sciences, Japan). Peptide desalting was performed using homemade C18 Stage Tips according to the published protocol53. C18 purified peptides were separated by nano-LC through the Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, California) before being acquired on the Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, MA) with settings reported previously. Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) with default settings for feature detection,protein/peptide identification and quantification. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled and the FDR was limited to 1% for both protein and peptide identifications. Peptides with posterior error probability greater than 10 % were removed and protein identification required a minimum of 1 unique peptide. For phosphopeptides, those exhibiting a phosphosite localization probability > 0.75 were included in further analyses. We defined up regulation of phosphosite or kinase expressionas having a fold change value of ≥1.2, and down-regulation a fold change value <0.833. The fold change values were obtained from triplicate kinomic profiling experiments

### Data Protocol
Generation of the kinome tree The Kinome tree was modified courtesy of Cell Signalling Technology Inc. (www.cellsignal.com) and annotated using Kinome Render software (available at http://bcb.med.usherbrooke.ca/kinomerender). Construction of protein-protein interactome networks The annotations of protein-protein interactions for all kinases in this study were extracted from the STRING database55 by using the database search function of Cytoscape software. For a few protein interaction partners whose annotations could not be extracted, we manually added them to the protein-protein interaction networks. Then, significantly up-regulated and down-regulated kinases within the context of STRING interactome networks were visualized and highlighted using Cytoscape at both the protein and phosphosite levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinome, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Monash University

### Submitter
Hugh Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Daly
Monash University


