### Accession
PXD006599

### Title
Soybean, Root, LC-MSMS -  Quantitative Phosphoproteomic and Metabonomic Analyses Reveal GmMYB173 Optimizes Flavonoid Metabolism in Soybean under Salt Stress

### Description
Salinity causes osmotic stress to crops and limits their productivity. To understand the mechanism underlying soybean salt tolerance, quantitative phosphoproteomics approach was used to identify phosphoproteins that were altered by NaCl treatment.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphopeptides enrichment, TiO2 beads were used as previously described (28). The labeled peptides were acidified with 50 μL DHB buffer (3 % 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, 80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % TFA), and then incubated with 25 μg of TiO2 beads (10 μ in diameter, Sangon Biotech) for 40 min at room temperature. After the incubation, the TiO2 beads were spun down and the pellets were packed into plastic tips (fit to 10 μL pipette). The peptide-TiO2 beads were washed with 20 μL of wash solution I (20 % acetic acid, 300 mM octanesulfonic acid sodium salt and 20 mg/mL DHB) three times, then washed with 20 μL wash solution II (70 % water; 30 % acetonitrile) three times. The phosphopeptides were then eluted using freshly prepared ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium phosphate, pH 10.5). The enriched phosphopeptide solution was lyophilized and re-dissolved in 20 μL 0.1 % TFA solution for nano-RPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide Identification and Quantitative Analysis—The raw data were extracted by Mascot2.2, and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer1.4 (Thermo Scientific). To identify the phosphopeptides, the mascot data was searched against the peptide database uniprot_Glycine_74305_20140429.fasta (http://www.uniprot.org/, on April 29, 2014). For each spectra of a specific sample, the median of its intensity values was used for quantification analysis. The average value of 8 median of a specific spectra was used as reference (supplemental Table S1) for data normalization in one Eight-plex iTRAQ Labeled sample group. A Student’s t-test was performed using the standard deviation to assess the changes between two samples (each had four biological replicates). The phosphopeptides that passed both FDR (False Discovery Rate) value < 0.05 and p value < 0.05 were considered significantly changed.

### Publication Abstract
Salinity causes osmotic stress to crops and limits their productivity. To understand the mechanism underlying soybean salt tolerance, proteomics approach was used to identify phosphoproteins altered by NaCl treatment. Results revealed that 412 of the 4698 quantitatively analyzed phosphopeptides were significantly up-regulated on salt treatment, including a phosphopeptide covering the serine 59 in the transcription factor GmMYB173. Our data showed that GmMYB173 is one of the three MYB proteins differentially phosphorylated on salt treatment, and a substrate of the casein kinase-II. MYB recognition sites exist in the promoter of flavonoid synthase gene GmCHS5 and one was found to mediate its recognition by GmMYB173, an event facilitated by phosphorylation. Because GmCHS5 catalyzes the synthesis of chalcone, flavonoids derived from chalcone were monitored using metabolomics approach. Results revealed that 24 flavonoids of 6745 metabolites were significantly up-regulated after salt treatment. We further compared the salt tolerance and flavonoid accumulation in soybean transgenic roots expressing the <sup>35</sup>S promoter driven cds and <i>RNAi</i> constructs of <i>GmMYB173</i> and <i>GmCHS5</i>, as well as phospho-mimic (<i>GmMYB173<sub>S59D</sub></i> ) and phospho-ablative (<i>GmMYB173<sub>S59A</sub></i> ) mutants of <i>GmMYB173</i> Overexpression of <i>GmMYB173<sub>S59D</sub></i> and <i>GmCHS5</i> resulted in the highest increase in salt tolerance and accumulation of cyaniding-3-arabinoside chloride, a dihydroxy B-ring flavonoid. The dihydroxy B-ring flavonoids are more effective as anti-oxidative agents when compared with monohydroxy B-ring flavonoids, such as formononetin. Hence the salt-triggered phosphorylation of GmMYB173, subsequent increase in its affinity to GmCHS5 promoter and the elevated transcription of GmCHS5 likely contribute to soybean salt tolerance by enhancing the accumulation of dihydroxy B-ring flavonoids.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Root, Soybean

### Affiliations
Hangzhou Normal University

### Submitter
Erxu Pi

### Lab Head
Dr Erxu Pi
Hangzhou Normal University


