### Accession
PXD015602

### Title
IP-MS of ALS-linked PFN1 variants

### Description
Dominant mutations in profilin-1 (PFN1) are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor neuron loss, paralysis, and death from respiratory failure. Our lab recently demonstrated that PFN1 mutant proteins are destabilized—they unfold at milder conditions during thermal and chemical denaturation. Furthermore, we and others have shown that mutant PFN1 is more prone to misfold and aggregate. This misfolding alters the  protein-protein interactions of PFN1, as demonstrated by an immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) screen of wild-type and ALS-associated PFN1 variants. While ALS-associated mutants do not show loss of interaction, several variants have altered interactions with one or several formin family proteins, a group of proteins that interact with profilins to regulate actin polymerization.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for MS were run about 1 cm into a 4-20% gradient gel (Bio-Rad 456-1094) and stained with coomassie brilliant blue (Denville E2700).  The band from each lane was excised. For the remainder of this protocol, LC/MS/MS and peptide data analysis were prepared and performed by John Leszyk of the UMMS MS core facility. Excised bands were cut into 1x1 mm pieces and placed in 1.5 mL eppendorf tubes with 1mL of water for 30 min. The water was removed and 200µl of 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. 20 µl of a 45 mM solution of 1, 4 dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the samples were incubated at 50°C for 30 min. The samples were cooled to ambient temperature and then 20 µl of a 100 mM iodoacetamide solution was added and allowed to react for 30 min. The gel slices were washed 2 X with 1 mL water aliquots. The water was removed and 1mL of 50:50 (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate: acetonitrile) was placed in each tube and samples were incubated at ambient temperature for 1hr. The solution was then removed and 200 µl of acetonitrile was added to each tube at which point the gel slices turned opaque white. The acetonitrile was removed and gel slices were further dried in a Speed Vac lyophilizer (Savant Instruments, Inc.). Gel slices were rehydrated in 100 µl of 4 ng/µl of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma) in 0.01% ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Additional bicarbonate buffer was added to ensure complete submersion of the gel slices. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 18 hrs. The supernatant of each sample was then removed and placed in a separate 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Gel slices were further extracted with 200 µl of 80:20 (acetonitrile: 1% formic acid). The extracts were combined with the supernatants of each sample. The samples were then completely dried down in a Speed Vac lyophilizer. Tryptic peptide digests were reconstituted in 25 µL 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and separated on a NanoAcquity (Waters) UPLC. In brief, a 2.5 µL injection was loaded in 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at 4.0 µL/min for 4.0 min onto a 100 µm inside diameter (I.D.) fused-silica pre-column packed with 2 cm of 5 µm (200Å) Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom) and eluted using a gradient at 300 nL/min onto a 75 µm I.D. analytical column packed with 25 cm of 3 µm (100Å) Magic C18AQ particles to a gravity-pulled tip. The solvents were A, water (0.1% formic acid); and B, acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). A linear gradient was developed from 5% solvent A to 35% solvent B in 60 minutes. Ions were introduced by positive electrospray ionization via liquid junction into a Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300-1750 at 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) and data-dependent acquisition selected the top 10 most abundant precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry by HCD fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 Da, collision energy of 27, and a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were peak processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo) prior to database searching with Mascot Server (version 2.5) against the Uniprot_Human database Search parameters included trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages. The variable modifications of oxidized methionine, pyroglutamic acid for N-terminal glutamine, N-terminal acetylation of the protein, and a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine were considered. The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.05Da for the fragments. Search results were then loaded into the Scaffold Viewer (Proteome Software, Inc.) for peptide/ protein validation and label free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Profilin-1 (PFN1) plays important roles in modulating actin dynamics through binding both monomeric actin and proteins enriched with polyproline motifs. Mutations in PFN1 have been linked to the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). However, whether ALS-linked mutations affect PFN1 function has remained unclear. To address this question, we employed an unbiased proteomics analysis in mammalian cells to identify proteins that differentially interact with mutant and wild-type (WT) PFN1. These studies uncovered differential binding between two ALS-linked PFN1 variants, G118V and M114T, and select formin proteins. Furthermore, both variants augmented formin-mediated actin assembly relative to PFN1 WT. Molecular dynamics simulations revealed mutation-induced changes in the internal dynamic couplings within an alpha helix of PFN1 that directly contacts both actin and polyproline, as well as structural fluctuations within the actin- and polyproline-binding regions of PFN1. These data indicate that ALS-PFN1 variants have the potential for heightened flexibility in the context of the ternary actin-PFN1-polyproline complex during actin assembly. Conversely, PFN1 C71G was more severely destabilized than the other PFN1 variants, resulting in reduced protein expression in both transfected and ALS patient lymphoblast cell lines. Moreover, this variant exhibited loss-of-function phenotypes in the context of actin assembly. Perturbations in actin dynamics and assembly can therefore result from ALS-linked mutations in PFN1. However, ALS-PFN1 variants may dysregulate actin polymerization through different mechanisms that depend upon the solubility and stability of the mutant protein.

### Keywords
Profilin 1, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Als, Pfn1, Formin, Diaphanous

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts School of Medicine
University of Massachusetts, Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Daryl Bosco

### Lab Head
Dr Daryl Bosco
University of Massachusetts, Department of Neurology


