### Accession
PXD010413

### Title
Discovery and quantification of non-human proteins in human milk

### Description
The question whether and which non-human peptides or proteins are present in human milk was raised many decades ago. However, due to cross-reactivity or nonspecific antibody recognition, the accuracy of detection by immunochemical methods has been a concern. Additionally, the relative low-abundance of non-human peptides/proteins in the complex milk sample makes them a challenging target to detect. Here, by deep proteome profiling we detected several non-human peptides, which could be grouped as non-human proteins. We next estimated their concentration in human milk by combining data-dependent shotgun proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring. First, we fractionated human milk at the protein level by using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by reduction, alkylation and in-gel digestion. The resulted peptide mixtures were subjected to proteomics analysis. We were able to detect 1577 human proteins in human milk. Additionally, we identified 109 non-human peptides, of which 71 were grouped in to 36 non-human proteins. In the next step, we targeted 37 non-human peptides and 9 of them could be repeatedly quantified in human milk samples. Peptides/proteins originating from bovine milk products were the dominant non-human proteins observed, notably bovine caseins (α-S1-, α-S2-, β-, κ-caseins) and β-lactoglobulin.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot of 300 µl thawed whole milk sample was centrifuged at 1000 × g for 1 h at 4°C to separate the upper-fat layer and lower skimmed milk. For data-dependent shotgun analysis, a total of 25 µg protein of skimmed milk was reduced with 25mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 75mM iodoacetamide (IAA) followed by SDS-PAGE fractionation on a 12% Criterion™ XT Bis-Tris protein gel. A gel of each sample was excised in 6 bands in a similar manner and digested using trypsin (1:50, w/w skimmed milk proteins) for 16 h at 37°C. After extraction with 10% FA and 100% ACN, the peptides were dried and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. For PRM analysis, skimmed milk (20 µg protein) was added with 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 100mM Tris and then reduced with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 30mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature. Trypsin (1:50, w/w skimmed milk proteins) was added and samples were incubated for 16 h at 37°C. After acidic precipitation of SDC with 0.5% TFA, peptides were cleaned by Sep-Pak C18 1cc vac cartridge, dried and stored at -20°C until MS analysis. All peptides were separated and analyzed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer Reversed-phase separation was accomplished using a 100 µm inner diameter 2 cm trap column coupled to a 50 µm inner diameter 50 cm analytical column. Mobile-phase solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and mobile-phase solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in ACN. Mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full scans (from m/z 375 to 1600) were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 at 400 m/z and a target of 3e6 ions or a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Fragmentation was induced for the Top 10 peaks using a 12 s dynamic exclusion. Target peaks were isolated in a 1.5 Da isolation window and subjected to high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy value of 25%. MS/MS spectra (from m/z 200 to 2000) were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at 400 m/z using an AGC setting of 5e4 ions or a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 were excluded. For PRM analysis, several non-human peptides were selected. For the selected peptides, stable isotope-labeled standards terminated with C-terminal heavy Arg/Lys were purchased. The heavy labeled peptides were mixed equally together, and a PRTC mixture was spiked in to monitor and calibrate the scheduled RT window.  Mixed  peptide digestion, heavy labeled peptides and PRTC mixture were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, as described above for shotgun proteomics, except that the LC separation used a 35min gradient of 13-40% buffer B and the mass analyzer was a Q-Exactive High Field X quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Detection was done with a resolution of 60,000 using an AGC setting of 2e5, maximum IT of 128 ms, 1 microscan, 1.4 m/z isolation window, 27% normalized collision energy and 5 min retention time window. Skyline was used to build a spectral library and assign integrated fragment peak.

### Data Protocol
Raw shotgun LC-MS/MS data were searched with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5). Since a search space for non-human peptides can become enormous, we conducted a two-step database search strategy. Generated peak lists were first searched against the Swiss-Prot database: Homo sapiens (canonical and isoform) and allergens (September 2016, 42,910 entries) with fixed Cys carbamidomethylation and variable Met oxidation of peptides. Trypsin was chosen for cleavage specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, followed by data filtering using Percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only ranked 1 PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted. The second search was conducted against the Swiss-Prot database: Homo sapiens (canonical and isoform) and organisms with identified allergens (September 2016, 56,329 entries) using the same parameters as in the first database search. Identified non-human peptides by the second search were refined to exclude those which could have originated from a human protein by manually checking all matches to the spectrum using the Mascot server. Since we didn’t search the whole proteome, all refined non-human peptides were next entered into the NCBI protein BLAST search engine (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastp&PAGE_TYPE=BlastSearch&LINK_LOC=blasthome) and searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot(SwissProt) using the blastp algorithm to further check uniqueness of the identified non-human peptides. Some peptides were identified as belonging to multiple non-human proteins when applied to the blastp algorithm. These peptides may potentially have originated from several non-human organisms so we devised a specific and non-specific classification scheme.  If a peptide belonged to several proteins associated with multiple organisms under more than one tribe, no direct peptide to protein match could be made and peptides were generally classified as non-human. If specific tribe to organism associations could be made then the common organism nomenclature was used to represent the peptide to protein relationship. For example, “Bos Taurus” is the representative of tribe Bovini which includes Bison, Bos, Bubalus, Syncerus and Pseudoryx. Amino acid sequence alignments were conducted by putting identifiers of non-human proteins and human homologs using the Clustal Omega program implemented in Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/align/).For PRM, Skyline was used to build a spectral library and assign integrated fragment peak. Summing extracted peak areas of top 5 (or fewer) ranked non-interfered fragment ions per each precursor ion were used for calculating ratio of light to heavy in the pair of non-human peptide and its stable isotope standard. Non-human peptide amount was generated by the ratio of light to heavy multiplying amount of stable isotope-labeled peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The question whether and which nonhuman peptides or proteins are present in human milk was raised many decades ago. However, due to cross-reactivity or nonspecific antibody recognition, the accuracy of detection by immunochemical methods has been a concern. Additionally, the relative low-abundance of nonhuman peptides/proteins in the complex milk sample makes them a challenging target to detect. Here, by deep proteome profiling, we detected several nonhuman peptides, which could be grouped as nonhuman proteins. We next estimated their concentration in human milk by combining data-dependent shotgun proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring. First, we fractionated human milk at the protein level and were able to detect 1577 human proteins. Additionally, we identified 109 nonhuman peptides, of which 71 were grouped into 36 nonhuman proteins. In the next step, we targeted 37 nonhuman peptides and nine of them could be repeatedly quantified in human milk samples. Peptides/proteins originating from bovine milk products were the dominant nonhuman proteins observed, notably bovine caseins (&#x3b1;-S1-, &#x3b1;-S2-, &#x3b2;-, &#x3ba;-caseins) and &#x3b2;-lactoglobulin. The method we present here can be expanded to investigate more about nonhuman peptides and proteins in human milk and give a better understanding of how human milk plays a role in allergy prevention.

### Keywords
Non-human proteins, Human milk, Parallel reaction monitoring, Shotgun proteomics, Non-human peptides, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Jing Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


