### Accession
PXD003822

### Title
Human AML patient samples, Method Optimization, LC-MSMS

### Description
We evaluated different in-solution and filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) proteomic workflows, and different enrichment strategies of phosphorylated peptides on acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient samples. We also studied the effect of liquid nitrogen storage on the proteome and phosphoproteome of four AML patients.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic sample preparation, we performed both label-free (LF) and super-SILAC (SS) experiments to compare SDS lysis combined with FASP, in-solution digestion with urea (IsD-U) as lysis buffer and in-solution digestion with guanidinium hydrochloride (IsD-G). With the SILAC-spiked samples we also compared fractionation with three-fraction SDB-RPS plugs and six-fraction SCX plugs. On the SILAC-spiked samples prepared by the FASP protocol, we also test different phosphopeptide enrichment strategies: IMAC, SIMAC and MOAC.   By using the best working methods (FASP single digested, FASP fractionated with SDB-RPS plugs (also referred to as mixed-mode in the paper) and IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment, we did a comparative analysis of four freshly lysed and liquid nitrogen frozen AML samples.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) was used to search all the raw files against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database version 2014 08 (20589 target sequences).Standard MaxQuant search parameters for label-free and SILAC proteomic and phosphoproteomic (serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation as a variable modification) analyses were used. Protein, peptide, and phosphosite FDR were all set to < 0.01. The match-between-runs option was only enabled for the fresh/frozen study. A site localization probability of at least 75% and a score difference of at least 5 were used as thresholds for the localization of phosphoresidues. Excel and Perseus v1.5.2.6  were used to filter and interpret the output of the MaxQuant analyses. The LFQ intensities were used for the label-free samples and MaxQuant normalized ratios were used for the SILAC samples.  In sum we had five dataset: 1) Label free - method optimization, comparing single and dougle digested FASP, IsD and IsG. All samples were processed in replicates (12 raw files and one zipped MQ search file) 2) Super-SILAC - method optimization PROTEOME, comparing IsD, IsG, FASP, and FASP+3xSDB-RPS/MM and FASP+6xSCX. All samples were processed in replicates (66 raw files and one zipped MQ search file). 3) Super-SILAC - method optimization PHOSPHOPEPTIDE ENRICHMENT, comparing IMAC, SIMAC and MOAC, all process with FASP. All samples were processed in replicates (42 raw files and one zipped MQ search file. Please note that some raw files included in the result files were not used in the final experiment, however, that did not affect the results as we did not use the "match between runs" feature). 4) Label free - Fresh vs Frozen (11 raw files: four fresh/frozen pairs and 3 quality controls (QC), which was a mix of all samples, and one zipped MQ search file) 5) Super-SILAC - Fresh vs Frozen (8 raw files from the phosphoenrichment and 24 raw files from the proteome samples, and one zipped MQ search file with combined phospho and proteome results)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Super-silac, Sample preparation, Lc-msms, Ltq-orbitrap elite, Label-free, Aml cells, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, PROBE, University of Bergen, Norway
PROBE

### Submitter
Elise Aasebo

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Steingrimsen Berven
Department of Biomedicine, PROBE, University of Bergen, Norway


