### Accession
PXD030968

### Title
Impact of simutaneous exposure to cold and metals on Salix viminalis transcriptome, proteome and antioxidative machinery

### Description
Frost is a major abiotic stress limiting plant growth and development in many parts of the world, especially under temperate and cold climates. To withstand freezing stress, plants have evolved an adaptative process known as cold acclimation. With climate changes, models predict an increase in the magnitude and frequency of late-frost events, which, together with an observed loss of soil insulation, will significantly damage roots leading to a decrease in plants primary productivity. While the cold acclimation process is well documented, it is known that plant response to multiple stresses is unique and cannot be deduced from the response to each stress taken separately. Here, we investigate the impact of long-term metal exposure on the cold acclimation of S. viminalis. To do so, we used physiological, transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. We found that while metal exposure significantly affected plants morphology and physiology, it did not impede cold acclimation. The impact of the simultaneous exposure to metals and cold acclimation on the transcriptome was unique. However, cold acclimation seemed to impact more the roots than metals exposure at the proteome level. Further analysis revealed that metals strongly and negatively impacted the cellular antioxidant system. This negative impact was not compensated in plants subsequently cold-acclimated. While this should have led to a loss of frost tolerance, it was not observed. Therefore, we propose a group of proteins that could have played a role in compensating the impediment or the antioxidative system.

### Sample Protocol
One individual S. viminalis grown under a controlled environment for three weeks, after which half of them were exposed to a mixture of heavy metals (1.5 ppm Cd, 175 ppm Cu, 30 ppm Ni, 500 ppm Zn). After 40 days, half of the plants were randomly chosen and cold-acclimated (7/5°C, 60% relative humidity, 16/8h photoperiod). Soluble proteins extraction was done from 400mg of roots and proteins quantified. 20 µg of total proteins were digested in-gel and extracted peptides were divided in two groups and loaded on LC-MSMS prior to identification. The peptides were analysed using a NanoLC 425 Eksigent System coupled to a TripleTOF 6600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Single fractions were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics data analysis software then combined. Spectra were processed by Mascot by searching against a custom-built database using our de novo assembled transcriptome. The search parameters were the following: peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Proteins identified with a confidence of 95% were kept for further analysis. Proteins were considered significantly different between conditions when at least 2 significantly identified peptides per protein of which 1 is unique for the identified protein, ANOVA p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 1.5. Significantly regulated proteins were characterised using clusterProfiler, based on GO terms from the de novo assembled transcriptome. A Pearson correlation between proteins and transcripts significantly under- or overexpressed in the different conditions was also performed.

### Publication Abstract
In nature, plants are exposed to a range of climatic conditions. Those negatively impacting plant growth and survival are called abiotic stresses. Although abiotic stresses have been extensively studied separately, little is known about their interactions. Here, we investigate the impact of long-term mild metal exposure on the cold acclimation of <i>Salix viminalis</i> roots using physiological, transcriptomic, and proteomic approaches. We found that, while metal exposure significantly affected plant morphology and physiology, it did not impede cold acclimation. Cold acclimation alone increased glutathione content and glutathione reductase activity. It also resulted in the increase in transcripts and proteins belonging to the heat-shock proteins and related to the energy metabolism. Exposure to metals decreased antioxidant capacity but increased catalase and superoxide dismutase activity. It also resulted in the overexpression of transcripts and proteins related to metal homeostasis, protein folding, and the antioxidant machinery. The simultaneous exposure to both stressors resulted in effects that were not the simple addition of the effects of both stressors taken separately. At the antioxidant level, the response to both stressors was like the response to metals alone. While this should have led to a reduction of frost tolerance, this was not observed. The impact of the simultaneous exposure to metals and cold acclimation on the transcriptome was unique, while at the proteomic level the cold acclimation component seemed to be dominant. Some genes and proteins displayed positive interaction patterns. These genes and proteins were related to the mitigation and reparation of oxidative damage, sugar catabolism, and the production of lignans, trehalose, and raffinose. Interestingly, none of these genes and proteins belonged to the traditional ROS homeostasis system. These results highlight the importance of the under-studied role of lignans and the ROS damage repair and removal system in plants simultaneously exposed to multiple stressors.

### Keywords
Stress combinations, Abiotic stress, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Salix viminalis, Cold acclimation, Heavy metals

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-BEAP, Belvaux, Luxembourg
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celine LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP, Belvaux, Luxembourg


