### Accession
PXD023455

### Title
KDM4C epigenetically regulates and forms a feed-forward loop with ALDH1A3 to maintain gastric cancer stemness

### Description
Gastric cancer (GC) stem cells (GCSCs) are characterized as high level of ALDH activity, however, the mechanisms of maintenance of high ALDH activity and stemness in GCSCs are largely unknown. Here, we report that KDM4C, a H3K9me2/3-demethylase, epigenetically regulates ALDH1A3 by histone demethylation and forms a feed-forward loop with ALDH1A3 to supports GS stemness. Ectopic expression of both KDM4C and ALDH1A3 promotes the properties of GCSCs, including spherogenecity, self-renewal, CD44 expression and ALDH activity; knockdown of anyone abolished the effect of each other. KDM4C directly binds to the promoter of ALDH1A3, leads to histone demethylation, thereby promoting ALDH1A3 transcription. Upregulated ALDH1A3 in turn transcriptionally upregulates KDM4C. Simultaneous inhibition of KDM4C and ALDH1A3 synergistically sensitizes GC sphere-derived cells to traditional chemotherapeutic drugs. The finding that upregulated ALDH1A3 promotes its own transcription via KDM4C-mediated epigenetic modification represents an important feed-forward mechanism for GCSCs to maintain stemness and promote tumourigenesis and our work thus suggests a novel therapeutic strategy for eradicating human GCSCs. To investigate the mechanisms underlying KDM4C promoting CG stemness, we identified the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between KDM4C-overexpressing and control AGS cells by iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
KDM4C-overexpressing and control AGS cells were cultured in ultra-low attachment plate for sphere formation. The spheres were collected by centrifugation and 1 × 107 digested cells were lysed by a mixture of acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1:9) containing 0.1% (w/v) ProteaseMax powder (Promega). The lysate was then centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 7 min, room temperature) and the total protein concentration in the supernatant was measured. An aliquot of 100 μg protein for each sample was used for iTRAQ analysis. The protein samples were incubated with 50 mM TCEP for 1 h at 60 °C and transferred to a centrifuge tube with a 30 kDa cut-off filter membrane and the alkylation (15mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in dark) and digestion were performed on the membrane. After 3 times washes with 75% urea solution, the samples were incubated with 0.1 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate solution (TEAB). After digestion with trypsin (1:50) for 16 h at 37 °C, the peptides were eluted with a mixture of 0.1 M TEAB and 0.5 M sodium chloride. The peptides were dried and incubated with iTRAQ labeling reagents for 2 h at room temperature according to the manufacturer’s protocol (AB SCIEX). All labeled samples were then pooled for subsequent high pH fractionation.  High pH reverse phase (RP) fractionation was performed using a Waters HPLC system (Elstree, UK). Briefly, the samples were reconstituted in mobile phase A and injected into the system. Waters Acquity UPLC BEH C18, 3.5 μm, 3.0 × 150 mm was used for the peptide separation at the flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. Other LC conditions were as follow: mobile phase A - 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10); mobile phase B - 80% Acetonitrile in 20 mM Ammonium formate (pH 10); gradient - 5-15% in 20 min, 15-40% in 20 min, 40–80% in 1 min. A total of 10 fractions were collected for further nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. A Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a TripleTOF 5600 (AB Sciex) was used for the nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Two technical runs were performed for each fraction. Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm × 75 µm was used as the analytical column at the flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase consists of (A) 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water and mobile phase (B) 2/98 v/v of water/ACN with 0.1% formic acid. A 120-min gradient was used at the following settings: 5–12% in 30 min, 12–40% in 60 min, and 40–90% in 20 min. The instrumental settings for the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer were as follows: ISVF (Ionspray Voltage Floating) = 2000 V, CUR (curtain gas) = 30, GS2 (Ion source gas 1) = 10, IHT (Interface Heater Temperature) = 125, DP (declustering potential) = 100 V, NC (Nebuliser current) = 3 for nitrogen gas. IDA (information-dependent acquisition) mode. The data was acquired using Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB SCIEX). Other settings for IDA experiments were as follows: TOF mass survey scan - 0.25 s; mass range - 400–1250; product ion scan - 0.05 s; mass range: 100-1500; charge state = 2~5; maximum number of candidate ions to monitor per cycle = 40 spectra; abundance threshold >120 counts; the exclusion of former target ions: 12 s. IDA Advanced settings such as ‘dynamic accumulation’, ‘adjust CE when using iTRAQ Reagent’ and ‘rolling collision energy (CE)’ was included.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using ProteinPilot 5.0 software (AB SCIEX) and the protein database (version: uniprot_all_Oct2014). Important settings in ProteinPilot were configured as follows: (i) sample type: iTRAQ 8plex (peptide labeled); (ii) cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; (iii) digestion: trypsin; (iv) instru- ment: TripleTOF 5600; (v) special factors: none; (vi) ID focus: biological modifications; (vii) search effort: thorough ID; and (viii) bias correction and background correction. 95% confidence level was used at the peptide level. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq quantitative proteomics, Aldh1a3, Cancer stem cells, Kdm4c, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Singapore Eye Research Institute

### Submitter
Lei Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Zhou
Singapore Eye Research Institute


