### Accession
PXD024114

### Title
The Human 2-Cys Peroxiredoxins Form Widespread, Cysteine-Dependent- And Isoform-Specific Protein-Protein Interactions.

### Description
Redox signaling is controlled by the reversible oxidation of cysteine thiols, a post-translational modification triggered by H2O2 acting as a second messenger. However, H2O2 reacts poorly with most cysteine thiols and it is not clear how it discriminates between cysteines to trigger appropriate signaling cascades in the presence of dedicated H2O2 scavengers like peroxiredoxins. It was suggested that peroxiredoxins act as peroxidases to facilitate H2O2-dependent oxidation of proteins via disulfide exchange reactions. It is unknown how the peroxiredoxin-based relay model achieves the selective substrate targeting required for adequate cellular signaling. Using a systematic mass-spectrometry-based approach to identify cysteine-dependent interactors of peroxiredoxins, we show that all five human 2-cys peroxiredoxins can form disulfide-dependent heterodimers with a large set of proteins. Each isoform displays a preference for a subset of disulfide-dependent binding partners, and we explore isoform-specific properties that might underlie this precedence. We provide evidence that peroxiredoxin-based redox relays can proceed via two distinct molecular mechanisms. Altogether, our results support the theory that peroxiredoxins could play a role in providing not only reactivity but also selectivity in the transduction of peroxide signals to generate complex cellular signaling responses.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of cysteine-dependent interactors the lysate of 4x20cm dishes were used for each pulldown on 75 l of Flag-M2 beads similar to the immunoprecipitation experiments described above. All immunoprecipitations were performed using three biological replicates. After washing, beads were resuspended with 8M urea in 1M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), reduced and alkylated in 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 minutes at RT. After fourfold dilution with 1M ABC, proteins were digested overnight on-bead with 250 ng Trypsin/LysC (Promega V5071) per sample at 37C. Samples were cleaned up with in-house-made C18 stagetips.   Peptides were separated on a 30‐cm pico‐tip column (75 μm ID, New Objective) and were packed in‐house with 3 μm aquapur gold C‐18 material (Dr. Maisch) using a 140‐min gradient (7–80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy‐nLC 1000 (LC120, Thermo Scientific), and electro‐sprayed directly into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 with oxidation of methionine, alkylation with N-ethylmaleimide and carbamidomethylation set as variable modifications. The Human protein database of UniProt was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Redox signaling is controlled by the reversible oxidation of cysteine thiols, a post-translational modification triggered by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> acting as a second messenger. However, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> actually reacts poorly with most cysteine thiols and it is not clear how H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> discriminates between cysteines to trigger appropriate signaling cascades in the presence of dedicated H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> scavengers like peroxiredoxins (PRDXs). It was recently suggested that peroxiredoxins act as peroxidases and facilitate H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-dependent oxidation of redox-regulated proteins via disulfide exchange reactions. It is unknown how the peroxiredoxin-based relay model achieves the selective substrate targeting required for adequate cellular signaling. Using a systematic mass-spectrometry-based approach to identify cysteine-dependent interactors of the five human 2-Cys peroxiredoxins, we show that all five human 2-Cys peroxiredoxins can form disulfide-dependent heterodimers with a large set of proteins. Each isoform displays a preference for a subset of disulfide-dependent binding partners, and we explore isoform-specific properties that might underlie this preference. We provide evidence that peroxiredoxin-based redox relays can proceed via two distinct molecular mechanisms. Altogether, our results support the theory that peroxiredoxins could play a role in providing not only reactivity but also selectivity in the transduction of peroxide signals to generate complex cellular signaling responses.

### Keywords
Hydrogen peroxide, Peroxiredoxin; redox signaling; redox relay, Protein thiol oxidation, Cysteine sulfenic acid, Thiol disulfide exchange

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias B. Dansen
Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


