### Accession
PXD012845

### Title
APOBEC mutagenesis and copy number alterations are drivers of proteogenomic tumor evolution and heterogeneity in metastatic thoracic tumors

### Description
Intratumor mutational heterogeneity has been documented in primary non-small cell lung cancer. Here, we elucidate mechanisms of tumor evolution and heterogeneity in metastatic thoracic tumors (lung adenocarcinoma and thymic carcinoma) using whole-exome and transcriptome sequencing, SNP array for copy number alterations (CNA) and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics of metastases obtained by rapid autopsy. APOBEC-mutagenesis, promoted by increased expression  of APOBEC3 region transcripts and associated with a high-risk germline APOBEC3 variant, strongly correlated with mutational tumor heterogeneity. TP53 mutation status was associated with APOBEC hypermutator status. Interferon pathways were enriched in tumors with high APOBEC mutagenesis and IFN- induced expression of APOBEC3B in lung adenocarcinoma cells in culture suggesting a role for the immune microenvironment in the generation of mutational heterogeneity. CNA occurring late in tumor evolution correlated with downstream transcriptomic and proteomic heterogeneity, although global proteomic heterogeneity was significantly greater than transcriptomic and CNA heterogeneity. These results illustrate key mechanisms underlying multi-dimensional heterogeneity in metastatic thoracic tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction   All but one tumor (RA004 – Li1a) had sufficient tissue for mass-spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic characterization. About 10-15 mg of tumor tissue fresh-frozen in liquid nitrogen was lysed in 400µl of urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate) using a tissue lyser (Qiagen). Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4oC for 10 mins and the clear supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentrations were determined by the Modified Lowry method (BioRad).   Enzymatic Digestion  The protein lysate was reduced with 45 mM dithriothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, MO), alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, MO), and subsequently digested with modified sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 30˚C overnight. The digest was then acidified using 0.1% TFA and the peptides were desalted using solid phase extraction C18 column (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA), and vacuum dried in a centrifugal evaporator.  TMT-Labeling  TMT10plex amine reactive reagents (0.8 mg per vial) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were resuspended in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and all 41 μL of each reagent was added to each sample and mixed briefly on a vortexer. Reactions were incubated at room temperature for 1 h, and then quenched by the addition of 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min and then combined at equal amount. All tumor tissues of LUAD patients RA000, RA003, RA005 and RA006 were pooled together to make a reference channel and labeled with TMT10-126. In a separate TMT labeling experiment, tumor tissues from patient RA006 were pooled together to make a reference channel.   Basic reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) fractionation  Basic RPLC separation was performed with a XBridge C18, 100 x 2.1 mm analytical column containing 5µm particles and equipped with a 10 x 2.1 mm guard column (Waters, Milford, MA) with a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. The solvent consisted of 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) as mobile phase A, and 10 mM TEABC in ACN as mobile phase B. Sample separation was accomplished using the following linear gradient: from 0 to 1% B in 5min, from 1 to 10% B in 5min, from 10 to 35% B in 30min, and from 35 to 100% B in 5min, and held at 100% B for an additional 3min. A total of 96 fractions were collected during the LC separation in a 96-well plate in the presence of 12.5 µL of 1% formic acid. The collected fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. One tenth of the peptides were injected directly for LC-MS/MS analysis.    LC-MS/MS analyses   Peptides separated/fractionated by basic reversed-phase chromatography were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite interfaced with an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The dried peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm) and separated on an Easy-sprayTM C18 LC column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% ACN, respectively. Peptides were eluted from the column at 300 nL/min using the following linear gradient: from 4 to 35% B in 60min, from 35 to 45% B in 5min, from 45 to 90% B in 5min, and held at 90% B for an additional 5min. The heated capillary temperature and spray voltage were 275°C and 2kV, respectively. Full spectra were collected from m/z 350 to 1800 in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000, followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS scans of the fifteen most abundant ions at a resolution of 30,000, using 40% collision energy and dynamic exclusion time of 30s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis  Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the Maxquant software package (version 1.5.3.30)(Tyanova et al., 2016) with the Andromeda search engine(Cox and Mann, 2008).  MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (May 2013, 38523 entries) and quantification was performed using default parameters for TMT10plex in MaxQuant. Corrected intensities of the reporter ions from TMT labels were obtained from the MaxQuant search.  The relative ratios were calculated for each channel to the reference channel. These ratios were then used to predict enrichment scores of overall immune signatures obtained from CIBERSORT (Newman et al., 2015) and Xcell (Aran et al., 2017) using single-sample GSEA (ssGSEA) from GenePattern and for REACTOME pathways by GSEA preranked through the R package “fgsea”. Pathways with p-value less than 0.10 were considered significantly enriched.  Samples were similarly combined as described for the RNA-seq data analysis. Cufflinks outputted FPKM values for each gene were normalized for all samples within each patient using limma package voom quantile method.

### Publication Abstract
Intratumor mutational heterogeneity has been documented in primary non-small-cell lung cancer. Here, we elucidate mechanisms of tumor evolution and heterogeneity in metastatic thoracic tumors (lung adenocarcinoma and thymic carcinoma) using whole-exome and transcriptome sequencing, SNP array for copy-number alterations (CNAs), and mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics of metastases obtained by rapid autopsy. APOBEC mutagenesis, promoted by increased expression of&#xa0;APOBEC3 region transcripts and associated with a high-risk APOBEC3 germline variant, correlated with mutational tumor heterogeneity. TP53 mutation status was associated with APOBEC hypermutator status. Interferon pathways were enriched in tumors with high APOBEC mutagenesis and IFN-&#x3b3;-induced expression of APOBEC3B in lung adenocarcinoma cells, suggesting that the immune microenvironment may promote mutational heterogeneity. CNAs occurring late in tumor evolution correlated with downstream transcriptomic and proteomic heterogeneity,&#xa0;although global proteomic heterogeneity was significantly greater than transcriptomic and CNA heterogeneity. These results illustrate key mechanisms underlying multi-dimensional heterogeneity in metastatic thoracic tumors.

### Keywords
Tumor heterogeneity rapid autopsy, Proteomics

### Affiliations
NCI/NIH
1Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Udayan Guha

### Lab Head
Dr Udayan Guha
1Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA


