### Accession
PXD031739

### Title
Effects on the lipid metabolism of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) after in vivo exposure with Ppar agonists

### Description
Lipid metabolism is essential in maintaining energy homeostasis in multicellular organisms. In vertebrates, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs, NR1C) regulate the expression of many genes involved in these processes. Four Ppar subtypes from Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) were recently cloned and characterized. However, the downstream regulatory role of Ppars in cod lipid metabolism is presently not well understood or described. Here we study the involvement of Atlantic cod Ppar subtypes in systemic regulation of lipid metabolism using the model agonists WY14,643, GW501516, and tetradecylthioacetic acid, employing a multiple omics approach after an in vivo exposure situation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation Proteomics analyses were performed at the Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE). Sample preparation was performed as described previously (Yadetie et al., 2016): 20-100 mg of male cod liver tissue was homogenized by sonication in a lysis buffer consisting of 8 M UREA, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 20 mM methylamine (10 mL added per mg tissue). After homogenization, samples were incubated at 37 °C for 5 min, centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min, before protein concentrations in the lysates (supernatants) were determined with the Pierce BCA-protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 30 mg of protein from each sample was transferred to an LB Eppendorf tube, and volumes adjusted to 20 mL. 20 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9) was added, and samples were incubated at room temperature (RT) for 5 min. Reduction and subsequent alkylation of the samples were performed by addition of 4 mL 100 mM DTT and 5 mL of iodoacetamide, respectively, with 1-hour incubation at RT for each reaction. 0.8 mL 100 mM DTT was thereafter added to quench unreacted iodoacetamide and avoid unwanted protease alkylation. Protein samples were then digested with trypsin (PROMEGA, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin) for 16 hours at 37 °C by adding 110 mL 50 mM Tric-HCl, pH 7.9, and 0.6 mg trypsin. Trypsin digestion was stopped by adding 10% TFA to a 1% final concentration and resulting peptide samples were desalted with OASIS C18 filtration (Waters) and dried in a freezevac. Samples were reconstituted in 0.1 M TEAB for labelling with TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific).  Tandem mass tag (TMT) protein analysis Nine identical reference samples were made by combining an aliquot of each sample following the protocol and guidelines provided by Thermo Fischer Scientific. Samples, including reference samples, were tagged by TMT 10 plex, and divided into 9 pooled samples. Pooled samples were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, resulting in 8 individual fractions for each TMT experiment. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out as described in (Kroksveen, et al. 2017), with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive HF equipped with an EASY-spray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). A 2-hour LC gradient was used. LC-MS data from the TMT-10 plex experiments were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using Sequest and MS Amanda (version 1.4.4.2822).

### Data Protocol
Data treatment and statistical analyses were conducted as described in (Lereim, et al. 2016). The Atlantic cod genome assembly ENSEMBL gadMor1 was used for protein identifications with Protein Discovery.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gw501516, Wy14643, Tmt-proteomics, Tetradecylthioacetic acid, Liver, Atlantic cod

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences University of Bergen Norway
Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Odd Andre Karlsen

### Lab Head
Dr Odd André Karlsen
Department of Biological Sciences University of Bergen Norway


