### Accession
PXD027494

### Title
Identify the specific binding partners of cytosolic TDP-43 WT and TDP-43ΔCR

### Description
To investigate how translation changed as a function of TDP-43 CR loss, mass spectrometry (MS) based approach was performed to monitor the dynamics of TDP-43-associated protein complexes in response to CR deletion using TDP-43 knockout HEK293 cells expressing strep tagged wild type TDP-43 (TDP-43WT) or TDP-43ΔCR mutant.

### Sample Protocol
, TDP-43 and TDP-43 ΔCR without strep tag, Strep-TDP-43, and Strep-TDP-43ΔCR were transfected into TDP-43 knockout HEK293 cells with TransIT ®-293 transfection reagent (Mirus). After immunoprecipitation with MagStrep "type3" XT beads, proteins were eluted with BXT buffer (IBA Lifesciences) and subjected to SDS-PAGE approximately ∼1 cm into a 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ precast protein gel (Bio-rad). The top 1 cm of the gel was then excised and in-gel digested by Lys-C (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Following digestion, LC-MS/MS was performed using the Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA). The LC-column used was an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reverse-phase nanocolumn (75 μm × 15 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and peptides were chromatographed with a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 2% to 35% in aqueous 0.1% formic acid over 90 min at 300 nL/min. The eluent was directly introduced into the mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent MS to MS/MS switching mode, with the 15 most intense ions in each MS scan subjected to MS/MS. Full MS scanning was performed at 70,000 resolutions between m/z 380 and 1300, and MS/MS spectra were collected at 17,500 resolutions. High-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25%. The precursor ion masses were dynamically excluded from MS/MS analyses for a duration of 20 s. Ions with the charge state of 1 and greater than 6 were excluded from MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all of the experimental peptide MS/MS spectra against the UniProt human database using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas variable modifications included oxidation of methionine to methionine sulfoxide and acetylation of N-terminal amino groups. For peptide/protein identification, strict Lys-C specificity was applied, the minimum peptide length was set to 7, the maximum missed cleavage was set to 2, and the cutoff false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Match between runs (match time window: 0.7 min; alignment time window: 20 min) and label-free quantitation (LFQ) options were enabled. The LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 2. The remaining parameters were kept as default. Protein quantitation was accomplished using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). LFQ values were log2-transformed, and missing values were imputed using the “Replace missing value from normal distribution” function on the entire matrix using default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The in vivo physiological function of liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) that governs non-membrane-bound structures remains elusive. Among LLPS-prone proteins, TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kD (TDP-43) is under intense investigation because of its close association with neurological disorders. Here, we generated mice expressing endogenous LLPS-deficient murine TDP-43. LLPS-deficient TDP-43 mice demonstrate impaired neuronal function and behavioral abnormalities specifically related to brain function. Brain neurons of these mice, however, did not show TDP-43 proteinopathy or neurodegeneration. Instead, the global rate of protein synthesis was found to be greatly enhanced by TDP-43 LLPS loss. Mechanistically, TDP-43 LLPS ablation increased its association with PABPC4, RPS6, RPL7, and other translational factors. The physical interactions between TDP-43 and translational factors relies on a motif, the deletion of which abolished the impact of LLPS-deficient TDP-43 on translation. Our findings show a specific physiological role for TDP-43 LLPS in the regulation of brain function and uncover an intriguing novel molecular mechanism of translational control by LLPS.

### Keywords
Tdp-43, Cytosolic binding partners, Human cells

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Ju Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Xinglong Wang
University of Nebraska Medical Center


