### Accession
PXD006214

### Title
Mouse hippocampus LC/MS with TMT labeling

### Description
Transgenic mouse models have been widely used to investigate the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). To elucidate underlying mechanisms of AD pathogenesis by amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau, we have generated a novel animal model of AD; ADLP - APT mice (Alzheimer’s Disease-Like Pathology) – carrying mutations of human amyloid precursor protein (APP), human presenilin-1 (PS1) and human tau. We profiled 9,824 proteins in the hippocampus of ADLP model mice using quantitative proteomics. To identify functional signatures in pathology of ADLP - APT mice, in-depth bioinformatics analysis was performed. For a longitudinal change of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), we identified ADLP - APT mice hippocampal proteome in an age-dependent manner. Network maps of interactome between Aβ and tau in newly generated ADLP - APT mice reveal relationship between accelerated NFT pathology of AD and proteomic changes.

### Sample Protocol
Total 36 mouse hippocampus tissues were used. First, tissue was lysed with SDS-containing buffer. Protein concentrations were determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to the digestion step, 300 ug of protein was precipitated by adding a 5-fold volume of ice-cold acetone. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in SDS-containing lysis buffer. After being heated at 99℃, the denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30-kDa spin filter. The digestion step was performed via FASP (Filter-aided sample preparation) process. Cysteine alkylation was accomplished through the addition of alkylation buffer (50 mM IAA, 8 M UREA in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) at 37℃ overnight. Then, peptide samples were labeled with TMT reagent kit according to the manufacturer's instruction. Mixed peptide samples were desalted using HLB OASIS (Waters) column. Then, a high-pH peptide fractionation was performed using HPLC (Agilent) with fraction collector. The peptide fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge. The peptide samples were analyzed using an LC-MS system, which comprised Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) that was coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on the 2-column setup with a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 75 um I.D. x 2 cm long, 3 um Acclaim PepMap100 C18 beads) and an analytical column (75 um I.D. x 50 cm long, 3 um ReproSil-Pur-AQ C18 beads). Prior to sample injection, the dried peptide samples were re-dissolved in solvent A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water). After the samples were loaded onto the nano LC, a 240-minute nonlinear gradient from 8% to 30% solvent B (100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) was applied. The spray voltage was 2.2 kV in the positive ion mode, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 320°C. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode using a top 15 method on a Q Exactive. The Orbitrap analyzer scanned precursor ions with a mass range of 300–1650 m/z and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 x 10^6 and the isolation window for MS/MS was 1.2 m/z. HCD scans were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 and 32 normalized collision energy (NCE). The AGC target value for MS/MS was 2 x 10^5. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and MS/MS scan was 30 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to perform a database search. The tandem mass spectra search was performed by the SEQUEST-HT algorithm against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (April 2014 released; 88,708 protein entries, http://www.uniprot.org). The database search was conducted according to the target-decoy search strategy. The search parameters were: full enzyme digest using trypsin (After KR/−) up to 2 missed cleavages; a precursor ion mass tolerance of 15 ppm (monoisotopic mass); a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (monoisotopic mass); static modifications of 229.163 Da on lysine residues and peptide N-termini and 57.02 Da on cysteine residues for carbamidomethylation; and dynamic modifications of 42.01 Da for protein N-term acetylation and 15.99 Da for methionine oxidation. Confidence criteria were set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% at both the peptide and protein level. Proteins were quantified by calculating reporter ion intensities using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer. The co-isolation threshold was set to 50.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc/ms, Mouse, Tmt, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Seoul, Korea

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Seoul, Korea


