### Accession
PXD000383

### Title
QUEST-MS for plasma biomarkers complementing the specificity of PSA test

### Description
To explore plasma biomarkers complementing the specificity of PSA test, we developed a unique proteomic technology QUEST-MS (Quick Enrichment of Small Targets for Mass Spectrometry). The QUEST-MS method based on 96-well formatted sequential reversed phase chromatography allowing efficient enrichment of < 20 kDa proteins quickly and reproducibly. The LC/MS/MS data from 24 healthy controls, 19 benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH) patients, and 73 prostate cancer patients plasma were subjected to label-free quantification analysis on Expressionist proteome server. Data processing: Mascot Server 2.3.1 was used with the database SwissProt 2011_08 (531473 sequences,188463640 residues). Enzyme: semiTrypsin. Search parameters: Peptide Mass Tolerance : +- 3 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance:+-0.8 Da. Fixed modifications:Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications:Oxidation (M),Deamidated (NQ). Max Missed Cleavages:2.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In prostate cancer diagnosis, PSA test has greatly contributed to the early detection of prostate cancer; however, expanding overdiagnosis and unnecessary biopsies have emerged as serious issues. To explore plasma biomarkers complementing the specificity of PSA test, we developed a unique proteomic technology QUEST-MS (Quick Enrichment of Small Targets for Mass Spectrometry). The QUEST-MS method based on 96-well formatted sequential reversed-phase chromatography allowing efficient enrichment of &lt;20 kDa proteins quickly and reproducibly. Plasma from 24 healthy controls, 19 benign prostate hypertrophy patients, and 73 prostate cancer patients were purified with QUEST-MS and analyzed by LC/MS/MS. Among 153 057 nonredundant peptides, 189 peptides showed prostate cancer specific detection pattern, which included a neurotransmitter polypeptide neuropeptide-Y (NPY). We further validated the screening results by targeted multiple reaction monitoring technology using independent sample set (n = 110). The ROC curve analysis revealed that logistic regression-based combination of NPY, and PSA showed 81.5% sensitivity and 82.2% specificity for prostate cancer diagnosis. Thus QUEST-MS technology allowed comprehensive and high-throughput profiling of plasma polypeptides and had potential to effectively uncover very low abundant tumor-derived small molecules, such as neurotransmitters, peptide hormones, or cytokines.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Biomarker Development

### Submitter
Koji Ueda

### Lab Head


