### Accession
PXD014800

### Title
Salivary proteome signatures in the early and middle stages of human pregnancy with term birth outcome

### Description
This prospective study is to find changes in salivary protein expressions from first to early third  trimester of pregnancy in normal term birth using SWATH-MS strategy.  Saliva at  three periods of gestation, 6-13 (V1), 18-21(V2), and 26-29 (V3) weeks  from 20 singleton pregnant women were used in a discovery phase. Selected proteins from the discovery study were verified by targeted schedule-MRM (multiple reaction monitoring) experiments in a separate subset of subjects (N=14). Using in-house generated saliva-specific protein library, 65 proteins (q-value<0.1) changed as a function of gestational age.

### Sample Protocol
The maternal saliva was collected from the enrolled participants. All samples were buffer exchanged with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0)through a 3 kDa MWCO membrane (Amicon Ultra, Millipore). Trypsin were used for proteins digestion at 20:1 protein to enzyme ratio. The digested samples were desalted using C18 fast-flow tips (Pierce Thermo Fisher scientific) and spiked with iRT (Biognosys, Switzerland) at 1:10 ratio. Samples were vacumm dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using an TripleTOF 5600 (SCIEX)in DDA or DIA (SWATH-MS) mode. MRM  was performed on a QTRAP 6500+ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis software (version 1.5.4.1) with default settings were used to generate reference spectral library from DDA MS files. All DIA datasets (.wiff files) were converted to HTRMS format before analysis and Spectronaut (version 11) software was used for retention time normalisation and targeted data extraction from the DIA MS files. The protein quantitation and peptide quantities were calculated as a mean intensity within the XIC peak area of the respective fragment ions at MS2. The protein CVs were calculated based on the summed intensities of their respective peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The establishment and maintenance of pregnancy in humans proceed through a continuous change of biochemical and biophysical processes. It requires a constant interaction between the fetus and the maternal system. The present prospective study aims to elucidate changes in salivary proteome from the early to middle stages of term pregnancy, and establishing an expressional trajectory for modulated proteins. To date, a comprehensive characterization of the longitudinal salivary proteome in pregnancy has not been performed and it is our immediate interest. In the discovery phase, maternal saliva (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;20) at 6-13, 18-21, and 26-29 weeks of gestation was analyzed using level-free proteomics (SWATH-MS) approach. The expression levels of 65 proteins were found to change significantly with gestational age and distributed into two distinct clusters with a unique expression trajectory. The results revealed that altered proteins are involved in maternal immune modulation, metabolism, and host defense mechanism. Further, verification of 12 proteins was employed using targeted mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) in a separate subset of saliva (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;14). The MRM results of 12 selected proteins confirmed a similar expression pattern as in SWATH-MS analysis. Overall, the results not only demonstrate the longitudinal maternal saliva proteome for the first time but also set the groundwork for comparative analysis between term birth and adverse pregnancy outcomes.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Human, Swath, Saliva

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad 121001, India.
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
NCR Biotech Science Cluster
3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway
P.O. Box No. 3, Faridabad - 121 001
Haryana (NCR Delhi), India

### Submitter
Bhoj Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Tushar Kanti Maiti
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad 121001, India.


