### Accession
PXD008123

### Title
Proteomics of rat overexpressing human DISC1 in the dorsal striatum

### Description
Disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a key protein involved in behavioral processes and various mental disorders, including schizophrenia and major depression. A transgenic rat modestly overexpressing non-mutant human DISC1, modeling aberrant proteostasis of the DISC1 protein, displays behavioral, biochemical and anatomical deficits consistent with aspects of mental disorders, including changes in the dorsal striatum, an anatomical region critical in the development of behavioral disorders.   Here, the dorsal striatum of 10 tgDISC1 and 10 littermate control rats was used for synaptosomal membrane preparations and for performing LC-MS-based quantitative proteomics, using TMT 10plex. Enrichment analysis was generated from proteins with level changes. Canonical pathway analysis assigned proteins with level changes to actin cytoskeleton, Gαq, Rho family GTPase and Rho GDI-, axonal guidance, ephrin receptor and dopamine-DARPP32 feedback in cAMP signalling.  Functional network components included proteins of the categories "quantity of neurons, extension of axons and neurites and long term potentiation".    Our analysis demonstrates that the effects of a relatively small overexpression of non-mutant DISC1 or its missassembly has profound consequences on protein networks essential for behavioral control

### Sample Protocol
Dorsal striata from fresh brains were dissected and stored at −80 °C. Synaptosomal fractions from bilateral regions were prepared for individual animals (for tgDISC1 and wild type; n=10 each), using a microscale discontinuous sucrose gradient modified from previous protocols (Hahn et al., 2009; Sialana et al., 2016).  Pelleted synaptosomal samples were reconstituted in urea buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100mM DTT, 50mM TEAB supplemented with protease inhibitors and sonicated for 1hr. Protein amounts were estimated using the Pierce 660 protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific).    Proteolytic digestion and isobaric labelling Fifty micrograms of samples were digested with a Trypsin-LysC enzyme mixture (1:100 w/w, Promega) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), as previously described, with minor modifications (Wisniewski et al., 2009).   The tryptically-digested samples were purified with reversed-phase C18 and labelled with TMT 10-plex according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer.  Two TMT-10plex experiments were performed, with each experiment consisting of five tgDISC1 and five wild type animals (n = 10 biological replicates per group).  For each TMT experiment, ten isobarically labelled peptide samples were pooled, the peptides separated by high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 100 time-based fractions and pooled into 25 samples.  The peptides were vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 5% formic acid.   Samples were injected onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany). Software versions used for the data acquisition and operation of the Q-Exactive were Tune 2.8.1.2806 and Xcalibur 4. HPLC solvents were as follows: solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. From a thermostated autosampler, 10 μL that correspond to 1 µg of the peptide mixture were automatically loaded onto a trap column (PM100-C18 3μm, 75 μm × 20 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Austria) with a binary pump at a flow rate of 5 µL/min using 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA for loading and washing the pre-column. After washing, the peptides were eluted by forward-flushing onto a 50 cm analytical column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed with 2 µm-C18 reversed phase material (PepMap-C18 2μm, 75 μm x 500 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Austria). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a 120 min gradient ranging from 5 to 37.5% solvent B, followed by a 10 min gradient from 37.5 to 50% solvent B and finally, to 90% solvent B for 5 min before re-equilibration to 5 % solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Velos ESI positive ion calibration solution (Pierce, IL, USA) was used to externally calibrate the instrument prior to sample analysis and an internal calibration was performed on the polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120024 from ambient air. MS1 scans were performed from m/z 375-1400 at a resolution of 70,000. Using a data-dependent acquisition mode, the 15 most intense precursor ions of all precursor ions with +2 to +7 charge were isolated within a 1.2 m/z window and fragmented to obtain the corresponding MS/MS spectra. The fragment ions were generated in a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at 32% normalized collision energy with a fixed first mass at 100 m/z and detected in an Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 35,000.  The dynamic exclusion for the selected ions was 30 s.  Maximal ion accumulation time allowed in MS and MS2 mode was 50 and 100 ms, respectively. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap and was set to 3 × 106 ions and 1 × 105 ions for a full Fourier transform MS and MS2 scan, respectively.

### Data Protocol
All MS-MS2 spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot rat protein database version v 2016.04.14 (27,815 sequences, including isoforms).  In addition, sequences of the human DISC1 protein and 11 isoforms produced by alternative splicing with the polymorphisms F607 and C704 were appended to the rat database.  All spectra files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) platform with Mascot using mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions. One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT 10-plex labelling of peptide N‐termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modification.  Thresholds were determined via the target-decoy approach using a reversed protein database as the decoy by imposing 1% false discovery rate (FDR). For TMT 10-plex labelled samples, relative abundances of proteins were determined from the TMT reporter ions. Protein abundance ratios were calculated based on unique and razor peptides. Relative protein levels were determined from the sum of the reporter ion intensities per quantitative channel that correspond to each biological animal replicate.

### Publication Abstract
Disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a key protein involved in behavioral processes and various mental disorders, including schizophrenia and major depression. A transgenic rat overexpressing non-mutant human DISC1, modeling aberrant proteostasis of the DISC1 protein, displays behavioral, biochemical and anatomical deficits consistent with aspects of mental disorders, including changes in the dorsal striatum, an anatomical region critical in the development of behavioral disorders. Herein, dorsal striatum of 10 transgenic DISC1 (tgDISC1) and 10 wild type (WT) littermate control rats was used for synaptosomal preparations and for performing liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based quantitative proteomics, using isobaric labeling (TMT10plex). Functional enrichment analysis was generated from proteins with level changes. The increase in DISC1 expression leads to changes in proteins and synaptic-associated processes including membrane trafficking, ion transport, synaptic organization and neurodevelopment. Canonical pathway analysis assigned proteins with level changes to actin cytoskeleton, G&#x3b1;q, Rho family GTPase and Rho GDI, axonal guidance, ephrin receptor and dopamine-DARPP32 feedback in cAMP signaling. DISC1-regulated proteins proposed in the current study are also highly associated with neurodevelopmental and mental disorders. Bioinformatics analyses from the current study predicted that the following biological processes may be activated by overexpression of DISC1, i.e., regulation of cell quantities, neuronal and axonal extension and long term potentiation. Our findings demonstrate that the effects of overexpression of non-mutant DISC1 or its misassembly has profound consequences on protein networks essential for behavioral control. These results are also relevant for the interpretation of previous as well as for the design of future studies on DISC1.

### Keywords
Human, Synapse, Synaptosome, Disc1

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
University of Vienna


