### Accession
PXD014038

### Title
CImP: Cellular Imprinting Proteomics applied to ocular disorders

### Description
A method (termed Cellular Imprinting Proteomics, CImP) for the identification and quantification of the ocular surface proteome using a minimally invasive membrane filter device is described. Moreover, The CImP method was applied to profile the molecular alterations in the eyes of infants exposed to Zika virus (ZIKV) infection during gestation.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide samples were loaded on an in-house packed pre-column (4cm × 100μm inner diameter, 5μm particles) using an Easy-nanoLC system (ThermoFisher) and separated by gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B in 100 min, 28 to 45% in 20 min, 45 - 95% B in 2 min and 8 min at 95% B.  (A = 0.1% FA; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow of 250nL/min on analytical Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ column (20cm x 75μm inner diameter, 3μm particles). The Easy-nanoLC system was connected online to Orbitrap Fusion LumosTribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. The full MS scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 350–1600 with detection in the Orbitrap at 120000 resolution with AGC target set to 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 100ms. Following each MS scan, the 20 most abundant peptide ions above a threshold of 50000 were selected in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented using HCD fragmentation (collision energy: 35). Fragment ions were acquired in the orbitrap at 30000 FWHM resolution for an ion target of 50000 and a maximum injection time of 50ms, dynamic exclusion of 30 s and fixed first mass 110 m/z. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v3.0.63 (Tune v2.0 1258).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using the MaxQuant v1.6.2.10 (MQ) and Proteome Discoverer v2.3.0.523 (PD) computational platforms using Andromeda (MQ) and Sequest search engines, respectively. The parameters used for database search were: human reviewed proteome database (20400 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 01/2019) with the common contaminants, trypsin as cleavage enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Protein identification was accepted with less than 1% FDR. For the Proteome Discoverer platform, the percolator, peptide and protein validator nodes were used to calculate PSMs, peptides and proteins FDR, respectively. FDR less than 1% was accepted. Protein grouping was performed using the strict parsimony principle. Label-free quantification was performed in the two platforms using the extracted ion chromatogram area of the precursor ions activating the matching between run feature. Protein quantification normalization and roll-up was performed using unique and razor peptides and excluding modified peptides. The Intensity based absolute quantification feature (iBAQ) was activated in MaxQuant to calculate the relative protein abundance within samples. Differentially regulated proteins between the three conditions were selected using t-test with a post-hoc background-based adjusted p-value<0.05 (10.1021/pr4006958). Statistical analyses, volcano and PCA plots were performed in the Perseus and Proteome Discoverer software. The data obtained from Proteome Discoverer were used as primary data and complemented with the MaxQuant data to prioritize proteins and biological processes.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital Zika syndrome was first described due to increased incidence of congenital abnormalities associated with Zika virus (ZIKV) infection. Since the eye develops as part of the embryo central nervous system (CNS) structure, it becomes a specialized compartment able to display symptoms of neurodegenerative diseases and has been proposed as a noninvasive approach to the early diagnosis of neurological diseases. Ocular lesions result from defects that occurred during embryogenesis and can become apparent in newborns exposed to ZIKV. Furthermore, the absence of microcephaly cannot exclude the occurrence of ocular lesions and other CNS manifestations. Considering the need for surveillance of newborns and infants with possible congenital exposure, we developed a method termed cellular imprinting proteomic assay (CImPA) to evaluate the ocular surface proteome specific to infants exposed to ZIKV during gestation compared to nonexposure. CImPA combines surface cells and fluid capture using membrane disks and a large-scale quantitative proteomics approach, which allowed the first-time report of molecular alterations such as neutrophil degranulation, cell death signaling, ocular and neurological pathways, which are associated with ZIKV infection with and without the development of congenital Zika syndrome, CZS. Particularly, infants exposed to ZIKV during gestation and without early clinical symptoms could be detected using the CImPA method. Lastly, this methodology has broad applicability as it could be translated in the study of several neurological diseases to identify novel diagnostic biomarkers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014038.

### Keywords
Cellular imprinting proteomic

### Affiliations
GlycoProteomics Laboratory Sao Paulo University
SDU

### Submitter
Livia Rosa-Fernandes

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
GlycoProteomics Laboratory Sao Paulo University


