### Accession
PXD037368

### Title
Comprehensive characterization of protein turnover by comparative SILAC labeling analysis in 3T3-L1

### Description
A balance between the synthesis and degradation of proteins is referred to as protein turnover, which is crucial for cellular protein homeostasis. Proteome-wide analysis of protein turnover in adipocytes, which are well-known for storing energy and also being associated with obesity and metabolic disorders, are yet to be carried out. Thus, with this objective in mind, our study employed comparative analysis of time-dependent SILAC labeling to evaluate the protein turnover of 3T3-L1 adipocytes ranging from 0 to 144 hours. We observed that relatively faster or slower protein half-lives in several protein groups were related to the PPAR signaling pathway, energy metabolism, extracellular matrix, ubiquitin-proteasome system, RNA splicing, Golgi complex, and lysosome. It is anticipated that these protein turnover profiles will provide greater clarity on the life cycle of adipocyte proteome and shed light on how they maintain protein homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
The collected cell pellets were digested using trypsin as per the manufacturer’s instructions in the PreOmics iST kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). LC/MS/MS analysis was conducted by a nano-flow chromatographic system (Vanquish Neo UHPLC system, Thermo ScientificTM) coupled to Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo ScientificTM).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer were processed for protein identification and quantification of SILAC labeling by MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using the Mus musculus UniprotKB database (release 2022_12, 55,286 protein entries).

### Publication Abstract
A balance between the synthesis and degradation of proteins is referred to as protein turnover, which is crucial for cellular protein homeostasis. Proteome-wide analysis of protein turnover in adipocytes, which are well-known for their role in energy storage and their link to obesity and metabolism disorders, is yet to be conducted. Thus, with this objective in mind, our investigation utilized a comparative analysis of time-dependent SILAC labeling to assess protein turnover in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, spanning a period of 0 to 144 h. We observed that relatively faster or slower protein half-lives in several protein groups were associated with the PPAR&#x3b3; signaling pathway, energy metabolism, extracellular matrix, ubiquitin-proteasome system, RNA splicing, Golgi complex, and lysosome. It is anticipated that these protein half-life profiles will provide greater clarity on the life cycle of adipocyte proteome and shed light on how they maintain protein homeostasis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Silac, Adipocytes, Mass spectrometry, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar

### Submitter
Sunkyu Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Sunkyu Choi
Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar


