### Accession
PXD008107

### Title
Profiling the small RNAs plasma levels in KSHV-infected Ugandan patients without KS

### Description
In the current study, we examined the cellular and viral miRNA expression profile in KSHV-infected patients without clinical signs of KSHV-associated disease. In addition, we characterized the viral miRNAs encoded by KSHV and EBV during natural infections in these patients. Finally, we show that malaria infection results in major alterations of the molecular content of plasma exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were enriched from plasma samples using the exoquick-LP kit to reduce contamination by lipoprotein particles prior to precipitation of exosomes. Exosomal proteins were extracted in RIPA buffer. Each sample was digested with trypsin and labeled with a TMT10plex labeling reagent (Thermo Scientific) for differential quantification. The labeled peptides from 10 samples were dissolved in 50 µL 0.1% TFA in each vial and combined. Then LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer™ version 2.1 was used for data normalization and analysis. The MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (March 19, 2014), common contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), Uniprot HIV 1 and NCBI human herpes virus -4,-6,-7,-8, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and plasmodium falciparum (strain 3D7) using SEQUEST. The following parameters were used: trypsin as the digestion protease; precursor and fragment error tolerance at 10 parts per million (ppm) and 0.6 Da; TMT modification of N-termini as a fixed modification; and TMT modification of lysine residues, carbamidomethyl on cysteine residues, and oxidation of methionine residues as variable modifications. Identified peptides were filtered by a 1% peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) using q-value of 0.01 from Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Malaria, Yrna, Mirna, Proteomics, Tmt, Exosomes, Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Research Assistant Professor Center for Global Infectious Disease Research Seattle Children’s Research Institute Seattle, Washington, USA
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Qing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Serge Barcy, PhD
Research Assistant Professor Center for Global Infectious Disease Research Seattle Children’s Research Institute Seattle, Washington, USA


