### Accession
PXD006550

### Title
Proteome and peptidome of human follicular fluid

### Description
Human follicular fluid (hFF) is a natural environment of oocyte maturation, and some components of hFF could be used to judge oocyte capability for fertilization and further development. In our pilot small scale study three samples from four donors (12 samples in total) were analyzed to determine which hFF proteins/peptides could be used to differentiate individual oocytes and which are patient specific. Ultrafiltration was used to fractionate hFF to High Molecular Weight (HMW) – proteome (>10kDa) and  Low Molecular Weight (LMW) – peptidome (<10 kDa) fractions. HMW and LMW compositions were analyzed using LC-MS in SWATH data acquisition and processing methodology. In total we were able to identify 158 proteins, form which 59 were never reported before as hFF components. 55 (45 Never reported before) proteins were found by analyzing LMW fraction, 67 (14 never reported before) were found by analyzing HMW fraction, and 36 were identified in both fractions of hFF. We were able to perform quantitative analysis for 72 proteins from HMW fraction of hFF. We found that concentrations of 18 proteins varied substantially among hFF samples from single donors and those proteins are promising targets to identify biomarkers useful in oocyte quality assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Each separate follicular fluid sample was centrifuged at 1 000 G for 10 minutes and 400 µl of each supernatant was separated from the cell pellets. 100 µl of acetonitrile was added to each sample and briefly vortexed to break protein-protein interactions. Then, each sample was subjected to ultrafiltration by centrifugation on the 10 kDa Amicon membrane (Merck-Millipore). Both, filtrates (LMW – low molecular weight fraction) and concentrated protein fractions (HMW – high molecular weight fraction) were collected for further analysis. Several of the pool samples were depleted of 14 most abundant human serum proteins prior to initial preparation step using a commercially available MARS-14 kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) according to manufacturer's protocol. Samples were then subjected to ultrafiltration as described in before and processed further accordingly as other HMW fraction samples. Samples of concentrated protein residue (HMW fraction) were diluted to approximate protein concentration of 1 mg/ml in NH4HCO3. Diluted protein solutions were subjected to protein digestion by trypsin with prior reduction by dithiothreitol and alkylation by iodoacetamide. Both, peptides resulting from digestion (HMWF) and filtration (LMWF) were desalted on C18 Pierce Spin Tips. LC separation was performed on the Eksigent microLC  (Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System, Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA) using for the digested high molecular weight fraction the ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 x 0.5 mm), and for the non-digested low molecular weight fraction the ChromXP C8CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 x 0.3 mm). Samples were loaded onto the column using the CTC Pal Autosampler (CTC Analytics AG, Zwinger, Switzerland), with each injection of a 5 µl volume. The solvents A and B comprised of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. Loaded material was separated on the column using a gradient of 10-90% solvent B in 28 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Eluate from the column was analyzed in a positive ion mode on a TripleTOF® 5600+ hybrid mass spectrometer with DuoSpray Ion Source (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). The microLC-MS/MS system was controlled by the AB SCIEX Analyst TF 1.6 software. The data-dependent experiments (IDA) were conducted for all the investigated samples. The TOF MS survey scan was performed in the m/z range of 100-2,000 with the accumulation time of  50 ms. The top 10 precursor ions, with the charge states from +2 to +5, were then selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation. Product ion spectra were collected in the m/z range of 100-2,000 with the accumulation time of 40 ms. This resulted in duty cycle time of 1.11 s. All the IDA runs were executed with rolling collision energy and the precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 5 s after two occurrences. SWATH-MS analyses were performed in a looped product ion mode. A set of overlapping 25 transmission windows, each 25 Da wide, was constructed and covered the precursor mass range of 400-1,000 m/z. The SWATH product ion scans were acquired in the range of 100-2,000 m/z. The collision energy for each window was calculated for a +2 to +5-charged ions centered upon the window with a spread of 2. The SWATH-MS1 survey scan was acquired in high sensitivity mode in the range of 100-2,000 Da in the beginning of each cycle with the accumulation time of 50 ms and it was followed by 40 ms accumulation time high sensitivity product ion scans, which resulted in the total cycle time of 1.11 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein database search was conducted in the ProteinPilot® 4.5 Software (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm. The search of combined HMW fraction IDA runs was performed against SwissProt Homo sapiens database (ver. 05.09.2016, 20 200 entries), with an automated false discovery rate of 5% and following parameters: instrument TripleTOF 5600, alkylation of cysteines by iodoacetamide, and trypsin enzyme digestion; ID focus on amino acid substitutions and biological modifications; search effort “thorough ID”; and detected protein threshold [unused protein score (Conf)]>0.05 (10%). Runs of LMW fraction samples were processed accordingly with changes in parameters: no modification of cysteines, and no enzyme specified in digestion. Quantitative analysis was performed by loading the resulting from the ProteinPilot database search  file to the MS/MS ALL with SWATH™ Acquisition MicroApp 2.01 in PeakView® 2.2 (SCIEX) to create automatically a spectral library file. The assumptions employed during the spectral library creation included: a maximum of 10 peptides per protein and 10 transitions per peptide; peptide modification was allowed (but shared peptides were excluded); only peptides of at least 95% confidence and an extraction window of 5 min and 0.02 Da width were used. The peptides profiles and transitions were manually inspected to ensure that PeakView extraction was accurate and that ion transitions correlated with each other. Proteins have been quantified using at least two peptides with a 95% identification certainty. The created spectral libraries were used for targeted data extraction from SWATH-MS experiments and further processing in MS/MS ALL with SWATH™ Acquisition MicroApp 2.01 in PeakView® 2.2 software. Statistical analysis of processed data was performed in MarkerView 1.2.1 Software (SCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
Human follicular fluid (hFF) is a natural environment of oocyte maturation, and some components of hFF could be used to judge oocyte capability for fertilization and further development. In our pilot small-scale study three samples from four donors (12 samples in total) were analyzed to determine which hFF proteins/peptides could be used to differentiate individual oocytes and which are patient-specific. Ultrafiltration was used to fractionate hFF to high-molecular-weight (HMW) proteome (&gt;10 kDa) and low-molecular-weight (LMW) peptidome (&lt;10 kDa) fractions. HMW and LMW compositions were analyzed using LC-MS in SWATH data acquisition and processing methodology. In total we were able to identify 158 proteins, from which 59 were never reported before as hFF components. 55 (45 not reported before) proteins were found by analyzing LMW fraction, 67 (14 not reported before) were found by analyzing HMW fraction, and 36 were identified in both fractions of hFF. We were able to perform quantitative analysis for 72 proteins from HMW fraction of hFF. We found that concentrations of 11 proteins varied substantially among hFF samples from single donors, and those proteins are promising targets to identify biomarkers useful in oocyte quality assessment.

### Keywords
Human, Swath, Lc-ms/ms, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Biopolymer Structure, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Stanislaw Oldziej
Laboratory of Biopolymer Structure, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


