### Accession
PXD020000

### Title
Downregulation of KRAB zinc finger proteins in 5-fluorouracil resistant colorectal cancer cells

### Description
The radio-chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is the standard of care treatment for patients with locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) but it is only effective for a third of them. The proteomic and transcriptomic response of three colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines to 5-FU and radiation was assessed and correlated with their genetic background. The induction of a 5-FU-resistance in those cell lines negatively affects the levels of transcripts corresponding to Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-containing zinc finger proteins (ZFPs), the largest family of transcriptional repressors. Among nearly 350 KRAB-ZFPs, almost a quarter are down-regulated after the induction of a 5-FU-resistance including a common one between the three CRC cell lines, ZNF649, whose role is still unknown. This proteomic, transcriptomic and genomic analysis of intrinsic and acquired resistance highlights possible new mechanisms involved in resistance to treatment and therefore potential new therapeutic targets to overcome this resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated with either 10 μM uracil (condition 1) or 10 μM 5-FU (condition 2) for 24 hours. Medium was changed and cells were irradiated with corresponding DL50 using an X-ray irradiator (X-RAD 225 XL, Precision X-Ray) (condition 3).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification as well as TMT-labeled peptide quantitation were performed with the MaxQuant version 1.6.14 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Uniprot human protein database. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Radio-chemotherapy with 5-flu&#x2009;orouracil (5-FU) is the standard of care treatment for patients with colorectal cancer, but it is only effective for a third of them. Despite our understanding of the mechanism of action of 5-FU, drug resistance remains a significant limitation to the clinical use of 5-FU, as both intrinsic and acquired chemoresistance represents the major obstacles for the success of 5-FU-based chemotherapy. In order to identify the mechanism of acquired resistance, 5-FU chemoresistance was induced in CRC cell lines by passaging cells with increasing concentrations of 5-FU. To study global molecular changes, quantitative proteomics and transcriptomics analyses were performed on these cell lines, comparing the resistant cells as well as the effect of chemo and radiotherapy. Interestingly, a very high proportion of downregulated genes were annotated as transcription factors coding for Kr&#xfc;ppel-associated box (KRAB) domain-containing zinc-finger proteins (KZFPs), the largest family of transcriptional repressors. Among nearly 350 KRAB-ZFPs, almost a quarter were downregulated after the induction of a 5-FU-resistance including a common one between the three CRC cell lines, ZNF649, whose role is still unknown. To confirm the observations of the proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, the abundance of 20 different KZFPs and control mRNAs was validated by RT-qPCR. In fact, several KZFPs were no longer detectable using qPCR in cell lines resistant to 5-FU, and the KZFPs that were downregulated only in one or two cell lines showed similar pattern of expression as measured by the omics approaches. This proteomic, transcriptomic and genomic analysis of intrinsic and acquired resistance highlights a possible new mechanism involved in the cellular adaptation to 5-FU and therefore identifies potential new therapeutic targets to overcome this resistance.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Protoemics, Chemoresistance, Tmt, 5-fu

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology Université de Sherbrooke 3201 Jean-Mignault, Sherbrooke, Québec, J1E 4K8, Canada

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr François-Michel Boisvert
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology Université de Sherbrooke 3201 Jean-Mignault, Sherbrooke, Québec, J1E 4K8, Canada


