### Accession
PXD040786

### Title
Proteomic profiling identifies ITIH3 as a biomarker for disease activity in  myasthenia gravis

### Description
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a chronic antibody-mediated autoimmune disease disrupting neuromuscular synaptic transmission. Antibodies (Abs) against the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) are detected in approximately 85% of patients. Here, we aimed to study the serum proteome of MG and to identify novel biomarkers reflecting disease activity.

### Sample Protocol
According to the manufacturer's instructions, 200 µL of each serum sample was depleted using the ProteoMiner kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, CA, USA). This subproteome was placed in Pall Nanosep® 10K Omega filter units (10 kDa cut-off; Pall, New York, USA) and centrifuged (12,500 g, room temperature). The analyte was washed by adding 100 µL urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris Base) to the filter unit and centrifuging. For reduction (45 min), 100 µL 50 mM dithiothreitol in urea buffer was added to the filter unit. Subsequently, the unit was centrifuged again, and the sample was rinsed with 100 µL urea buffer. For alkylation, 50 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer was placed into the filter unit. Incubation proceeded in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Following centrifugation and rinsing twice with 300 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10% acetonitrile (ACN) in urea buffer, 200 µL 0.01 µg/µL trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10% ACN were added to the filter unit. Incubation proceeded at 37°C overnight. Peptides were collected by rinsing the filter thrice with 5% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by centrifugation. Samples were dried using a Speedvac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and redissolved in 10 µL 5% ACN/ 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Progenesis for Proteomics (Waters) and the Uniprot human database. One missed cleavage was allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed, and methionine oxidation as the variable modification. A shortlist of the protein output was created by demanding protein assignment by at least two peptides, a fold value of at least 2, and analysis of variance (ANOVA) p ≤ 0.05. Quality controls (profile plots) were generated with Perseus v1.6.14.0.

### Publication Abstract
Therapeutic strategies targeting complement have revolutionized the treatment of myasthenia gravis (MG). However, a deeper understanding of complement modulation in the human system is required to improve treatment responses and identify off-target effects shaping long-term outcomes. For this reason, we studied a cohort of patients with MG treated with either eculizumab or azathioprine as well as treatment-naive patients using a combined proteomics and metabolomics approach. This strategy validated known effects of eculizumab on the terminal complement cascade. Beyond that, eculizumab modulated the serum proteometabolome as distinct pathways were altered in eculizumab-treated patients, including the oxidative stress response, mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, and lipid metabolism with particular emphasis on arachidonic acid signaling. We detected reduced levels of arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) and leukotriene A4 in eculizumab-treated patients. Mechanistically, ligation of the C5a receptor (C5aR) is needed for ALOX5 metabolism and generation of downstream leukotrienes. As eculizumab prevents cleavage of C5 into C5a, decreased engagement of C5aR may inhibit ALOX5-mediated synthesis of pro-inflammatory leukotrienes. These findings indicate distinct off-target effects induced by eculizumab, illuminating potential mechanisms of action that may be harnessed to improve treatment outcomes.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Achr, Myasthenia gravis, Machine learning, Proteomics, Itih, Treatment response, Complement

### Affiliations
University Hospital Düsseldorf,  Clinic for Neurology, Düsseldorf, Germany
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Ruck
University Hospital Düsseldorf,  Clinic for Neurology, Düsseldorf, Germany


