### Accession
PXD000781

### Title
Huwe1-mediated ubiquitylation of Dvl defines a novel negative feedback loop in the Wnt signaling pathway

### Description
Wnt signaling plays a central role in development, adult tissue homeostasis and cancer. Several steps in the canonical Wnt/b-catenin signaling cascade are regulated by ubiquitylation, a protein modification that influences the stability, subcellular localization or protein-protein interactions of target proteins. To identify novel regulators of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway, we performed RNAi screens in C. elegans and human tissue culture cells and identified the HECT domain containing ubiquitin ligase eel-1/Huwe1 as a negative regulator of Wnt signaling. Huwe1 functions cell autonomously in signal-receiving cells and genetically acts upstream of b-catenin. Mechanistically, Huwe1 binds to and ubiquitylates the cytoplasmic Wnt pathway component Dishevelled (Dvl) in a Wnt3a and CK1e dependent manner. Huwe1 mediated ubiquitylation does not target Dvl for degradation. Instead, we found that Huwe1 decreases Dvl signaling by inhibiting Dvl multimerization. We conclude that Huwe1 is part of an evolutionarily conserved negative feedback loop in the Wnt/b-catenin pathway

### Sample Protocol
Immunopurified proteins attached on beads or resolved by 1D PAGE were digested by trypsin in-solution or in-gel, respectively. For ubiquitylation crossling analysis, samples were fractionated using peptide digly antibody. All samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Elite) analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data were procesed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer and MASCOT (2.4). Data were searched against local database with trypsin enzyme specificity and two miscleavages allowed and modifications: ubiquitylation (K, dynamic) carbamidomethylation (C, static), oxidation (M, dynamic)

### Publication Abstract
Wnt signaling plays a central role in development, adult tissue homeostasis, and cancer. Several steps in the canonical Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling cascade are regulated by ubiquitylation, a protein modification that influences the stability, subcellular localization, or interactions of target proteins. To identify regulators of the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway, we performed an RNA interference screen in Caenorhabditis elegans and identified the HECT domain-containing ubiquitin ligase EEL-1 as an inhibitor of Wnt signaling. In human embryonic kidney 293T cells, knockdown of the EEL-1 homolog Huwe1 enhanced the activity of a Wnt reporter in cells stimulated with Wnt3a or in cells that overexpressed casein kinase 1 (CK1) or a constitutively active mutant of the Wnt co-receptor low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6). However, knockdown of Huwe1 had no effect on reporter gene expression in cells expressing constitutively active &#x3b2;-catenin, suggesting that Huwe1 inhibited Wnt signaling upstream of &#x3b2;-catenin and downstream of CK1 and LRP6. Huwe1 bound to and ubiquitylated the cytoplasmic Wnt pathway component Dishevelled (Dvl) in a Wnt3a- and CK1&#x3b5;-dependent manner. Mass spectrometric analysis showed that Huwe1 promoted K63-linked, but not K48-linked, polyubiquitination of Dvl. Instead of targeting Dvl for degradation, ubiquitylation of the DIX domain of Dvl by Huwe1 inhibited Dvl multimerization, which is necessary for its function. Our findings indicate that Huwe1 is part of an evolutionarily conserved negative feedback loop in the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Ubiquitylation, Dvl

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular research, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Katerina Sedova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular research, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


