### Accession
PXD034985

### Title
Endothelial pathomechanisms in response to in vito exposure to differentz peritoneal dialysis fluids

### Description
Loss of ultrafiltration capacity in peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients is often associated with peritoneal vascular changes, manifest as diabetes-like vasculopathy and angiogenesis. The endothelial monolayer lining the vessel lumen controls vessel barrier function and thereby influences peritoneal substrate transport and ultrafiltration. In this study, we investigated the influence of exposure of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) to different PD fluids.  HUVECs were exposed to experimental solutions for up to 24 h. All test ﬂuids were sterile-ﬁltered before usage. Each experiment consisted of three independent samples in biological replicates on separate culture plates. For PD fluid incubation, cells were first exposed to pure PD fluids (Dianeal PD4 3.86% glucose, Physioneal 3.86% glucose, Extraneal, all Baxter, Castlebar, Ireland), or to a lab-made GDP-free PD fluid or to normal medium without growth factors as control. Cells were subsequently exposed for 24 h to the above solutions diluted 1:1 with culture medium and brought to 2% FCS.  Cells were then washed three times (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7) and lysed in 125 µL per well of lysis buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1 mM EDTA, one tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel; Switzerland) per 100 ml, and one tablet of PhosStop Protease Inhibitor (Roche) per 100 mL). Total protein concentration was determined with the Pierce 660 Kit (Thermo) per manufacturer’s manual. Lysates were stored at -80°C until further processing. We investigated the molecular mechanisms of endothelial cell pathology during in vitro PD fluid exposure by proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of the endothelial cell response to the PD fluid induced stress, integrating current understanding of PD-related cellular injury and stress responses (Bender et al., Nephrol Dial Transplant, 2011, doi:10.1093/ndt/gfq484; Kratochwill et al., BioMed research international, 2015, doi:10.1155/2015/628158; Kratochwill et al., J Proteome Res, 2009, doi:10.1021/pr800916s; Lechner et al., J Proteome Res, 2010, doi:10.1021/pr9011574). We then evaluated the effect of AlaGln addition to conventional PD fluid on these parameters in endothelial cells.  This strategy allowed characterization of endothelial cell injury and stress responses during exposure to different PD fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Digestion was performed using single-pot, solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). Briefly, the reduced and alkylated proteins were bound to SP3 beads, washed with 80% ethanol and acetonitrile, and subjected to on-bead digestion with trypsin (1:50 protease to protein ratio) or trypsin/LysC (1:25protease to protein ratio) overnight at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5. After elution peptides were desalted using C18 macrospin columns ) or Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns and labeled with TMT 10plex or TMTpro 16plex according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 macrospin columns or Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns. Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH. Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high pH on an offline Dionex U300 HPLC. 36 time-based fractions were collected as previously described [Bennett et al., J Proteomics 2011] and analyzed at low pH on a Dionex U3000 coupled directly to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA). The analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-15 high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) method for peptide identiﬁcation and relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed and analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer (v2.4.0.305, Thermo). SequestHT was used as search engine and following parameters were chosen: database: Homo sapiens (SwissProt, downloaded on 2021-09-24); enzyme: trypsin; max. missed cleavage sites: 2; static modifications: TMT6plex or TMTpro (K and peptide N-terminus) and carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus), met-loss (M) and met-loss+acetyl (M); ; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. For reporter ion quantification the most intense m/z in a 20 ppm window around the theoretical m/z was used. Correction of isotopic impurities for reporter ion intensities was applied. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, which was based on S/N values with an average S/N threshold of 10. Normalization was based on total peptide amount and scaling mode on controls average (internal standard). Only peptides and proteins with FDR <0.01 are reported and single peptide IDs were excluded from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
To replace kidney function, peritoneal dialysis (PD) utilizes hyperosmotic PD fluids with specific physico-chemical properties. Their composition induces progressive damage of the peritoneum, leading to vasculopathies, decline of membrane function, and PD technique failure. Clinically used PD fluids differ in their composition but still remain bioincompatible. We mapped the molecular pathomechanisms in human endothelial cells induced by the different characteristics of widely used PD fluids by proteomics. Of 7894 identified proteins, 3871 were regulated at least by 1 and 49 by all tested PD fluids. The latter subset was enriched for cell junction-associated proteins. The different PD fluids individually perturbed proteins commonly related to cell stress, survival, and immune function pathways. Modeling two major bioincompatibility factors of PD fluids, acidosis, and glucose degradation products (GDPs) revealed distinct effects on endothelial cell function and regulation of cellular stress responses. Proteins and pathways most strongly affected were members of the oxidative stress response. Addition of the antioxidant and cytoprotective additive, alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln), to PD fluids led to upregulation of thioredoxin reductase-1, an antioxidant protein, potentially explaining the cytoprotective effect of AlaGln. In conclusion, we mapped out the molecular response of endothelial cells to PD fluids, and provided new evidence for their specific pathomechanisms, crucial for improvement of PD therapies.

### Keywords
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells, Tmt, Dialysis

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Medical University of Vienna


