### Accession
PXD018711

### Title
Signature cleavage in vitro assay of 20S and 26S proteasome using naked and ubiquitined cyclin

### Description
A systematic and comparative study of the proteolysis products generated by purified human 26S and 20S proteasome following the in vitro cleavage of non-modified (naked), mono-ubiquitinated and poly-ubiquitinated cyclin B.

### Sample Protocol
terminated by heating mixtures at 95°C for 5min. Then the mixture was passed through 30KDa cut-off Amicon® Ultra - 0.5mL Centrifugal Filter unit (Merck-Millipore). The flow-through was collected and desalted by C18 StageTip column(ref: PMID:17703201). Desalted peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry. Samples of in vitro cleavage reactions were analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Ultimate 3000 Nano Systems (Thermo Scientific) following loading via an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 å; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 å; Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted with a linear 30 min gradient of 6–30%, followed by 3 min gradient of 30–34%, 5  min gradient of 34–76% and 10 min wash at 76% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.2  μl/min). These MS analyses done In positive mode using HCD when each cycle was set to a fixed cycle time of 2s and consisted of an Orbitrap full ms1 scan (range: 375‐1575 m/z) at 60.000 resolution with  AGC target: 1e6; maximum IT: 118 ms,  followed 18 Orbitrap ms2 scans (range 140-2000) at 60,000 resolution: with AGC target: 4e5; maximum IT: 118 ms; isolation window: 1.4 m/z; HCD Collision Energy: 32%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s and the “exclude isotopes” option was activated.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was done with the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) v5.2.0 Flammagenitus (ref: PMID:25631240).TPP searches were done following RAW files conversion to mzML using MSConvert (ver 3.01157) using centroid and while compressing peak list, Searches were performed using Comet (2017.01 rev. 1) and high-resolution settings. They include ‘no enzyme’ cleavage specificity and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications.  All searches were conducted against protein sequences downloaded from UniProt (ref:https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1049). The. searches of in vitro cleavage reactions of cyclin-B were done with a database composed of all Uniport Yeast proteome (November 2017; 6721 sequences), all of Human proteasome-related proteins (based on “Proteasome” Keyword in Uniprot, November 2017; 169 sequence), the sequences of modified Cyclin-B, FLAG-tagged ubiquitin and Myc-tagged ubiquitin, and the sequence of the cRAP contaminant database (cRAP database released Feb 2012; 115 entries). All of these sequences were supplemented with decoy sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, 26s proteasome, Cyclin, 20s proteasome

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Rooms 433-4, Biology Building Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Rooms 433-4, Biology Building Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel


