### Accession
PXD024664

### Title
Isolation of the Buchnera aphidicola flagellum basal body complexes from the Buchnera membrane

### Description
Buchnera aphidicola is an intracellular bacterial symbiont of aphids and maintains a small genome of only 600 kbps. Buchnera is thought to maintain only genes relevant to the symbiosis with its aphid host. Curiously, the Buchnera genome contains gene clusters coding for flagellum basal body structural proteins and for flagellum type III export machinery. These structures have been shown to be highly expressed and present in large numbers on Buchnera cells. No recognizable pathogenicity factors or secreted proteins have been identified in the Buchnera genome, and the relevance of this protein complex to the symbiosis is unknown. Here, we show isolation of Buchnera flagellum basal body proteins from the cellular membrane of Buchnera, confirming the enrichment of flagellum basal body proteins relative to other proteins in the Buchnera proteome. This will facilitate studies of the structure and function of the Buchnera flagellum structure, and its role in this model symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Buchnera aphidicola cells were extracted from aphids (Acyrthosiphon pisum) by crushing and vacuum filtering aphid homogenate. Buchnera was lysed, and incubated on ice at pH 10. The solution was spun 3x at 5000g and transferred to a polyallomer ultracentrifuge tube and spun at 30,000g for one hour. Pellets were covered in TET (Tris-EDTA-Triton) buffer and allowed to sit overnight to soften and disperse.

### Data Protocol
Soluble protein was run on a 4-12% Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE gel, cut out, and submitted to the University of Texas at Austin CBRS Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility for LC-MS/MS. Samples were submitted with Buchnera aphidicola as the reference organism. The FT-MS resolution was set to 120,000, with an MS/MS cycle time of 3 s and acquisition in HCD ion trap mode. Raw data were processed using SEQUEST HT embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Scaffold 4 was used for validation of peptide and protein IDs.

### Publication Abstract
Buchnera aphidicola is an intracellular bacterial symbiont of aphids and maintains a small genome of only 600 kbps. Buchnera is thought to maintain only genes relevant to the symbiosis with its aphid host. Curiously, the Buchnera genome contains gene clusters coding for flagellum basal body structural proteins and for flagellum type III export machinery. These structures have been shown to be highly expressed and present in large numbers on Buchnera cells. No recognizable pathogenicity factors or secreted proteins have been identified in the Buchnera genome, and the relevance of this protein complex to the symbiosis is unknown. Here, we show isolation of Buchnera flagellum basal body proteins from the cellular membrane of Buchnera, confirming the enrichment of flagellum basal body proteins relative to other proteins in the Buchnera proteome. This will facilitate studies of the structure and function of the Buchnera flagellum structure, and its role in this model symbiosis.

### Keywords
Endosymbiont, Flagella, Buchnera, Basal body

### Affiliations
Nancy Moran, Warren J. and Viola Mae Raymer Chair, Professor, The University of Texas at Austin Department of Integrative Biology. nancy.moran@austin.utexas.edu  David Taylor, Lorene Morrow Kelley Endowed Faculty Fellowship Fund, Professor, The University ofTexas at Austin Department of Molecular Biosciences. david.taylor@utexas.edu
The University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Matthew Schepers

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Schepers
Nancy Moran, Warren J. and Viola Mae Raymer Chair, Professor, The University of Texas at Austin Department of Integrative Biology. nancy.moran@austin.utexas.edu  David Taylor, Lorene Morrow Kelley Endowed Faculty Fellowship Fund, Professor, The University ofTexas at Austin Department of Molecular Biosciences. david.taylor@utexas.edu


