### Accession
PXD030007

### Title
RAW264.7 proteins interacting with Tc-MUC-1 LC-MSMS

### Description
Human toxocariasis is a neglected parasitic disease of global importance, caused predominantly by larvae of Toxocara canis. It is known that mucins secreted by larvae play crucial roles in immune recognition and evasion, but very little is understood about molecular interactions between host cells and T. canis. Here, using an integrative approach of His pull-down, mass spectrometry, co-immunoprecipitation and bioinformatics, we identified 219 proteins expressed by a murine macrophage cell line ( RAW264.7) that interact with a surface coat glycoprotein (Tc-MUC-1) of infective larvae of T. canis. Protein-protein interactions shown between Tc-MUC-1 and an actin binding protein CFL1 as well as the fatty acid binding protein FABP5 of RAW264.7 macrophages were also demonstrated in human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK 293T) expressing a mutant version of the SV40 large T antigen.

### Sample Protocol
An in-gel digestion approach was employed to process the SDS-PAGE separated proteins. In brief, proteins sliced from gels were reduced with 10 mM (2S,3S)-1,4-bis-sulfanylbutane-2,3-diol, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 1 µg trypsin (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37 C overnight. Peptide desalting was performed using a C18 resin column (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were free-dried, resuspended in 15 µL aqueous 3% w/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid, and then subjected to LC-MS/MS using the ekspertTMnanoLC and AB TripleTOF 5600-plus (SCIEX) by a service provider (GeneCreate Biological Engineering Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass data were processed using ProteinPilot software (SCIEX), using the following search parameters: enzyme of trypsin, Cys alkylation of iodoacetamide, bias correction of true, background correction of true, protein mass of unrestricted, against the Mus musculus proteome in the UniProt database. Peptide identification was performed with a confidence of ≥ 95%. Common contaminants (e.g., keratin, antibodies and serum albumin or globulins) were filtered out prior to the identification of proteins targeting rTc-MUC-1. Identified proteins were annotated based on the UniProt database and Gene Ontology resources using the OmicsBean data integration analysis platform, and based on the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database using Kobas 3.0 [35]. Protein network analysis was performed using STRING 10.0 software and visualised using Cytoscape 3.4.0 platform.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Raw264.7; tc-muc-1; lc-msms

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University
College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
G M

### Lab Head
Dr Guangxu Ma
College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University


