### Accession
PXD011124

### Title
Pervasive Roles of Ubiquitination in Orchestrating the Deubiquitinase Activity and Function of the BAP1/ASXL2 Tumor Suppressor Complex

### Description
The tumor suppressor and deubiquitinase (DUB) BAP1 regulates chromatin-associated processes and is frequently mutated in various malignancies. BAP1 and its drosophila orthologue Calypso assemble DUB complexes with ASXL-1, -2, -3 paralogues and ASX respectively, and these cofactors are required for stimulating their DUB activity. However how the DUB activity of BAP1 is regulated remains largely unknown. Here we show that BAP1 promotes monoubiquitination of ASXLs on the ASXM/DEUBAD domain. ASXL2 monoubiquitination promotes its stability or proteasomal degradation, stimulates BAP1 DUB activity and is required for mammalian cell proliferation. Monoubiquitination of ASXL2 is directly catalyzed by UBE2E family of ubiquitin conjugating enzymes and is regulated by deubiquitination. Monoubiquitination of ASX is regulated by Calypso and is required for drosophila development. We further revealed a switch mechanism that tightly regulate BAP1 function, as a monoubiquitination of BAP1 UCH domain is mutually exclusive with ASXL2 monoubiquitination, thus ensuring highly coordinated DUB-mediated signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human skin fibroblasts (LF1), U2OS osteosarcoma, human embryonic kidney HEK293T (293T), Cervical cancer HeLa, normal Human Lung Fibroblasts (IMR90), Phoenix ampho cells and 3T3-L1 mouse preadipocytes were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10 % of foetal bovine serum (FBS), 1 % L-glutamine and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin. BAP1-deficient human lung squamous carcinoma NCI-H226, BAP1-deficient human mesothelioma NCI-H28, and Mesothelioma cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % of fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1 % L-glutamine and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin. Drosophila S2 cells were cultured in Schneider medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10 % FBS.293T cells were transfected with the mammalian expressing vectors using polyethylenimine (PEI) (Sigma-Aldrich). Three days post-transfection, cells were harvested for immunoblotting or immunoprecipitation. U2OS, IMR90 or LF1 cells were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAimax (Life technologies) with 200 pmol of either ON-TARGET plus Non-targeting pool (D-001810) or with a pool of siRNA sequences purchased from Sigma-Aldrich targeting BAP1 ( pool of 2 oligonucleotides, SASI_Hs01_00105395, SASI_Hs01_00105396), UBE2E1 (pool of 2 oligonucleotides, SASI_Hs01_00147125, SASI_Hs01_00335491 ) UBE2E2 (pool of 2 oligonucleotides, SASI_Hs01_00102040, SASI_Hs01_00102041)  or UBE2E3 (pool of 2 oligonucleotides, SASI_Hs01_00107204, SASI_Hs01_00107206). Four days post-transfection, cells were harvested for immunoblotting or three days post-transfection, cells were plated for survival assay (MTT) or for colony forming assay (CFA). U2OS, IMR90, LF1 or 3T3L1 cells were transduced with lentiviral expression vectors for Myc-ASXL2 WT, Myc-ASXL2 K370R, GFP-DEUBAD(ASXL2) WT and GFP-DEUBAD(ASXL2) K370R. 48 hours post-selection (2 μg/ml puromycin for Myc-tagged constructs and 12 μg/ml blasticidin for the GFP-tagged constructs), the cells were plated either for MTT or CFA assays or for cell cycle progression analysis by synchronizing the cells by double thymidine block or nocodazole. Total cell lysates were prepared in buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and1% SDS, samples were immediately boiled at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated to breakdown DNA.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt human database with carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications, deamidation (NQ,) oxidation (M) acetylation (N-term) and ubiquitination (K) as variable modifications. Tolerance was set at 10 ppm on precursor mass and 0.01 Da on the fragments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polycomb group proteins; bap1; calypso; asxl; cell proliferation, Histone h2ak119ub; deubiquitination

### Affiliations
Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center and Department of Medicine, University of Montréal, Montréal H3C 3J7, Québec, Canada
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Bachir El Affar
Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center and Department of Medicine, University of Montréal, Montréal H3C 3J7, Québec, Canada


