### Accession
PXD021918

### Title
Data in support of Anti-Aβ antibody treatment with Aducanumab modified the proteome of senile plaques and surrounding tissue and altered disease progression in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most comment type of dementia and is characterized by neuronal loss and cognitive decline. Aggregation and accumulation of Aβ proteoforms into senile plaques (SP) is one of the key hallmarks of the disease. The accumulation of Aβ in particular in hippocampus has been observed prior to cognitive decline, indicating a potential link between Aβ and the subsequent pathological events in AD. Several clinical trials have used immunotherapies targeting Aβ for degradation but have had diverging outcome in AD patients.   We therefore set to determine the molecular profile of SP and surrounding tissue following biologics based immunotherapy using two antibodies, gantenerumab and aducanumab, that have high binding affinity to different Aβ epitopes for investigating the antibody Aβ-clearing properties. We used two cohorts of the APPPS1-21 PD mouse model that overexpresses human mutated APP (KM670/671NL) and PSEN1 (L166P). After chronic treatment for 4-month with weekly dose (20 and 10 mg/kg gantenerumab or aducanumab, respectively), we investigated SP load in two brain regions using thioflavin-S staining. A significant reduction of SP was observed in hippocampus of aducanumab treated mice while only a partial reduction was observed in same region of gantenerumab treated mice compared to respective control (irrelevant IgG and vehicle (PBS) treated mice). To determine the molecular changes associated with the aducanumab treatment, we applied two mass spectrometry (MS) methods, matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization (MALDI) imaging, and microproteomics by combining laser microdissection and liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS). We microdissected three subregions, containing SP, SP penumbra (SPP1), and an additional penumbra (SPP2) to the SPP1 extract from the hippocampus of the treated mice.

### Sample Protocol
The coronal brain sections from aducanumab treated mice, were fixed in EtOH and stained with 1% thioflavin-S as reported in the previous sections. Microdissection was performed using the Arcturus Veritas LCM system. Three subgroups were collected from each treatment group; SP, SP penumbra 1 (SPP1) and a second penumbra of SPP1 (SPP2). Dissection was performed on three tissue sections per mouse (Table 1). Dissected material was collected onto CapsureTM Macro LCM caps (Thermo Scientific, Denmark).  The collected material was extracted from the cap surface by resuspending 10 µl digestion buffer (50mM triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma Aldrich), containing 0.01% ProteaseMaxTM; pH 8.5; Promega) six times on the surface, giving a final volume of 60 µl. The diluted material was collected in 0.5 ml protein Lobind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf) followed by storage at -20°C until further use.  Samples were adjusted to RT, sonicated for five minutes (DA968), heated for ten minutes at 95°C and cooled to RT. Samples were reduce and alkylated by adding 1:50 (v:v) tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (0.5M; Sigma Aldrich, Denmark) and 1:10 (v:v) 2-chloroacetamide (0.5M; Sigma Aldrich, Denmark) and incubating at 37°C for 30 minutes. 0.06 µg of trypsin/lys-C mix (Promega, Denmark) was added and incubated at 37°C O/N for protein digestion. 0.6 µl of 99% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo Scientific, Denmark) was added followed by incubation at 37°C for 30 minutes to end the digestion. Samples were then vacuum centrifuged (MiVac, GeneVac) and dry product was stored at -80C until MS analysis. The dried material was reconstituted in 12 µl loading buffer containing 2% acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, Denmark), 0.1% TFA and 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, Denmark), and treated with sonication (50W; 3 minutes; DA-968, DADI, Denmark) and centrifugation (14000G; 10 minutes; HERMLE Z160M, Ole Dich Instrumentmakers ApS). One µl from each sample  was collected in a tube to create a pooled high intensity sample (total volume 66 µl). The pooled sample was vacuum centrifuged and dry product was reconstituted in 25 µl loading buffer. All samples were randomly distributed in 96-well PCR plates (0.2 ml, low profile, skirted, Thermo Scientific). The pooled samples (n = 5 injections; 5 µl each) were distributed throughout the que to enable a reference that could be used to check for possible shifting in retention times during the MS analysis.      Data acquisition, processing and analysis. Peptides were separated using reverse phase liquid chromatography on an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) and analysed using a trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) quadrupole time of flight (QToF) mass spectrometer i.e. timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics) with an applied 1800 voltage. Samples were injected directly onto a C18 reversed phase column (IonOptics Aurora 25cm x 75µm, C18 1.6µm) kept at 50°C in a Sonation Column oven (Sonation GmbH, Germany, Biberach). Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water (v/v) and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade acetonitrile (v/v), respectively. Total run time was 85 min with a flow of 350nL/min and were according to the following windows: 0-25min at 2% B, 25-55min at 2-35% B, 55-60min at 35-95% B, 60-68min at 95% B, and 68-85min at 2% B. The timsTOF Pro was operated using default application TIMS-On and Parallel Accumulation – Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) positive mode. RF fields for funnel 1 and 2 were set to 300 and 200 Vpp, respectively. Trapped ion mobility separation was performed via scanning a mobility range of 0.6 – 1.6 1/k0. The runs were acquired with a 100 ms ramp and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per top10 with a cycle time of 1.32 sec. Signal-to-noise ratios was increased summation of individual TOF scans, and the target value was set to 20,000 a.u., and intensity threshold was set to 2,500 a.u.. The mass range for MS and MS/MS spectra were set to 100-1700 m/z and calibrated for mass accuracy and CCS prior to use.

### Data Protocol
Datafiles were processed in MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) (Ref) and matched against the reviewed UniProt mus musculus database (UP000000589; 17.025 entires) that was downloaded the 30th of October 2019. Mouse App and PSEN1 protein sequences were removed and human versions, including isoforms, were added (the human versions included the mutations associated with the APPPS1-21 model: APP, KM670/671NL; PSEN1, L166P). The following settings were used: Trypsin (specific, max missed = 3). LFQ min ratio count = 1. Modification used in protein quantification = oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) and deamidation (NQ). Match-between-runs function (match time window 7 min, match ion mobility window 0.05, alignment time window 20 min and alignment ion mobility = 1). Bioinformatic analysis was performed in Perseus (v1.6.10.0). In brief, reverse peptides and potential contaminants were removed followed by filtering for presence of unique peptides (>1). Technical replicates were averaged by median and log2 transformed. Venn-diagram were created on averaged groups (median and three minimum valid values per group). Filtering (minimum valid value of 50% in at least one group) and imputation was applied for principal component analysis (PCA). After ensuring normal distribution by histogram profiling, one-way ANOVA and Tukey's HSD (honestly significant difference) post-hoc test was applied to compare the three respective subgroups (minimum valid value filter = 50%; permutated-based FDR = 0.1%; p-value cut-off ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ad, Pasef, Proteomics, A-beta

### Affiliations
Translational Biomarkers, Aalborg University, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Translational Biomarkers, Aalborg University, Denmark


