### Accession
PXD025858

### Title
Glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase 2 (GFPT2) is upregulated in breast epithelial-mesenchymal transition and involved in oxidative stress regulation.

### Description
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a diverse and dynamic biological process which is involved in cancer progression. It is important for carcinoma cells during invasion and metastasis. EMT has been in the spotlight for cancer cells to disseminate to distant organs by gaining partial EMT phenotype. Cancer cells with partial EMT are believed to be more cancerogenic/invasive than cells that have undergone complete EMT. The proteomic changes that occur following EMT in breast epithelial cells and how these relate to changes in cellular metabolism are incompletely understood. To study metabolic reprogramming in different mesenchymal states, we analyzed proteomic changes following EMT in the breast epithelial cell model D492, with single-shot LFQ supported by SILAC proteomic approach. The D492 EMT cell model contains three isogenic cell lines: epithelial D492 cells, mesenchymal D492M cells, and partial mesenchymal, HER2 overexpressing, tumorigenic D492HER2 cells. Proteomic analysis positioned the D492 and D492M cells as basal-like while D492HER2 as claudin-low. Further comparison of the non-tumorigenic D492 and D492M cells to tumorigenic D492HER2 differentiated the metabolic EMT markers of migration from those of invasion. Among these were markers of glycan metabolism. We identified glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase [isomerizing] 2 (GFPT2) as the top dysregulated enzyme in glycan metabolism and found increased GFPT2 expression was a characteristic of claudin-low breast cancer. siRNA knockdown of GFPT2 influenced both cell growth and invasion in vitro and was accompanied by lowered flux through the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP). Knockdown of GFPT2 decreased cystathionine and sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase (SQOR) in the transsulfuration pathway which regulates H2S production and mitochondrial homeostasis. Moreover, GFPT2 expression was regulated by the level of reduced glutathione (GSH) and suppressed by the oxidative stress regulator, GSK3-β. Our results demonstrate that GFPT2 is a marker for oxidative stress. It is upregulated and controls growth and invasion in the D492 EMT model and is associated with claudin-low and poor prognosis in breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were with respective SILAC labels to get fully labeled cell populations for D492 (medium label, L-arginine-13C6 hydrochloride (Arg+6 Da), L-lysine-4,4,5,5-d4 hydrochloride (Lys+4 Da)), D492M (light label, L-arginine, L-lysine), and D492HER2 (heavy label, L-arginine-13C6,15N4 hydrochloride (Arg+10 Da), L-lysine-13C6,15N2 hydrochloride (Lys+8 Da)). Same procedures as described in the LFQ protein preparation section were conducted for SILAC protein extraction with lysis buffer supplemented with one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche) and one tablet of cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche). Proteins were solubilized in 150 µl of lysis buffer with 100 mM DTT. Protein extracts were heated at 95 ˚C, and DNA was shredded by sonication to reduce the viscosity of the lysates. Samples were then centrifuged and processed using FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) with some modifications. After lysates were passed through the filters (Nanosep, 10k, PALL Life Sciences), proteins were alkylated in 100 µl iodoacetamide (IAA) at a final concentration of 50 mM for 15 min, filters were washed four times with 200 µl 8M urea in Tris-HCl (100 mM, pH 8) then twice with 200 µl 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins on the filters were then digested twice at 30°C with trypsin (3.3 µg x2), first overnight and then for another 6h in 200 µl, ammonium bicarbonate at 40 mM. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 solid-phase extraction cartridge (Empore, Agilent technologies). Samples equivalent to 4 mg were dissolved in 200 μL of 10 mM ammonium formate buffer (pH 9.5), and peptides were fractionated using high pH RP chromatography. A C18 Column from Waters (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 4.6 X 150 mm, Ireland) with a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 4.6 X 20mm, Waters) was used on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Scientific). Buffers A and B used for fractionation consist, respectively of 10 mM ammonium formate in milliQ water (Buffer A) and 10 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (Buffer B), and both buffers were adjusted to pH 9.5 with ammonia. Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC autosampler (Thermo-Scientific) at 1 min intervals. Column and guard column were equilibrated with 2% buffer B for 20 min at a constant flow rate of 0.75 ml/min and a constant temperature of 21°C. Samples (185 µl) were loaded onto the column at 0.75 ml/min, and the separation gradient started from 2% buffer B to 5% B in 6 min, then from 5% B to 60% B within 55 min. Each peptide fraction was acidified immediately after elution from the column by adding 20 to 30 µl 10% formic acid to each tube in the autosampler. Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed using MagReSyn-TiIMAC beads (Resyn Biosciences) and Magnetic Rack (DynaMag-2, Life Technologies).  Analysis of peptides for total proteome and phospho-proteome was performed on a Velos-Pro orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following:  buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). All fractions from both total proteome and phosphor-proteome were reconstituted in 50 µl of 1% formic acid. An aliquot (10 μL of total proteome- 15 μL of phospho-proteome) of each fraction were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in buffer A for 19 min. The trap column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate, and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B within 124 min. The column was then washed for 20 min at 98% buffer B and re-equilibrated in 5% buffer B for 19 min. LTQ-Orbitap Velos Pro was operated in data-dependent positive ionization mode. The source voltage was set to 2.6 Kv, and the capillary temperature was 250°C. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800) in the velos pro-orbitrap followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (the threshold value was set at 5000, and the minimum injection time was set at 200 ms) in LTQ with collision-induced dissociation. The resolution of the Orbitrap Velos was set at 60,000 after the accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, with all unassigned charge states and singly charged species rejected. Multistage activation for neutral loss ions was activated only for analysis of phospho-peptides. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs are performed.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each experiment were collated into a single quantitated data set using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Andromeda search engine software (Cox et al., 2011). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other parameters used were: (i) variable modifications, methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, gln → pyro-glu, Phospho (STY); (ii) fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (iii) database: Uniprot-human_dec2017 (171216); (iv) heavy label: R10K8, medium label: R6K4; (v) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10ppm , ITMS- 0.6 Da; (vi) maximum peptide length, 6; (vii) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (viii) maximum of labelled amino acids, 3; and (ix) FDR, 1%. Peptide ratios were calculated for each arginine- and/or lysine-containing peptide as the peak area of labeled arginine/lysine divided by the peak area of non-labeled arginine/lysine for each single-scan mass spectrum. Peptide ratios for all arginine- and lysine-containing peptides sequenced for each protein were averaged. Data were normalized using 1/median ratio value for each identified protein group per labeled sample. Phospho peptides were normalized using the non-phospho protein 1/median values to correct for mixing errors and compared against the individual non-phospho protein ratio itself to correct for protein regulation interactions. Different parameters used in the iBAQ quantification were: (i) variable modifications- methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, Phospho (STY), deamidation (NQ); (ii) database: Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.pep.all (108481); (iii) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 20ppm, ITMS- 0.5Da.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer cells that have undergone partial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are believed to be more invasive than cells that have completed EMT. To study metabolic reprogramming in different mesenchymal states, we analyzed protein expression following EMT in the breast epithelial cell model D492 with single-shot LFQ supported by a SILAC proteomics approach. The D492 EMT cell model contains three cell lines: the epithelial D492&#xa0;cells, the mesenchymal D492M&#xa0;cells, and a partial mesenchymal, tumorigenic variant of D492 that overexpresses the oncogene HER2. The analysis classified the D492 and D492M&#xa0;cells as basal-like and D492HER2 as claudin-low. Comparative analysis of D492 and D492M to tumorigenic D492HER2 differentiated metabolic markers of migration from those of invasion. Glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase 2 (GFPT2) was one of the top dysregulated enzymes in D492HER2. Gene expression analysis of the cancer genome atlas showed that GFPT2 expression was a characteristic of claudin-low breast cancer. siRNA-mediated knockdown of GFPT2 influenced the EMT marker vimentin and both cell growth and invasion in&#xa0;vitro and was accompanied by lowered metabolic flux through the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP). Knockdown of GFPT2 decreased cystathionine and sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase (SQOR) in the transsulfuration pathway that regulates H<sub>2</sub>S production and mitochondrial homeostasis. Moreover, GFPT2 was within the regulation network of insulin and EGF, and its expression was regulated by reduced glutathione (GSH) and suppressed by the oxidative stress regulator GSK3-&#x3b2;. Our results demonstrate that GFPT2 controls growth and invasion in the D492 EMT model, is a marker for oxidative stress, and associated with poor prognosis in claudin-low breast cancer.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Proteomics, Gfpt2, Breast cancer, Metabolism, Emt, Claudin-low

### Affiliations
University of Iceland
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & The Center for Systems Biology University of Iceland Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik  Iceland.

### Submitter
Qiong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Óttar Rolfsson
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & The Center for Systems Biology University of Iceland Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik  Iceland.


