### Accession
PXD005933

### Title
Soybena response to waterlogging

### Description
Leaf is sensitive to environmental changes and exhibits specific responses to abiotic stress. To identify the response mechanism in soybean leaf under waterlogging stress, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique combined with polyethylene glycol fractionation was used.

### Sample Protocol
A portion (500 mg) of collected root and leaf samples was ground in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The obtained powder was transferred to a solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol [30]. The resulting mixture was vortexed, sonicated for 10 min, and then incubated for 1 h at -20 °C with vortexing every 15 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the obtained pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone before being dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator (Savant Instruments, Hickville, NY, USA). The sample was resuspended in lysis buffer consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine by vortexing for 1 h at 25 °C, and the resulting suspension was further centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 20 min at 25 °C. The supernatant was collected as crude extract. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay [31] with bovine serum albumin as the standard.  Proteins (100 µg) were enriched with methanol and chloroform to remove any detergent from the sample solutions [33]. Briefly, 400 µL methanol was added and mixed with each sample before the further addition of 100 µL chloroform and 300 µL water. After mixing, the samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min to achieve phase separation. The upper aqueous phase was discarded and 300 µL methanol was slowly added to the lower phase. The samples were further centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min, and the obtained pellets were dried, resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C, and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysine endopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 1:100 enzyme/protein concentrations at 37 °C for 16 h. The resulting tryptic peptides were acidified with formic acid (pH<3) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The resulting supernatant was collected and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS. Trypsinized peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm; Dionex) and were then separated by elution from the trap column using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. Peptide ions were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired over 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy [34]. The ions C24H39O4 (m/z 391.28429), C14H46NO7Si7 (m/z 536.16536), and C16H52NO8Si8 (m/z 610.18416) were used as lock mass standards. Values for the ion isolation window were set as follows: activation type was collision-induced dissociation, default charge state was 2, isolation width was 2.0 m/z, normalized collision energy was 35%, and activation time was 30,000. The values used for dynamic exclusion were as follows: repeat count was 2, repeat duration was 30 sec, exclusion list size was 500, exclusion duration was 90 sec, and exclusion mass width was ± 1.8 Da. The ten most intense precursor ions above the threshold value of 500 were selected for collision-induced fragmentation. The acquired MS spectra were used for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a soybean peptide database (54,175 sequences; Phytozome, version 9.1; http://www.phytozome.net/soybean) [35]. The parameters used in the Mascot searches were as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation/methionine oxidation was set as a fixed modification/variable modification, trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, 1 missed cleavage was allowed, peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.8 Da, and peptide charges were +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with the Mascot percolator to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification [36]. False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.0%. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p<0.05) were used for protein identification. The Mascot search results were exported in msf format for SIEVE analysis (version 2.2.49; Thermo Fisher Scientific) to compare the relative abundances of peptides and proteins between samples. For the analysis, the chromatographic peaks detected by MS were aligned and the peptide peaks were detected as a frame using a frame time width of 5 min and a frame m/z width of 10 ppm. All frames generated for the parent ions were scanned by MS/MS. Chromatographic peak areas within a single frame for each sample were compared and the ratios between samples in each frame were determined. The frames detected in the MS/MS scan were matched to the imported Mascot search results. The ratio of peptides between samples was determined from the relative variance-weighted average of the ratios in the frames that matched the peptides in the MS/MS spectrum. The peptide ratios were further integrated to determine the ratios of the corresponding proteins. In the differential analysis of protein abundance, total ion current was used for normalization. The minimum requirement for the identification of a protein was two matched peptides and a p value of <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Leaf is sensitive to environmental changes and exhibits specific responses to abiotic stress. To identify the response mechanism in soybean leaf under waterlogging stress, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique combined with polyethylene glycol fractionation was used. Attenuated photosynthesis by waterlogging stress in the leaf of soybean seedlings was indicated from proteomic results. Defensive mechanisms such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging was also recognized. Cluster analysis revealed that proteins that exhibit characteristic dynamics in response to waterlogging were mainly related to photosynthesis. Among the identified photorespiration-related proteins, the protein abundance and enzyme activity of hydroxypyruvate reductase were transiently increased in control plants, but were clearly decreased in response to waterlogging stress. These results suggest that waterlogging directly impairs photosynthesis and photorespiration. Furthermore, hydroxypyruvate reductase may be a critical enzyme controlling the rate of photorespiration.

### Keywords
Time dependency, Gel-free/label-free proteomics, Leaf, Waterlogging., Soybean

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
National Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, Tsukuba 305-8518, Japan

### Submitter
Akiko Hashiguchi

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
National Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization, Tsukuba 305-8518, Japan


