### Accession
PXD034098

### Title
    Cyclin A and Cks1 promote kinase consensus switching to non-proline directed CDK1 phosphorylation

### Description
Ordered protein phosphorylation by CDKs is a key mechanism for regulating the cell cycle. How temporal order is enforced in mammalian cells remains unclear. Using a fixed cell kinase assay and phosphoproteomics, we studied how CDK1 activity and non-catalytic CDK1 subunits contribute to the choice of substrate and phosphorylation site. Increases in CDK1 activity alters substrate choice, with intermediate and low sensitivity CDK1 substrates enriched in DNA replication and mitotic functions, respectively. This activity dependence was shared between Cyclin A- and Cyclin B-CDK1. Cks1 has a proteome-wide role as an enhancer of multisite CDK1 phosphorylation. Contrary to the model of CDK1 as an exclusively proline-directed kinase, we show that Cyclin A and Cks1 promote non-proline directed phosphorylation, preferably on sites with a +3 lysine residue. Indeed, 70% of cell cycle regulated phosphorylations, where the kinase carrying out this modification has not been identified, are non-proline directed CDK1 sites.

### Sample Protocol
In the kinase assay where phosphorylation by BC was compared to BCC described in Figure 1, the TMTpro labelled and phosphoenriched samples were analyzed using Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC-Coupled Tribrid Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded and separated using 75 μm × 50 cm EASY-Spray column with 2 μm sized particles, which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source and operated constantly at 50oC. Two mobile phases were used to separate the peptides: Phase A consisting of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and phase B consisting of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. A voltage of 2.2 kV was set when spraying this gradient of peptides into the front end of the mass spectrometer at ion capillary temperature of 280oC with a maximum cycle time of 3 secs. An MS1 scan at a resolution of 120,000 in Orbitrap detector was performed with a maximum injection time of 50 msec and the top 10 most abundant ions within a scan range of 380-1500 m/z based on the m/z signal with charge states of 2-6 from that scan were chosen for fragmentation in a HCD cell at 28%. This was followed by a rapid MS2 scan on a linear ion trap for peptide identification with a maximum injection time of 50 msec. To minimize the TMTpro reporter ion ratio distortion, 5 precursor fragments were selected for a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 method from 3 precursor dependent scans (McAlister et al., 2014). These fragments were further fragmented at 55% collision energy in a HCD chamber and analyzed using an Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 55,000 with a 90 msec maximum injection time. The samples from this experiment that were not phosphoenriched were analyzed for total proteome analysis using the same method, except that the MS2 fragmentation was performed in a CID cell at 35% energy.    In the experiment where AC and BC phosphorylation of fixed cells was compared (Figure 3), both total and phosphorylated peptides were loaded into a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å) attached to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS system in 0.1% TFA for 3 mins and then separated through analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å) in the following mobile phases: 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (Solvent B). Separation was carried out using a linear solvent gradient of 5% to 35% for 130 mins. The separation was carried out at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were then sprayed into the front end of a Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer through a nanoelectrospray ionizer with a cycle time of 3 secs and the MS1 data for precursor ions were acquired in an Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 120,000. The top 10 most abundant peaks with charge states of 2-6 were then fragmented in a HCD chamber at 28% and analyzed on a linear ion trap for peptides identification in a maximum injection time of 70 msec. A neutral loss that matches the molecular weight of the phosphate group (98 m/z) was set to identify phosphorylated peptides. SPS MS3 was then performed on the top 5 precursor fragments from 5 precursor dependent scans following HCD fragmentation (58%) in Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 50,000 with a maximum injection time of 110 msec.         Finally, phosphorylated and total samples that involved sequential reactions with phosphatase and CDK1 described in Figure 2 and those used for the analysis of CDK1 CCR sites described in Figure 4 were labelled with TMTpro and pooled into the same set and analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer. Peptides were initially trapped in PepMap nanoViper C18 column (100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) in 0.1% TFA for 5 mins then fractionated with analytical PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS system with a 5%-35% gradient for 130 mins. Peptides from the gradient were injected into the front end of a Tribrid Eclipse mass spectrometer through a nanoelctrospray ionizer in a 3 secs cycle time. Precurosr ions were detected in a master scan using Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 120,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 msecs. Precursor ions with top 10 signals and charge states of 2-7 were selected for fragmentation using HCD (28%) and analyzed by a linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 50 msecs. SPS-MS3 of 5 fragments from 5 precursor dependent runs were fragmented by HCD (55%) and analyzed by Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 with a maximum injection time of 90 msecs.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the assays on fixed cells were processed on MaxQuant version 1.6.14 (Cox and Mann, 2008). To normalize the data, reporter intensities for histone proteins detected in all TMTpro channels in the Protein Groups file were summed. Summed intensities were used to normalize the reporter ion intensities for sites in the corresponding TMTpro channels in the PhosphoSTY file to adjust for mixing error. The fold change in phosphorylation intensity for each site was then calculated by dividing the normalized reporter ion intensity of that site in the sample treated with the active recombinant kinase by its normalized reporter ion intensity in the control sample. Sites with at least 2-fold increase in their phosphorylation were considered in vitro phosphorylated. To perform clustering based on the phosphorylation pattern, the fold change for each site in a particular channel was scaled, i.e. (x – x̄) / s, where s is the sample standard deviation and x̄ is the sample mean. Data were then plotted on a heat map and sites with missing values were eliminated. K-means clustering was then used to segregate sites with similar phosphorylation changes into clusters. Regular expressions were used to grep sites with certain amino acid sequences, such as those with or without a +1 Proline or those without a +1 Proline but with a +3 Lysine. To perform motif enrichment analysis, sequences of each cluster were inserted into the online tool WebLogo and plots generated were used in the results section presented here (Crooks et al., 2004). For motif enrichment analysis with IceLogo, the sequences in the cluster of interest were inserted as the positive set and sites in either the rest of the heat map or in the rest of the phospho-proteome were inserted as the background (Colaert et al., 2009). To match the CCR sites with the in vitro data, a column containing the gene name, the phosphorylated residue, and the location of that residue in the protein was added to the two tables. Rows with matching data in that column in both tables were considered in vitro targets of CDK1 with CCR endogenous phosphorylation.       

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Cell cycle, Cdk1

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Tony Ly

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Ly
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression University of Dundee


