### Accession
PXD003897

### Title
LC-MS/MS of blue ring octopus and the southern sand octopus salivary gland extracts

### Description
This study provides comprehensive proteomic profiles from the venom producing posterior salivary glands of Octopus (superorder Octopodiformes) species. A combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach was used to identify 1,703 proteins from the posterior salivary gland of the southern blue ring octopus, Hapalochlaena maculosa and 1,300 proteins from the posterior salivary gland of the southern sand octopus, Octopus kaurna.  The two proteomes were broadly similar, clustering of proteins into orthogroups revealed 1,563 of 2,466 clusters were shared between species. Serine proteases were particularly diverse and abundant in both species. Other abundant proteins included a large number of secreted proteins many of which had no known conserved domains, or homology to proteins with known function.  Based on homology to known venom proteins, 23 putative toxins were identified in H. maculosa and 24 in O. kaurna. These toxins span nine protein families: CAP (cysteine rich secretory proteins, antigen 5, parthenogenesis related), chitinase, carboxylesterase, DNase, hyaluronidase, metalloprotease, phospholipase, serine protease and tachykinin. Serine proteases were responsible for 70.9% and 86.3% of putative toxin expression in H. maculosa and O. kaurna respectively as determined using intensity based absolute quantification measurements. Phylogenetic analysis of the putative toxin serine proteases revealed a similar suite of diverse proteins present in both species.   Venom composition H. maculosa and O. kaurna differ in several key aspects.  While O. kaurna expressed the proteinaceous neurotoxin, tachykinin, this was absent from H. maculosa, perhaps reflecting the acquisition of a potent non-proteinaceous neurotoxin, tetrodotoxin (TTX) produced by bacteria in the salivary glands of that species. Dispersal factors particularly hyaluronidase, were disproportionately high in H. maculosa.  Chitinase was abundant in both species and is believed to facilitate envenomation in chitinous/crustacean prey. Cephalopods represent a largely unexplored source of novel proteins distinct from all other venomous taxa and are of interest for further inquiry as novel proteinaceous toxins derived from venoms may contribute to pharmaceutical design.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Sampling - Animals were collected around 8pm on the 30th of April 2010 from St Leonards Pier, Melbourne, Australia (38°10'14.0"S 144°43'19.2"E) by Drs Mark Norman and Julian Finn (Museum Victoria) via SCUBA.  For each species, the posterior salivary gland was removed by dissection and stored individually in RNAlater (Qiagen) at -800C.   Protein extraction – Posterior salivary gland samples (one for each species) were defrosted gradually on ice and four tissue samples, each of 0.03g was taken. Each tissue sample was then homogenized in 500ul of Milli-Q water and 300ul of suspension buffer (RNAlater, Qiagen). 100ul of each homogenized sample was reduced for three hours with 100ul of 7M urea and 3M thiourea to break disulfide bonds.  Samples were then alkylated with 4ul of 1M iodoacetamide (IAA) at 230C for 20 minutes while protected from light to prevent disulfide bonds from reforming. To prevent side reactions from excess IAA and achieve the optimum pH for the digestive enzymes, samples were diluted with 1ml of 20nm Tris to achieve a pH of 7.5.  Samples were then digested with one of two endopeptidases, 2ul of trypsin or chymotrypsin over night at 370C. Liquid was evaporated using a Speedvac Concentrator SAVN SPD121P and the resulting precipitate suspended in 100ul of buffer (100ul of 10% trifluoroacetic acid [TFA] + 100ul (2% acetonitrile [ACN] +0.1% TFA). Peptides were concentrated and salts + contaminants removed using C18 Ziptip pipette tips in accordance with the ZIP TIP® PROTOCOL (for Millipore procedure, see http://www.millipore.com/catalogue/module/c5737). Peptides were eluted using 50ul of a buffer containing 85% ACN and 1% TFA and then evaporated until dry. Peptides were then resuspended in 20ul of Milli-Q water. This process resulted in four samples for each species, two trypsin and two chymotrypsin. Mass Spectrometry analysis - Samples were separated via a liquid chromatography (LC) column during a six-hour gradient. Ionization of samples was performed using electrospray ionization (ESI) then analyzed on an Orbitrap elite Mass Spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific). Two runs were performed for each of the O. kaurna samples and a single run was performed for each H. maculosa sample, comprising a total of eight runs for O. kaurna and four runs for H. maculosa. For O. kaurna this amounted to a total of 362 thousand and 240 thousand MS/MS spectra for Trypsin and Chymotrypsin respectively, and for H. maculosa a total of 219 thousand Tryptic and 196 thousand Chymotryptic spectra were obtained. The process was performed within the La Trobe Comprehensive Proteomic Platform.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis – For each species we processed all raw mass spectrometry data files using MaxQuant v1.5.0.30 (44) to calculate iBAQ (intensity based absolute quantitation) values.  As part of this process MaxQuant performs a Tandem MS database search with the Andromeda search engine. We used a proteogenomically constructed database for each species for these searches. Search parameters for Andromeda were as follows; variable modifications, Oxidation [M] and Acetyl [Protein N-term]; fixed modification, Carbamidomethyl [C]; two missed cleavages allowed; precursor mass tolerance, 20ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da. Peptide and protein probability false discovery rates were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
This study provides comprehensive proteomic profiles from the venom producing posterior salivary glands of octopus (superorder Octopodiformes) species. A combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach was used to identify 1703 proteins from the posterior salivary gland of the southern blue-ringed octopus, Hapalochlaena maculosa and 1300 proteins from the posterior salivary gland of the southern sand octopus, Octopus kaurna. The two proteomes were broadly similar; clustering of proteins into orthogroups revealed 937 that were shared between species. Serine proteases were particularly diverse and abundant in both species. Other abundant proteins included a large number of secreted proteins, many of which had no known conserved domains, or homology to proteins with known function. On the basis of homology to known venom proteins, 23 putative toxins were identified in H.&#xa0;maculosa and 24 in O.&#xa0;kaurna. These toxins span nine protein families: CAP (cysteine rich secretory proteins, antigen 5, parthenogenesis related), chitinase, carboxylesterase, DNase, hyaluronidase, metalloprotease, phospholipase, serine protease and tachykinin. Serine proteases were responsible for 70.9% and 86.3% of putative toxin expression in H.&#xa0;maculosa and O.&#xa0;kaurna, respectively, as determined using intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) measurements. Phylogenetic analysis of the putative toxin serine proteases revealed a similar suite of diverse proteins present in both species. Posterior salivary gland composition of H.&#xa0;maculosa and O.&#xa0;kaurna differ in several key aspects. While O.&#xa0;kaurna expressed the proteinaceous neurotoxin, tachykinin, this was absent from H.&#xa0;maculosa, perhaps reflecting the acquisition of a potent nonproteinaceous neurotoxin, tetrodotoxin (TTX) produced by bacteria in the salivary glands of that species. The dispersal factor, hyaluronidase was particularly abundant in H.&#xa0;maculosa. Chitinase was abundant in both species and is believed to facilitate envenomation in chitinous prey such as crustaceans. Cephalopods represent a largely unexplored source of novel proteins distinct from all other venomous taxa and are of interest for further inquiry, as novel proteinaceous toxins derived from venoms may contribute to pharmaceutical design.

### Keywords
Transcriptome, Proteome, Salivary gland, Octopus

### Affiliations
Department of Ecology, Environment and Evolution School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University, Bundoora Victoria, Australia
James Cook University

### Submitter
Ira Cooke

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Strugnell
Department of Ecology, Environment and Evolution School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University, Bundoora Victoria, Australia


