### Accession
PXD034901

### Title
Acetylation of p62 regulates base excision repair through interaction with APE1

### Description
p62, a well-known adaptor of autophagy, plays multiple functions in response to various stresses. Here, we report a function for p62 in base excision repair that is distinct from its known functions. Loss of p62 impairs BER capacity and increases the sensitivity of cancer cells to alkylating and oxidizing agents. In response to alkylative and oxidative damage, p62 is accumulated in the nucleus，acetylated by hMOF， deacetylated by SIRT7, and acetylated p62 is recruited to chromatin. The chromatin-enriched p62 directly interacts with APE1, a key enzyme of the BER pathway, and promotes its endonuclease activity, which facilitates BER and cell survival. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that p62 is a regulator of BER, and provide further rationale for targeting p62 as a cancer therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
p62-K264Q cells were harvested and lysed by NP40 lysis, and Flag-p62-K264Q was purified by Flag-M2 beads. p62-K264Q-interacting proteins were detected by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.1 was used to analysis data. Database: human database downloaded from Uniprot.org  Digestion enzyme: trypsin. Mass tolerance: 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Maximum missed cleavages: 2.

### Publication Abstract
p62, a well-known adaptor of autophagy, plays multiple functions in response to various stresses. Here, we report a function for p62 in base excision repair that is distinct from its known functions. Loss of p62 impairs base excision repair capacity and increases the sensitivity of cancer cells to alkylating and oxidizing agents. In response to alkylative and oxidative damage, p62 is accumulated in the nucleus,acetylated by hMOF,and deacetylated by SIRT7, and acetylated p62 is recruited to chromatin. The chromatin-enriched p62 directly interacts with APE1, a key enzyme of the BER pathway, and promotes its endonuclease activity, which facilitates BER and cell survival. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that p62 is a regulator of BER and provide further rationale for targeting p62 as a cancer therapeutic strategy.

### Keywords
Ape1, Acetylation, Sirt7, P62, Base excision repair, Hmof

### Affiliations
Peking University Health Science Center
Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and Cell Function, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 100191, China.

### Submitter
Meiting Li

### Lab Head
Dr Haiying Wang
Beijing Key Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and Cell Function, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 100191, China.


