### Accession
PXD009325

### Title
Plasma proteomic profiling one year post-delivery of women with pre-eclampsia

### Description
The aim of this study was to examine the global plasma proteomic profiole of women with pre-eclampsia one year post-delivery

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analysed using threee dimensional LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submirted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy search using Sequest

### Publication Abstract
Epidemiological data suggest that pre-eclampsia (PE) is associated with an increased risk of post-delivery metabolic dysregulation. The aim of the present case-control observational study was to examine the global plasma proteomic profile 1 year postpartum in women who developed PE during pregnancy (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) compared to controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), in order to identify a novel predictive marker linking PE with long-term metabolic imbalance. Key findings were verified with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in a separate cohort (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17 women with PE and n&#x2009;=&#x2009;43 controls). One hundred and seventy-two proteins were differentially expressed in the PE vs. control groups. Gene ontology analysis showed that Inflammatory|Immune responses, Blood coagulation and Metabolism were significantly enriched terms. CD14, mapping to the inflammatory response protein network, was selected for verification based on bibliographic evidence. ELISA measurements showed CD14 to be significantly increased 1 year postpartum in women with PE during pregnancy compared to controls [PE group (median&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD): 296.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;113.6; control group (median&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD): 128.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;98.5; Mann-Whitney U test p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0078]. Overall, the identified proteins could provide insight into the long-term disease risk among women with PE during pregnancy and highlight the need for their postpartum monitoring. CD14 could be examined in larger cohorts as a predictive marker of insulin resistance and type II diabetes mellitus among women with PE.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Preeclampsia, Plasma proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
University of Southampton


