### Accession
PXD034542

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis reveals changes in primary hepatocytes following Wdr6 knockout

### Description
WDR6 was a scaffolding/ regulatory protein that interacts with diverse signaling molecules. Our findings showed that WDR6 might be involved in post-translational modifications (PTMs). Then we performed transcriptomic analysis of primary hepatocytes from WDR6-WKO and control mice.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, the primary hepatocyte were lysed with lysis buffer supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Bimake) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Shenergy Biocolor Bioscience) and precipitated with 4 × volumes of −20 °C acetone for 4 h. Then precipitated protein was collected by centrifuging for 5 min at 4500 g (4 °C), pellets washed twice with −20 °C 80% acetone, and air-dried upside down for ~10 min at RT or until no residual acetone odor remained. Pellets were resuspended in 8 M carbamide. Then protein concentration was determined with a BCA assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then samples were digested with trypsin. For phosphopeptide enrichment, digested peptide mixtures were incubated with an IMAC microsphere suspension. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. Then the IMAC microspheres were washed. Finally, the supernatant was collected and lyophilized for the LC-MS/MS. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column. Peptides were separated and were subjected to Capillary source followed by the tims-TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
For database search, the resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus swissprot database (17045 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%. phosphoproteomics bioinformatics data analysis was then performed.

### Publication Abstract
Under normal conditions, insulin promotes hepatic de novo lipogenesis (DNL). However, during insulin resistance (IR), when insulin signalling is blunted and accompanied by hyperinsulinaemia, the promotion of hepatic DNL continues unabated and hepatic steatosis increases. Here, we show that WD40 repeat-containing protein 6 (WDR6) promotes hepatic DNL during IR. Mechanistically, WDR6 interacts with the beta-type catalytic subunit of serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 1 (PPP1CB) to facilitate PPP1CB dephosphorylation at Thr316, which subsequently enhances fatty acid synthases transcription through DNA-dependent protein kinase and upstream stimulatory factor 1. Using molecular dynamics simulation analysis, we find a small natural compound, XLIX, that inhibits the interaction of WDR6 with PPP1CB, thus reducing DNL in IR states. Together, these results reveal WDR6 as a promising target for the treatment of hepatic steatosis.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Primary hepatocytes, Mice

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University

### Submitter
Zhenyu Yao

### Lab Head
Dr Jiajun Zhao
Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University


