### Accession
PXD033429

### Title
Global bottom-up analysis of wild type and RBM20 knock out rat hearts by LC-TIMS-MSMS

### Description
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major risk factor for developing heart failure and is often associated with an increased risk for life-threatening arrhythmia. Although numerous causal genes for DCM have been identified, RNA binding motif 20 (RBM20) remains one of the few splicing factors that, when mutated or genetically ablated, leads to the development of DCM. In this study we sought to identify changes in the cardiac proteome in RBM20 deficient rat hearts using global quantitative proteomics to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms precipitating the development of DCM secondary to RBM20 loss. Our analysis identified changes in titin interacting proteins, as well as mitochondrial enzymes, implicating activation of pathological hypertrophy and mitochondrial dysfunction in DCM development in RBM20 deficient rats. Collectively, our findings provide the first look into changes in the cardiac proteome associated with genetic ablation of RBM20.

### Sample Protocol
Chemicals and reagents All reagents were purchased from Millipore Sigma unless otherwise noted. HPLC grade water, formic acid, and acetonitrile were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ). 4-Hexylphenylazosulfonate (Azo) was synthesized in-house as previously described.14,15  Animals and tissue collection  Wild type (WT) and RBM20 homozygous knockout (KO) rats (Rattus norvegics) were used in this study. RBM20 KO rats have been described previously.6,16 All rats were crosses of Sprague-Dawley (SD) × Brown Norway (BN) (all strains were originally obtained from Harlan Sprague Dawley, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Animals were maintained on a standard rat chow diet. All procedures involving animals were carried out following the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the National Institutes of Health and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. WT and KO rats (n = 8 each) were sacrificed at three weeks-of-age, hearts were excised, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 oC for later use.  Protein extraction Protein extracted from approximately 120 mg of ventricular tissue using the procedure developed by Aballo et al17 to fit the scale used by Jin et al. Briefly, tissue was washed twice in 2mL of Mg2+/Ca2+-free DPBS containing 1× HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). After washing, tissues were homogenized in 1.5 mL of lysis buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM L-methionine, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1x HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor) using a Pro 200 electronic homogenizer from Pro Scientific Inc. (Oxford, CT, USA). After initial homogenization, 1.5 mL of Azo14 extraction buffer (0.2% w/v Azo, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM L-methionine, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1x HALT protease) was added and samples were homogenized a second time. Homogenates were centrifuged at 21,100 × g for 30 min (4 °C) and the supernatants were recovered. The recovered protein extracts were analyzed by SDS-PAGE to assess the reproducibility of protein extraction and digested for liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis. Protein digestion and LC- MS/MS analysis The concentration of protein extracts was determined using the Bradford protein assay, digesting 100 µg of total protein from each sample using the one-hour digestion procedure employed by Aballo et al. Resulting peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 Tips from Thermo Fisher (Waltham, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were evaporated to dryness under vacuum then reconstituted in mobile phase A (0.2% Formic acid in water). Samples were then normalized to 0.2 mg/mL using a nanoDrop Onec from Thermo Fisher Scientific  to determine peptide concentration through A205 response. Peptides were separated by reverse phase LC (RPLC) using a Bruker nanoElute with an IonOpticks Aurora CSI C18 column, injecting 1 µL and using a 90 minute stepped gradient of 5-5-65-95-100-5-5% mobile phase B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 0-5-65-95-105-106-120 minutes at 55 °C. Detection of separated peptides was performed though online coupling with a Bruker timsTOF Pro using data-dependent analysis to select the top-10 precursor intensities and fragment by parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 to search all reviewed canonical and isoform data for Rattus norvegicus in Uniprot (downloaded January 12, 2021) and quantify protein expression by label free quantitation (LFQ). MaxQuant results were processed using both LFQ analyst18 and Perseus v1.6.14.0.19 Significance testing in Perseus was performed using a two-tailed student’s T-test with p-value truncation and threshold p-value of 0.05.  Protein network analysis of differentially expressed proteins was performed using String 11.0 and Cytoscape 3.8.2.

### Publication Abstract
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major risk factor for developing heart failure and is often associated with an increased risk for life-threatening arrhythmia. Although numerous causal genes for DCM have been identified, RNA binding motif protein 20 (<i>Rbm20</i>) remains one of the few splicing factors that, when mutated or genetically ablated, leads to the development of DCM. In this study we sought to identify changes in the cardiac proteome in <i>Rbm20</i> knockout (KO) rat hearts using global quantitative proteomics to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms precipitating the development of DCM in these rats. Our analysis identified changes in titin-interacting proteins involved in mechanical stretch-based signaling, as well as mitochondrial enzymes, which suggests that activation of pathological hypertrophy and altered mitochondrial metabolism and/or dysfunction, among other changes, contribute to the development of DCM in <i>Rbm20</i> KO rats. Collectively, our findings provide the first report on changes in the cardiac proteome associated with genetic ablation of <i>Rbm20</i>.

### Keywords
Heart, Timstof pro, Rat, Rbm20

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Eli Larson

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison


