### Accession
PXD017227

### Title
Novel manifestations of immune dysregulation and granule defects in gray platelet syndrome

### Description
Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is a rare inherited bleeding disorder characterized by absence of platelet ɑ-granules and pathogenic variants in NBEAL2.   To discern the spectrum of pathological features, we obtained genotype and phenotype data from 47 GPS patients and performed RNA sequencing and protein mass spectrometry on blood cells and plasma in a subset of these patients. We identified 37 novel GPS-causing variants in NBEAL2.   There were widespread differences in the transcriptome and proteome of GPS platelets, neutrophils, monocytes, and CD4-lymphocytes. Proteins less abundant in these cells were enriched for constituents of granules, supporting a role for Nbeal2 in the function of these organelles across a wide range of blood cells.   Finally, we show that the plasma proteome of GPS patients has increased levels of proteins associated with inflammation and immune response, 27% of which are synthesized outside of the hematopoietic system, predominantly in the liver.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were depleted then reduced/alkylated prior to digestion with Trypsin. Peptide samples were then eluted in microflow over a 2 hour reversed phase gradient

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry files were searched using openSWATH and filtered using pyProphet. Downstream analysis was performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is a rare recessive disorder caused by biallelic variants in NBEAL2 and characterized by bleeding symptoms, the absence of platelet &#x3b1;-granules, splenomegaly, and bone marrow (BM) fibrosis. Due to the rarity of GPS, it has been difficult to fully understand the pathogenic processes that lead to these clinical sequelae. To discern the spectrum of pathologic features, we performed a detailed clinical genotypic and phenotypic study of 47 patients with GPS and identified 32 new etiologic variants in NBEAL2. The GPS patient cohort exhibited known phenotypes, including macrothrombocytopenia, BM fibrosis, megakaryocyte emperipolesis of neutrophils, splenomegaly, and elevated serum vitamin B12 levels. Novel clinical phenotypes were also observed, including reduced leukocyte counts and increased presence of autoimmune disease and positive autoantibodies. There were widespread differences in the transcriptome and proteome of GPS platelets, neutrophils, monocytes, and CD4 lymphocytes. Proteins less abundant in these cells were enriched for constituents of granules, supporting a role for Nbeal2 in the function of these organelles across a wide range of blood cells. Proteomic analysis of GPS plasma showed increased levels of proteins associated with inflammation and immune response. One-quarter of plasma proteins increased in GPS are known to be synthesized outside of hematopoietic cells, predominantly in the liver. In summary, our data show that, in addition to the well-described platelet defects in GPS, there are immune defects. The abnormal immune cells may be the drivers of systemic abnormalities such as autoimmune disease.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Gps

### Affiliations
Stoller Biomarker Discovery Centre, University of Manchester, United kingdom
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Bethany Geary

### Lab Head
Dr Bethany Geary
Stoller Biomarker Discovery Centre, University of Manchester, United kingdom


