### Accession
PXD027367

### Title
Qualitative and quantitative proteomics informed by transcriptomics insight into the proteome of Ornithodoros erraticus adult tick saliva.

### Description
Anti-tick vaccines have proved to be an effective and sustainable method for the control of tick infestations and tick-borne diseases with clear advantages over the application of chemical acaricides (Šmit and Postma, 2016; de la Fuente, 2018; Ndawula and Tabor, 2020). Moreover, the efficacy of acaricide application against Ornithodoros ticks is seriously limited owing to their endophilic/nidicolous life style, which make these ticks less accessible to the chemical acaricides (Astigaraga et al., 1995). Success in tick vaccine development is largely dependent on identification of new and highly protective tick antigens. Searching of new candidate protective antigens is currently being approached among tick molecules that play important biological functions at the tick-host interface, and more precisely among the salivary and intestinal proteins involved in biological processes specifically evolved by ticks to adapt to haematophagy (de la Fuente et al., 2016; Oleaga et al., 2021; Pérez-Sánchez et al., 2021).  Accordingly, next-generation sequencing (NGS) and high-throughput proteomics technologies are been used to explore the transcriptome and proteome of the salivary glands/saliva and midguts of an increasing number of tick species and obtain the corresponding sialomes and mialomes (Chmelař et al., 2016; Almeida-Martins  et al., 2020; Mans et al., 2020; Oleaga et al., 2021). These studies have identified a wealth of tick molecules related to tick haematophagy, tick-host interplay and pathogen transmission, which can then be scrutinized and filtered in vaccinomics pipelines for selecting candidate protective antigens (Chmelař et al., 2016; Maruyama et al., 2017; Antunes et al., 2018; de la Fuente et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2019; Couto et al., 2021). Similarly, we were also interested in characterizing the O. erraticus sialome. As far as O. erraticus saliva must contain all the bioactive molecules that the tick need to successfully feed, decoding its composition will lead to the discovery of new antigen targets for developing vaccines for the control and prevention of O. erraticus infestations and the diseases it transmits. Accordingly, the objective of the present work was to obtain the proteome of the saliva of O. erraticus adult ticks. For this, we have used a proteomics informed by transcriptomics approach to analyse female and male saliva separately using two different mass spectrometry approaches: liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, and Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical fragment ion spectra Mass Spectrometry (SWATH MS). SWATH MS is a specific variant of data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods that combines deep proteome coverage capabilities with quantitative consistency and accuracy (Ludwig et al., 2018). Here we reported the identification of 387 non-redundant proteins in the saliva of O. erraticus adult ticks as well as a qualitative and quantitative comparison of the saliva protein composition between both sexes. The integration of O. erraticus sialoproteomic and sialotranscriptomic datasets facilitate a better understanding of the physiology of feeding in O. erraticus and will drive the discovery of new and more effective antigen targets for development of anti-tick vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
The O. erraticus ticks were obtained from the laboratory colony of IRNASA-CSIC (Salamanca, Spain), which was initiated from specimens captured in nature in the Salamanca Province (Spain) in the 1980s. The colony is kept at 28 °C, 85% relative humidity, 12-h light/12-h dark photoperiod and regularly fed on New Zealand white rabbits.  Saliva samples were collected separately from newly moulted 3-month-old female and male ticks after stimulation of secretion with 1% pilocarpine following the protocol described by Diaz-Martín et al. (2013) with minor modifications. Three replicated biological saliva samples from each sex were prepared, each containing the secretion of 20 female ticks/sample (F1, F2, F3) and 30 male ticks/sample (M1, M2, M3). Saliva samples were centrifuged 20 min at 12.000 ×g and 4 °C, and the supernatants were recovered and stored at -20 °C. Protein concentration was measured as a function of absorbance at 280 nm in the NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher), and sample reproducibility inside and between sexes was checked by SDS-PAGE in silver-stained 5–20% gradient gels following standard methods  Salivary proteins were in-solution digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) as follows. Ten micrograms of each saliva sample (F1, F2, F3, M1, M2 and M3) were reduced by incubating with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) to a final volume of 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma) for 20 min at 60 °C. Then, proteins were alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) (Sigma) to a final volume of 110 µl 50 mM ABC for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess of IAM was quenched by adding 100 µl of 20 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC and incubating for 1h at 37 °C. After that, each sample was added 400 ng of trypsin in a final volume of 218 µl and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped with 20 µL of 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Fisher Scientific) in water. The mixtures were dried in a rotatory evaporator and dissolved in a final volume of 40 µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA.  SWATH MS data for both female and male saliva samples were acquired in a microESI qQTOF mass spectrometer (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The samples were acquired in a random order to avoid bias in the analysis. Five µl of each digested sample were loaded by a 425 Ekspert  nanoLC (Eksigent) onto a trap column (LC Column, 12 nm, 3 µ Triart-C18, 0.5 x 5.0 mm; YMC) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 10 µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, Luna Omega 3 µm Polar C18, 150 x 0.3 mm, Capillary Phenomenex) equilibrated in 3% ACN 0.1% FA. Peptide elution was performed with a linear gradient of 3-35% B in A for 45 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  Sample was ionized in a Source Type: Optiflow 1-50uL Micro applying 4.5 kV to the spray emitter. Analysis was carried out in a data-independent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 400–1250 m/z for 250 ms. 100 variable windows from 400 to 1250 m/z were acquired throughout the experiment. The total cycle time was 2.79 secs. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode.

### Data Protocol
The  spectral library was used as a database for SWATH analysis and peaks from SWATH runs were extracted by Peak View 2.2 software (Sciex) with a peptide confidence threshold of 95% and False Discovery Rate (FDR) lower than 1%. A maximum of 20 peptides per protein were selected for the quantitation. And, 6 transitions were quantified per peptide. Quantitated proteins areas were normalized by total areas sum for differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label free quantitaion, Swath, Lc msms, Ornithodoros erraticus proteome, Dia

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Parasitology Laboratory, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology (IRNASA, CSIC). Cordel de Merinas, 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Pérez-Sánchez
Parasitology Laboratory, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology (IRNASA, CSIC). Cordel de Merinas, 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain.


