### Accession
PXD040103

### Title
Optimising complexome profiling for systematic exploration of DNA-/RNA-protein complexes in human mitochondria

### Description
Here we aimed to improve native gel electrophoresis-based complexome profiling (CP) method for examination of mitochondrial (mt)DNA-/RNA-protein complexes. We compared the performance of Blue Native PAGE (BNE) and high resolution Clear Native PAGE (hrCNE). We found that hrCNE much better preserves the integrity of mtDNA-/RNA-protein complexes.To further improve the detection of mtDNA-binding proteins, we treated solubilized mitochondrial samples with DNase I prior to separation on hrCNE or BNE. To characterize the detected by hrCNE mtRNA-protein complexes, we performed CP with samples treated with RNase A. To validate the utility of the method, we performed CP using mitochondria isolated from cells treated with ethidium bromide as well as from cells recovering after this treatment. Our study not only helps to validate and unveil proteins involved in mitochondrial DNA- and RNA-related processes, but also offers a convenient and systematic way for analysing these interactions that can be used equally well for the investigation of the nucleus and other DNA-/RNA-containing cell compartments.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were purified from human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells (ATCC; CRL-1573). For mtDNA replication and transcription inhibition experiment, the cells were treated with 30 ng/ml of ethidium bromide (EtBr) for 3 days (72 hours). To reinitiate mitochondrial DNA and RNA synthesis, EtBr was washed out from the cell media and cells were incubated for another 24 hours. Freshly obtained mitochondrial pellets (200 µg protein) were solubilized with water-soluble digitonin (8 g/g protein; SERVA) in ice-cold solubilization buffer (50 mM NaCl, 2 mM 6-aminohexanoic acid, 50 mM imidazole/HCl, pH 7.0, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2) in a total volume of 47 µl. When needed, the solubilization mixture was supplemented with 150 U of DNase I (Invitrogen; 18047019) or a combination of DNase I and 5 µg of RNase A (Thermo Scientific; EN0531). For BNE, MgCl2 and CaCl2 were omitted from the solubilization buffer. All the solubilized samples were incubated at 10 °C for one hour. The lysates were supplemented with 2.5 mM EDTA to chelate the divalent cations and further cleared by centrifugation (22,000 x g; 20 min; 4 °C). The supernatants were recovered and supplemented with either 7 µl of Coomassie-blue loading buffer (35% glycerol, 0.15 M 6-aminohexanoic acid, 1.5% Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (SERVA)) for BNE or 5 µl of Ponceau loading buffer (50% glycerol, 0.1% Ponceau S) for high-resolution clear native electrophoresis (hrCNE).  The samples were separated by either blue or high-resolution clear native electrophoresis using 3-16% polyacrylamide gradient gels according to the published protocols. After electrophoresis, the gels were fixed for 1 h (50% methanol, 10% acetic acid, 100 mM ammonium acetate), stained with Coomassie blue for 15 min, and destained with 10% acetic acid for 1 h, followed by overnight incubation in water. Each gel lane was cut into 56 slices starting from the bottom. Each slice was diced into small pieces and transferred into a 96-well filter microplate (Millipore; MABVN1250) attached to a liquid-collection plate. The gel pieces were incubated several times with this solution and shaken until the Coomassie-blue dye was fully removed. For in-gel trypsin digestion, the gel pieces were first incubated with 120 µl of dithiothreitol (10 mM in 50 mM ABC; 60 min; shaking; RT), followed by alkylation with 120 µl of chloroacetamide (30 mM in 50 mM ABC; 45 min; shaking in the dark; RT). The gel pieces were dehydrated in complete destaining solution for 30 min and then dried for 45 min in a Clean Air® horizontal laminar flow cabinet. Then, 20 μl of 5 ng/μl sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; V5111) prepared in 50 mM ABC supplemented with 1 mM CaCl2 were added to the gel pieces and incubated 30 min at 4 °C. Lastly, 50 μl of 50 mM ABC were added to the wells and the gel pieces were incubated overnight at 37 °C in a sealed bag to minimize evaporation.  Next, the peptide-containing solutions were collected onto 96-well PCR microplates by centrifugation. The gel pieces were additionally incubated with 50 μl of 30% acetonitrile (ACN), 3% formic acid (FA) (30 min; shaking; RT) and the remaining peptides were collected in the same microplates. The peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator plus (Eppendorf) and resuspended in 20 μl of 5% ACN, 0.5% FA. The samples were stored at -20 °C if not immediately analysed. Resultant peptides (3 μl) were analysed by tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy nLC1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using emitter columns (15 cm length x 100 μm ID x 360 μm OD x 15 μm orifice tip; MS Wil/CoAnn Technologies; ICT015100015-5) filled with ReproSilPur C18-AQ reverse-phase beads of 3 μm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Dr. Maisch GmbH; r13.aq) on 30 min linear gradients of 5-35% ACN/0.1% FA, followed by 35-80% gradient of ACN/0.1% FA (5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and a final column wash with 90% ACN (5 min) at 600 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode switching automatically between MS and data-dependent MS/MS of the 20 most abundant precursor ions. Full-scan MS mode (400-1400 m/z) was set at a resolution of 70,000 m/Δm with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1×106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Selected ions for MS/MS were analysed with a resolution of 17,500 m/Δm, AGC target 1×105; maximum injection time 50 ms; precursor isolation window 4.0 m/z. The normalized collision energy was set to 30% at a dynamic exclusion window of 30 s. dd-Settings: Minimum AGC of 1×103, intensity threshold 2×104, peptide match preferred and only precursor ions of charges 2, 3 and 4 were selected for collision-induced dissociation. A lock mass ion (m/z= 445.12) was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files from all the analysed slices for complexome profiling were processed with MaxQuant v.2.0.3. The identified tryptic peptides were matched to the human UniProt reference proteome (ID UP000005640, release date: 28/04/2021). The sequences of known contaminants were added to the search. The default parameters were kept as default with the following changes: enabled “Match between runs” with a 2-minute time window; minimal peptide length = 6, variable modifications = Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), fixed modification = Carbamidomethylation (C); up to two missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed. To quantify the protein abundances for complexome profiling analysis, the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were calculated.  Moreover, to quantify the changes in total protein abundance between untreated and DNase-treated samples, all the raw MS data files from their three respective replicates were re-analysed with MaxQuant v2.0.3.0. For each profile, the 56 individual data files were set as 56 fractions of the given replicate. The search parameters were the same as aforementioned, except that deamidation (NQ) was included as an extra variable modification and calculation of label-free quantification (LFQ) values was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Complexome profiling (CP) is a powerful tool for systematic investigation of protein interactors that has been primarily applied to study the composition and dynamics of mitochondrial protein complexes. Here, we further optimized this method to extend its application to survey mitochondrial DNA- and RNA-interacting protein complexes. We established that high-resolution clear native gel electrophoresis (hrCNE) is a better alternative to preserve DNA- and RNA-protein interactions that are otherwise disrupted when samples are separated by the widely used blue native gel electrophoresis (BNE). In combination with enzymatic digestion of DNA, our CP approach improved the identification of a wide range of protein interactors of the mitochondrial gene expression system without compromising the detection of other multiprotein complexes. The utility of this approach was particularly demonstrated by analysing the complexome changes in human mitochondria with impaired gene expression after transient, chemically induced mitochondrial DNA depletion. Effects of RNase on mitochondrial protein complexes were also evaluated and discussed. Overall, our adaptations significantly improved the identification of mitochondrial DNA- and RNA-protein interactions by CP, thereby unlocking the comprehensive analysis of a near-complete mitochondrial complexome in a single experiment.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mtdna, Complexome profiling, Rna-protein complex, Native gel electrophoresis, Dna-protein complex, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Radboudumc, Department of Paediatrics
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Alisa Potter

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes N. Spelbrink
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


