### Accession
PXD028865

### Title
Unbiased in vivo exploration of nuclear bodies-enhanced sumoylation reveals that PML orchestrates embryonic stem cell fate

### Description
Membrane-less organelles are condensates formed by phase separation whose functions often remain enigmatic. Upon oxidative stress, PML scaffolds Nuclear Bodies (NBs) to regulate senescence or metabolic adaptation, but their role in pluripotency remains elusive. Here we establish that PML is required for basal SUMO2/3 conjugation in mESCs and oxidative stress-driven sumoylation in mESCs or in vivo. PML NBs create an oxidationprotective environment for UBC9-driven SUMO2/3 conjugation of PML partners, often followed by their poly-ubiquitination and degradation. Differential in vivo proteomics identified several members of the KAP1 complex as PML NB-dependent SUMO2-targets. The latter drives functional activation of this key epigenetic repressor. Accordingly, Pml-/- mESCs reexpress transposable elements and display features of totipotent-like cells, a process further enforced by PML-controlled SUMO2-conjugation of DPPA2. Finally, PML is required for adaptive stress responses in mESCs. Collectively, PML orchestrates mESC fate through SUMO2-conjugation of key transcriptional or epigenetic regulators, raising new mechanistic hypotheses about PML roles in normal or cancer stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
For large-scale purification of His10-SUMO2 conjugates, leukemic mouse spleens (with >70% of GFP+ leukemic cells) were dissociated in culture medium and washed in PBS. His10- SUMO2 conjugates were purified as described in25,74. Briefly, cells were either lysed with Laemmli buffer as inputs or stored as dry frozen pellets. Guanidine lysis buffer (above) was added to frozen pellets for sonication and protein concentration was assessed using BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific, v23225). Lysates were equalized for protein concentration and incubated with NiNTA agarose beads (Qiagen, #L30210) for O/N. Beads were washed using buffer 1 with 5 mM b-mercaptoethanol and 0.1% de Triton X-100), buffer 2 (8 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 8.0, 10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM imidazole pH 8.0, 5 mM de b-mercaptoethanol and 0.1% Triton X-100), buffer 3 (8 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 6.3, 10 mM Tris pH 6.3, 10 mM imidazole pH 7.0 and 5 mM de bmercaptoethanol) and with buffer 3 without imidazole. Samples were eluted in 7 M urea, 100 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, 10 mM Tris pH 7.0 and 500 mM imidazole pH 7.0. Eluates were passed through pre-washed 0.45 um filter columns (Millipore) to remove any residual beads and subsequently concentrated on pre-washed 100kDa cut off filters (Sartorius). Sample volume were equalized to 50 uL (5% of the samples were used as pulldown control for Westen blots analysis) and digested by LysC (Wako, #129-02541) and Trypsin (Promega, # V5111), and acidified using 2% TCA (Sigma, # T1647). Peptide samples were load on C18 StageTips and dried using vacuum.  Both His10-SUMO conjugates were processed by mass spectrometry analyses in Alfred Vertegaal laboratory (LUMC, Netherland). All the experiments were performed on an EASYnLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source as previously described17. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an innerdiameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The gradient length was 120 minutes from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute. For the samples from cohort 2 and 3, two technical repeats were performed operating the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 5 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher- Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 17,500 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 250 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 20 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis. For the cohort 1, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 7 method, two independent technical repeats were performed. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 35,000 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 120 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were further analysed in MaxQuant v 1.6.14 according to Tyanova et al(1) using standard settings with the following modifications. Maximum missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 3. Searches were performed against an in silico digested database from the mouse proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 22nd April 2021). Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications with a maximum of 3. Label-free quantification was activated, including calculation of iBAQ and not enabling Fast LFQ. The match between runs feature was activated with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Embryonic stem cells, Pml, Cancer

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands


