### Accession
PXD016316

### Title
Transgelin silencing induces different processes in differrent breast cancer cell lines

### Description
Transgelin is a protein which has been described as a marker of several cancers. Interestingly, the literature describes both up- and down-regulation of transgelin in the tumor in comparison with non-tumor tissue. The mechanisms of transgelin function in cancer are considerably unknown. Transgelin is abundant especially in smooth muscle cells. It is associated with actin stress fibers. These contractile structures participate among others in cell motility, adhesion or morphology. We focused on transgelin function in breast cancer. Initially, we studied transgelin role in cell migration in the breast cancer cell lines BT 549 and PMC 42. Using xCELLigence system we reached opposite results in two cell lines. Transgelin silencing increased and decreased migration of PMC 42 and BT 549 cells, respectively. To further clarify these contradictory results, we performed an experiment to quantify proteomic changes after transgelin silencing in these two cell lines using quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ-2DLC-MS/MS). Our results confirmed transgelin function in the migration of BT 549 cells and suggested transgelin role in apoptosis and small molecule biochemistry in PMC 42 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative study of proteome changes after transgelin silencing in the cells PMC 42 and BT 549 human breast cancer cells were transfected with transgelin specific or non-specific control siRNA. Each cell line was transfected in duplicate. Twenty-two hours after the transfection, the cells were harvested in cold PBS and lysed in 0.5 M TEAB with 0.05 % SDS. Cell lysates were subjected to needle sonication (Bandelin 2200 Ultrasonic homogenizer, Bandelin, Germany, 30 x 0.1 s pulses at 50 W), kept on ice for 1 h and centrifugated 14000 g for 20 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was quantified using RC-DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, USA) according to manufacturer’s instruction. The lysates (100g of total protein) were reduced by 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated by 10 mM s-methylmethanethiosulfonate both in 8 M urea in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and digested with trypsin (37°C for 16 h, trypsin to protein ratio 1:30) using FASP as previously described [17]. The labeling with iTRAQ 8-plex (ABSCIEX, Darmstadt, Germany) was performed at RT for 2 h according to manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were then mixed, dried in centrifugal vacuum concentrator and fractionated using HILIC as previously described [18], 14 fractions were collected in a peak-dependent manner.   LC-MS/MS analysis All LC-MS/MS analyses were performed by nanoscale reversed phase liquid chromatography (RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled on-line to Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Individual HILIC fractions were re-dissolved in 0.1% FA (aq) and loaded onto a trap column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with sorbent X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 (3.5 μm particles, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min onto Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (2 µm, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% FA and phase B was composed of acetonitrile:methanol:2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (6:3:1; v/v/v) containing 0.1% FA. Gradient conditions were: 1% mobile phase B (0 to 1 min), 1% - 11% B (1 to 30 min), 11% - 25% B (30 to 60 min), 25% - 45% B (60 to 90 min), 45% - 80% B (90 to 95 min), and 80 % B held for 15 min. Equilibration of the trap and the analytical column was performed before injection of the sample to sample loop. The analytical column was coupled on-line to Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). MS data were collected by data-dependent strategy selecting 10 precursors from MS scan (m/z range 350 – 2000 m/z, resolution 60 000 at m/z 400, accumulation 1x106 ions for max. 200 ms, 1 microscan). 10 000 and 50 000 ions for max. 200 ms with isolation window of 2.0 and 1.3 m/z were accumulated for MS/MS spectra after CID (collision induced dissociation, 35% relative collision energy; recorded in ion trap, rapid scan rate) and HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation; 45% relative collision energy; resolution 15 000 at m/z 400), respectively. CID spectra were used for database searching and HCD spectra for relative quantitation. Dynamic precursor exclusion was allowed for 45 s after each MS/MS spectrum measurement.

### Data Protocol
Two LC-MS/MS analyses were done with the exclusion of already identified peptides in the second run. Exclusion list was made using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) after database search of MS/MS spectra using Mascot and Sequest search engines against protein database of H. sapiens downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/proteomes/HUMAN.fasta.gz (2013/01/09) and cRAP database (http://thegpm.org/crap/index.html). Database search tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS level, respectively. Static and variable modifications were the same as for database searches in MaxQuant. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with q-value < 0.01 (Percolator) were considered. PSMs were excluded for 3 min with m/z tolerance of 10 ppm. Protein identification and quantification from the iTRAQ experiment was performed with MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 (www.maxquant.org) using Andromeda database search algorithm. Database searches were performed against UniProt database of Homo sapiens downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org (2012/11) with 84 921 protein sequences. Common protein contaminants database complemented target database according to standard settings of Andromeda. Enzyme name: Trypsin (cleaving polypeptides at the carboxyl side of lysine or arginine except when either is followed by proline), max. missed cleavage sites 2, taxonomy: Homo sapiens. Decoy database search: True. Target FDR 0.01. Tolerances: 20 ppm/6 ppm (first search/main search) precursor mass tolerance and 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance. Modifications: Dynamic (variable): oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phospho (STY). Static (fixed): iTRAQ 8-plex (K, N-term), methylthio (C). Protein identification and quantification was based on unique peptides only. The quantitative comparison of the protein levels was performed with Perseus 1.3.0.4 (www.maxquant.org). Proteins up- or down-regulated more than 1.15 or less than 0.85 in transgelin positive versus negative sample were subjected to functional analysis using IPA (ingenuity Pathway Analysis) software.

### Publication Abstract
Transgelin is a protein reported to be a marker of several cancers. However, previous studies have shown both up- and down-regulation of transgelin in tumors when compared with non-tumor tissues and the mechanisms whereby transgelin may affect the development of cancer remain largely unknown. Transgelin is especially abundant in smooth muscle cells and is associated with actin stress fibers. These contractile structures participate in cell motility, adhesion, and the maintenance of cell morphology. Here, the role of transgelin in breast cancer is focused on. Initially, the effects of transgelin on cell migration of the breast cancer cell lines, BT 549 and PMC 42, is studied. Interestingly, transgelin silencing increased the migration of PMC 42 cells, but decreased the migration of BT 549 cells. To clarify these contradictory results, the changes in protein abundances after transgelin silencing in these two cell lines are analyzed using quantitative proteomics. The results confirmed the role of transgelin in the migration of BT 549 cells and suggest the involvement of transgelin in apoptosis and small molecule biochemistry in PMC 42 cells. The context-dependent function of transgelin reflects the different molecular backgrounds of these cell lines, which differ in karyotypes, mutation statuses, and proteome profiles.

### Keywords
Transgelin; breast cancer; metastasis; migration; apoptosis; cytoskeleton

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science


