### Accession
PXD034177

### Title
NADPH Oxidase 1 in Chronic Pancreatitis-Activated Pancreatic Stellate Cells Facilitates the Progression of Pancreatic Cancer

### Description
Aims: Patients suffering from chronic pancreatitis (CP) have a higher risk of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). NADPH oxidase 1 (Nox1) in activated pancreatic stellate cells from a CP mouse model (CP-activated PaSCs) forms fibrotic tissue and up-regulates matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 9. Yet, the role and mechanism of Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs in the progression of PDAC is unknown. 1) We tested the ability of Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs to facilitate the growth and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells. 2) We identified proteins in the secretome of CP-activated PaSCs whose production was Nox1-dependent. Results: In vitro, Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs facilitated the migration/invasion of MIA PaCa-2 and HPAC cells. Nox1 evoked a both pro-invasive and cancer-promoting phenotype in PaSCs via a paracrine activation of both p38 MAPK and STAT3 pathways in neoplastic cells. In vivo, Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs facilitated tumor growth, metastasis formation, and stromal expansion. Using mass spectrometry, we identified proteins protecting from cellular stresses in the secretome of CP-activated PaSCs whose production was Nox1-dependent. Innovation: Inhibiting the stromal Nox1 signaling at early stages can reduce the reorganization of histological barriers, and the protection of neoplastic cells from cellular stresses, ameliorating the progression of PDAC. Conclusions: Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs induced both Twist1 and MMP-9 expression, causing changes in the extracellular matrix composition. In addition, Nox1 oxidized peroxiredoxins 1 and 4 through thioredoxin reductase 1, causing p38 MAPK and STAT3 phosphorylation in neoplastic cells when they were secreted from CP-activated PaSCs. Both mechanisms facilitated the progression of PDAC.

### Sample Protocol
To assess the extent to which the lack of Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs affects the production of proteins facilitating the growth and invasion of cancer cells, we analyzed the secreted proteins that differ between activated PaSCs from Nox1-competent mice with CP and PaSCs from Nox1-null mice with CP using mass spectrometry. We isolated CP-activated PaSCs as previously described (Xia et al., 2020), placed them in the wells of a 24-well plate and cultured them in a serum-free IMDM medium because FBS interferes with the mass spectroscopy analysis. After 48 h, we collected the serum-free CM, centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min and store the supernatants at −80°C. We used serum-free IMDM medium as a negative control. Digested peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), to which an Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) is connected at the upfront. Two microliters of peptide sample was first trapped on a Pepmap100 C18 peptide trap (5um, 0.3X5mm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and then washed at 20 ul/min using 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 10 minutes. Next the cleaned peptides were washed off the trap and further separated on a Pepman 100 RSLC C18 column (2.0 um, 75-μm × 150-mm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) at 40°C using a gradient of between 2% to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 100 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. LC-MS/MS analysis were performed using data-dependent acquisition in positive mode with the Orbitrap MS analyzer for precursor scans at 120,000 FWHM from 300 to 1500 m/z and the ion-trap MS analyzer for MS/MS scans at top-speed mode (3-second cycle time). Collision-induced dissociation method was used to fragment the precursor peptides with a normalized energy level of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS spectrum for each sample were filtered and processed using the Proteome Discoverer software by Thermo Scientific (v1.4, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and then submitted to SequestHT search algorithm against the Uniprot human database (10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance: 10 ppm, product ion mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, static Carbamidomethylation of +57.021 Da). Perculator peptide spectrum matching (PSM) validator algorithm was used for peptide spectrum matching validation and false discovery rate estimation. Proteins were listed by gene name, accession number, Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI), subcellular localization, molecular function, and biological process as reported by the www.uniprot.org. Proteins whose subcellular location is extracellular matrix/extracellular space/basement membrane/basal lamina and/or secreted proteins were studied. Using normalized spectral counts (label-free quantification) assigned to statistically significant, Nox1-competent/Nox1-null mice predominant ratios were computed and plotted on an arithmetic scale to highlight the predominance in either CM of CP-activated PaSCs from Nox1-competent mice or CM of CP-activated PaSCs from Nox1-null mice. We focused on proteins that were at least 2.5-fold more abundant in CM of PaSCs from Nox1-competent mice (cut off: 2.5-fold change) and their standard error of the mean (SEM) were lower than 10 % of fold change (mean).

### Publication Abstract
Patients suffering from chronic pancreatitis (CP) have a higher risk of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) compared to the general population. For instance, the presence of an activated pancreatic stellate cell (PaSC)-rich stroma in CP has facilitated the progression of non-invasive pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) lesions to invasive PDAC. We have previously found that in a mouse model of CP, NADPH oxidase 1 (Nox1) in activated PaSCs forms fibrotic tissue and up-regulates both matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 9 and the transcription factor Twist1. Yet, the role and mechanism of Nox1 in activated PaSCs from mice with CP (CP-activated PaSCs) in the progression of PDAC is unknown. For that, we tested the ability of Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs to facilitate the growth of pancreatic cancer cells, and the mechanisms involved in these effects by identifying proteins in the secretome of CP-activated PaSCs whose production were Nox1-dependent. We found that, <i>in vitro</i>, Nox1 evoked a pro-invasive and cancer-promoting phenotype in CP-activated PaSCs via Twist1/MMP-9 expression, causing changes in the extracellular matrix composition. <i>In vivo</i>, Nox1 in CP-activated PaSCs facilitated tumor growth and stromal expansion. Using mass spectrometry, we identified proteins protecting from endoplasmic reticulum, oxidative and metabolic stresses in the secretome of CP-activated PaSCs whose production was Nox1-dependent, including peroxiredoxins (Prdx1 and Prdx4), and thioredoxin reductase 1. In conclusion, inhibiting the Nox1 signaling in activated PaSCs from patients with CP at early stages can reduce the reorganization of extracellular matrix, and the protection of neoplastic cells from cellular stresses, ameliorating the progression of PDAC.

### Keywords
Nadph oxidase 1; mmp-9; peroxiredoxin; twist1; p38 mapk; pancreatic stellate cells

### Affiliations
augusta university
Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences Augusta University C2014 Science Hall 2500 Walton Way, Augusta-GA

### Submitter
MARIA SABBATINI

### Lab Head
Dr MARIA EUGENIA SABBATINI
Assistant Professor of Biological Sciences Augusta University C2014 Science Hall 2500 Walton Way, Augusta-GA


