### Accession
PXD015060

### Title
Inhibition of spinal cord Hsp90 enhances morphine anti-nociception by activating an ERK/RSK pathway

### Description
Morphine and other opioids continue to be commonly utilized as clinical analgesics, despite their numerous adverse side effects, including respiratory depression, addiction, and tolerance. The modulation of µ-opioid receptor (MOR) signaling and subsequent behavioral output is one viable approach to improve opioid therapy. Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a molecular chaperone protein that has recently been implicated in downstream MOR signaling within the brain in mice. Here we identify a context-dependent impact on MOR signaling in which the inhibition of Hsp90 within the spinal cord promotes morphine induced anti-nociception. We show that intrathecal and not systemic administration of the Hsp90 inhibitors 17-AAG or KU-32 amplifies morphine-induced anti-nociception in both thermal and mechanical pain models. Further, we demonstrate that the inhibition of Hsp90 allows for ERK phosphorylation after opioid treatment. ERK activation was localized within the dorsal horns of the spinal cord, which are heavily populated with primary afferents responsible for nociception. The behavioral effects observed with Hsp90 inhibitors were abolished upon intrathecal U0126 (ERK inhibitor) and cycloheximide (translation inhibitor) treatment, suggesting that downstream ERK phosphorylation and rapid protein translation are responsible for the observed amplification of anti-nociception. Quantitative proteomic analysis identified upregulated RSK with spinal cord Hsp90 inhibition, which we further found was necessary for the observed enhancement of anti-nociception. Taken together, we have uncovered a novel downstream MOR ERK/RSK cascade, localized to the spinal cord and repressed by Hsp90, whose modulation may allow for enhanced efficacy and decreased side effects during opioid therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse spinal cord lysates were prepared using our previously published protocol (PMID: 28450396). Mouse spinal cord lysates (100µg) from animals that were treated with either 17-AAG or vehicle (n=3 each) were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain. Each lane of the SDS-PAGE gel was cut into six slices and the gel slices were subjected to trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides were purified by C18-based desalting exactly as previously described (PMID 28550165 & 31018989).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 3.0 msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were searched against the mus musculus SwissProt_2018_01 database (16965 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications were made using Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered. Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification as previously described (PMID 31018989).

### Publication Abstract
Morphine and other opioids are commonly used to treat pain despite their numerous adverse side effects. Modulating &#x3bc;-opioid receptor (MOR) signaling is one way to potentially improve opioid therapy. In mice, the chaperone protein Hsp90 mediates MOR signaling within the brain. Here, we found that inhibiting Hsp90 specifically in the spinal cord enhanced the antinociceptive effects of morphine in mice. Intrathecal, but not systemic, administration of the Hsp90 inhibitors 17-AAG or KU-32 amplified the effects of morphine in suppressing sensitivity to both thermal and mechanical stimuli in mice. Hsp90 inhibition enabled opioid-induced phosphorylation of the kinase ERK and increased abundance of the kinase RSK in the dorsal horns of the spinal cord, which are heavily populated with primary afferent sensory neurons. The additive effects of Hsp90 inhibition were abolished upon intrathecal inhibition of ERK, RSK, or protein synthesis. This mechanism downstream of MOR, localized to the spinal cord and repressed by Hsp90, may potentially be used to enhance the efficacy and presumably decrease the side effects of opioid therapy.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Spinal cord, Anti-nociception, Erk

### Affiliations
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Paul R. Langlais
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology


