### Accession
PXD033486

### Title
Surface proteome of emetic Bacillus cereus strain grown in glucose containing medium

### Description
This project provides tandem mass spectrometry data of extracellular non-covalently bound cell surface proteins from samples of Bacillus cereus AH187 strain. The wild-type strain was grown on liquid MOD medium supplemented with glucose and harvested at five growth stages: early exponential, late exponential, stationary phase, tardive stationary 1 and tardive stationary 2.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for a short electrophoretic migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT. The results were then parsed with IRMA.

### Publication Abstract
Many prokaryotes are covered by a two-dimensional array of proteinaceous subunits. This surface layers (S-layer) is incompletely characterized for many microorganisms. Here, we studied <i>Bacillus cereus</i> AH187. A genome analysis identified two genes encoding the S-layer proteins SL2 and EA1, which we experimentally confirmed to encode the two protein components of the S-layer covering the surface of <i>B. cereus</i>. Shotgun proteomics analysis indicated that SL2 is the major component of the <i>B. cereus</i> S-layer at the beginning of exponential growth, whereas EA1 becomes more abundant than SL2 during later stages of stationary growth. Microscopy analysis revealed the spatial organization of SL2 and EA1 at the surface of <i>B. cereus</i> to depend on their temporal-dynamics during growth. Our results also show that a mutant strain lacking functional SL2 and EA1 proteins has distinct surface properties compared to its parental strain, in terms of stiffness and hydrophilicity during the stationary growth phase. Surface properties, self-aggregation capacity, and bacterial adhesion were observed to correlate. We conclude that the dynamics of SL2 and EA1 expression is a key determinant of the surface properties of <i>B. cereus</i> AH187, and that the S-layer could contribute to <i>B. cereus</i> survival in starvation conditions.

### Keywords
Bacillus cereus, S-layer proteins, Surfaceome, Ah187 strain, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


