### Accession
PXD022689

### Title
Calpain-mediated Protein Targets in Cardiac Mitochondria following Ischemia-Reperfusion

### Description
Calpain 1 and 2 (CPN1/2) are calcium-dependent cysteine proteases that exist in cytosol and mitochondria. Pharmacologic inhibition of CPN1/2 decreases cardiac injury during ischemia (ISC) – reperfusion (REP) by improving mitochondrial function. However, the protein targets of CPN1/2 activation during ISC-REP are unclear. CPN1/2 include a large subunit and a small regulatory subunit 1 (CPNS1). Genetic deletion of the CPNS1 eliminates the activities of both CPN1 and CPN2. Conditional, cardiomyocyte specific CPNS1 knockout (KO) mice were used in the present study to clarify the role of CPN1/2 activation in mitochondrial damage during ISC-REP with an emphasis on identifying the potential protein targets of CPN1/2. Isolated hearts from wild type (WT) or CPNS1 KO mice underwent 25 min in vitro global ISC and 30 min REP. LDH activity in coronary effluent was measured to reflect cardiac injury. Mitochondria were isolated from the hearts. Cardiac injury was decreased in CPNS1 KO mice following  ISC-REP compared to WT. ISC-REP decreased the rate of oxidative phosphorylation in WT but not in CPNS1 KO mice when glutamate + malate was used as complex I substrate. KO of CPNS1 led to a smaller decrease in CRC (calcium retention capacity) following REP compared to WT. The H2O2 generation was decreased in KO mitochondria following ISC-REP compared to WT. KO of CPNS1 also resulted in less cytochrome c release from mitochondria. Proteomic analysis of the isolated mitochondria showed that KO of CPNS1 increased the abundance of ribosomal proteins and mitochondrial biogenesis proteins. These results show that activation of CPN1/2 increases cardiac injury during ischemia-reperfusion by damaging mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
Each mitochondrial sample was fractionated and separated on an SDS-PAGE gel, and the gel lane was cut into a single area for in-gel digestion. The bands were washed/destained in 50% ethanol, 5% acetic acid and then dehydrated in acetonitrile. The samples were then reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide before the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel using trypsin, by adding 10 μL (10 ng/μL) trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac and then re-suspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 μL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptides were analyzed on a ThermoFisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a ThermoFisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was performed prior to MS/MS analysis for peptide separation. The HPLC column used is a ThermoFisher Scientific 15 cm x 75 µm Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 μm, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Five μL volumes of the peptide extract were injected and peptides eluted from the column by a 110-minute acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min. The nanoelectrospray ion source was operated at 2.3 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra using a Fourier Transform (FT) orbitrap analyzer to determine peptide molecular weights (resolution 120,000) and collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS product ion spectra with an ion-trap. The MS/MS experiment was carried out with a duty cycle of 3 seconds. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and ions within 10 ppm of the fragmented mass were excluded for 60 seconds. The data were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (PD) V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) with the search engine Sequest which is integrated in PD software. The CID spectra collected in the experiment were used for peptide sequencing and protein identification, and the full scans were used for peptide precursor intensity calculations. The database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot mouse protein database containing 16996 entries with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences).  The search was performed looking for fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da.  A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein, and two peptides were required for a positive protein identification. Protein quantities were estimated by Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer V2.3 using full scan intensities of the identified peptides. These are based on the (raw) intensities that are normalized on multiple levels to ensure that profiles of normalized intensities across samples accurately reflect the relative amounts of the proteins.  Missing quantitative values were imputed using low abundance resampling method replacing the missing values with random values sampled between the minimum and the lower 5 percent of all detected values. Protein abundance change over 2 fold with p-value < 0.05 from 2-tailed Student T-test was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Calpain; mitochondrial respiratory chain; reactive oxygen species, Reverse electron flow

### Affiliations
Departments of Medicine (Division of Cardiology), Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, 23298
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Qun Chen
Departments of Medicine (Division of Cardiology), Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, 23298


