### Accession
PXD021339

### Title
Elucidation of the signatures of proteasome-catalysed peptide splicing

### Description
Proteasomes catalyse the degradation of endogenous proteins into oligopeptides, but can concurrently create spliced oligopeptides through ligation of previously non-contiguous peptide fragments. Recent studies have uncovered a formerly unappreciated role for proteasome-catalysed peptide splicing (PCPS) in the generation of non-genomically templated major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I)-bound cis-spliced peptides that can be targeted by CD8+ T cells in cancer and infection. However, the mechanisms defining PCPS reactions are poorly understood. Here, we experimentally define the biochemical constraints of proteasome-catalysed cis-splicing reactions by examination of in vitro proteasomal digests of a panel of viral and self-derived polypeptide substrates using a tailored mass-spectrometry-based de novo sequencing workflow. We show that forward and reverse PCPS reactions display unique splicing signatures, defined by preferential fusion of distinct amino acid residues with stringent peptide length distributions, suggesting sequence- and size-dependent accessibility of splice reactants for proteasomal substrate binding pockets. Our data provide the basis for a more informed mechanistic understanding of PCPS that will facilitate future prediction of spliced peptides from protein sequences.

### Sample Protocol
For constitutive proteasomal digests, 5 μg of synthetic polypeptide were incubated with 500 ng of the 20S constitutive proteasome (CP) (Enzo Life Sciences) in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 5 mM magnesium chloride, 2 mM DTT for 2 h or 20 h at 37°C. Control incubations (lacking the CP) were performed for each peptide in parallel. Following incubation, reactions were terminated by addition of 5 μL of acetic acid, and digest material was bound to a C18 ZipTip column (Merck), eluted in 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), dried down and resuspended in 20 μl LC-MS/MS loading buffer (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water). For LC-MS/MS analysis, 1 μl of each digest sample was injected onto a 3 μm particle size 0.075 mm x 150 mm PepMap C18 trap column followed by loading onto a 2 μm particle size, 75 μm x 50 cm analytical column on the Ultimate 3000 nUPLC system (Thermo Scientific). A gradient was applied for 30 min from 8-50% buffer B (0.1% TFA in 100% ACN) in buffer A (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water). Peptides were introduced to the Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using an Easy-Spray source at 2000V and 40ºC. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 305ºC. Full MS spectra were recorded from 300-1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000. Precursor selection was performed using Top Speed mode at a cycle time of 2 s. Peptide ions were isolated using a width of 1.2 amu, followed by trapping at a maximal injection time of 120 ms, setting an AGC target of 300,000. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was induced at an energy setting of 28 for peptides with a charge state of 2-4, while singly charged peptides were fragmented at an energy setting of 32 at lower priority. Fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS v8.0 (Bioinformatic Solutions) software was employed for the analysis of all LC-MS/MS datasets (.raw files). Matching against precursor polypeptide sequences was conducted without enzyme specification, using a mass tolerance precursor setting of 5 ppm for peptides and 0.03 Da for fragment ions. PEAKS de novo assisted sequencing was implemented for the assignment of non-spliced peptides derived from individual polypeptide sequences following proteasomal digest of each of the 23 precursor substrates. A false discovery rate of 5% was set using a parallel decoy database search. Following matching of spectra to respective polypeptide sequences, MS/MS spectra assigned as post-translationally modified or originating from the 20S CP were removed from the analysis, as were peptides assigned a PEAKS -10lgP score of <20, yielding a final list of non-spliced peptide sequences. For identification of spliced peptides, a tailored bioinformatics workflow was employed similar to that previously described (Paes et al., 2019). De novo sequences originating from peptide spectra with average local confidence (ALC) scores of 50% that did not match contiguous sequences within the polypeptide precursors were considered. These were termed ‘de novo unmatched peptides’ (DNUPs), and only the top 5 scoring sequence interpretations for each scan were included in the analysis. As the mass:charge ratios of leucine (L) and isoleucine (I) are identical, LC-MS/MS cannot differentiate between L and I residues within peptides. Hence, PEAKS de novo sequencing reports all L or I residues as Ls. Therefore, for DNUPs containing a total of ‘n’ leucine residues, all permutations (2n) of L/I variants were computed prior to in silico splicing – e.g. for de novo sequence DLLGCFKPFLC originating from polypeptide precursor KTFKPFICSLDLIGCPM, 23 combinations of the original de novo sequence would be computed (DLLGCFKPFLC, DLIGCFKPFLC, DILGCFKPFLC, DLLGCFKPFIC, DLIGCFKPFIC, DILGCFKPFIC, DIIGCFKPFLC and DIIGCFKPFIC) and each sequence input to the splicing algorithm. If a match to a contiguous polypeptide sequence within the SwissProt proteome resulted following L/I permutations, the whole LC-MS/MS spectrum/scan was removed from the analysis. In silico splicing of the resulting DNUP sequence interpretations in each scan was then implemented. Briefly, each DNUP of length ‘n’ amino acids was split into two fragments from (n-1) aa to 1 aa. The (n-1)th fragment was first scanned for a contiguous match across the polypeptide, and when found, its corresponding splice partner fragment was scanned for a contiguous match within the remainder of the polypeptide sequence. Trans-spliced peptides were omitted from the analysis. Contiguous and spliced peptides identified in control experiments involving incubation of polypeptides without the 20S CP were removed prior to further data analysis, to exclude degradation products that may not arise directly from proteasome-induced hydrolysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomes catalyze the degradation of endogenous proteins into oligopeptides, but can concurrently create spliced oligopeptides through ligation of previously non-contiguous peptide fragments. Recent studies have uncovered a formerly unappreciated role for proteasome-catalyzed peptide splicing (PCPS) in the generation of non-genomically templated human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I)-bound <i>cis-</i>spliced peptides that can be targeted by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in cancer and infection. However, the mechanisms defining PCPS reactions are poorly understood. Here, we experimentally define the biochemical constraints of proteasome-catalyzed <i>cis</i>-splicing reactions by examination of <i>in vitro</i> proteasomal digests of a panel of viral- and self-derived polypeptide substrates using a tailored mass-spectrometry-based <i>de novo</i> sequencing workflow. We show that forward and reverse PCPS reactions display unique splicing signatures, defined by preferential fusion of distinct amino acid residues with stringent peptide length distributions, suggesting sequence- and size-dependent accessibility of splice reactants for proteasomal substrate binding pockets. Our data provide the basis for a more informed mechanistic understanding of PCPS that will facilitate future prediction of spliced peptides from protein sequences.

### Keywords
Protein splicing, Splicing mechanism, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford


