### Accession
PXD037805

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of caeca dissected from Gammarus fossarum

### Description
Proteomic analysis of caeca of gammarids sampled in four different population of Gammarus fossarus (Mandorne, Séran, Ardillat, Baculy). The aim of the project is  to analyze the environmental effect of inter- and intra- population proteomic diversity of a key organ involved in organism fitness and tolerance to metal contamination.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT using a RNAseq-derived database, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry in multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode is a powerful technique that can provide highly selective, multiplexed, and reproducible quantification of peptides derived from proteins. Ideal for the application of molecular biomarkers in biomonitoring surveys, MRM tools have been recently developed to quantify sets of pre-selected biomarkers in freshwater sentinel species. Still limited to the validation and application phase of biomarkers, dynamic MRM (dMRM) acquisition mode has increased the multiplexing capacity of mass spectrometers, expanding opportunities to explore proteome modulations in sentinel species. This study evaluated the feasibility to propose dMRM tools for investigating sentinel species proteomes at the organ level and demonstrated its potential for screening contaminant effects and discovering new protein biomarkers. As a proof of concept, a dMRM assay was developed to comprehensively capture the functional proteome of the caeca of Gammarus fossarum, a freshwater crustacean, commonly used as a sentinel species in environmental biomonitoring. The assay was then used to assess the effects of sub-lethal concentrations of cadmium, silver, and zinc on gammarid caeca. Results showed dose-response and specific metal effects on caecal proteomes, with a slight effect of zinc compared to the two non-essential metals. Functional analyses indicated that cadmium affected proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, digestive and immune processes, while silver affected proteins related to oxidative stress response, chaperonin complexes and fatty acid metabolism. Based on these metal-specific signatures, several proteins modulated in a dose-dependent manner were proposed as candidate biomarkers for tracking the level of these metals in freshwater ecosystems. Overall, this study highlights the potential of dMRM to decipher the specific modulations of proteome expression induced by contaminant exposure and pinpoints specific response signatures, offering new perspectives for the de novo identification and development of biomarkers in sentinel species.

### Keywords
Gammarus fossarum, Proteogenomics, Heavy metal response, Proteomics, Tolerance, Caeca, Vulnerability, Fitness

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


