### Accession
PXD047386

### Title
Riboproteome remodelling during quiescence exit in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Characterization of the riboproteome composition in quiescent cells and post-translational reactivation. To characterize ribosome heterogeneity during the exit from quiescence, the protein composition of ribosomal particles from stationary phase and nutrient-stimulated cells was assessed. A label-free quantitative mass spectrometry strategy was taken to compare quiescent yeast cells with cells that had been nutrient stimulated for 30 and 60 min. To this end, crude extracts from these cells were subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation and three fractions free (F); monosome (M=80S + 60S + 40S) and polysome (P) were analyzed by nano-HPLC-MS/MS. A total of 528 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Fractions from the sucrose gradients were prepared for Mass Spectrometry Analysis. 27 samples (corresponding to three biological replicates of each of the 3 fractions of the 3 different treatments: SP F,SP M,SP P, SP + 30 min SDC F, SP + 30 min SDC M, SP + 30 min SDC P, SP + 60 min SDC F,SP + 60 min SDC M, SP + 60 min SDC) were analyzed. Protein samples were reduced with dithiotreitol (DTT) in 50mM of ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 10 mM (45 min, 56°C) and alkylated with iodoacetamide in the same solvent at a final concentration of 30mM (40 min, RT, in darkness). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega V5111). After that, the peptides were purified and desalted with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). digests were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific QExactive Mass Spectrometer coupled to a nanoHPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). For the LC-MS/MS analysis, approximately 1 μg of peptides was loaded onto the column and eluted for 120 minutes using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 µm, 100A, 50 µm x 150 mm) Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801)) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high degree of resolution. The flow rate used for the nano column was 300 nL min-1 and the solvent range from 7% B (5 min) to 35% (120 min). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water whereas B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The injection volume was 2µL. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Thermo Scientific, Q-Exactive). A voltage of 3,5 kV was used for Electro Spray Ionization (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY). XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) software was used for data acquisition. Equipment configuration allows peptide identification at the same time of their chromatographic separation. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer. The scanned mass range was 400-1800 m/z, at a resolution of 70000 at 400 m/z and the 15 most intense ions in each cycle, were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD and measured in the Orbitrap analyzer. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.1.21 Thermo Scientific) and searched against Saccharomyces cerevisiae UP00002311 protein sequence database with trypsin specificity and a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide. Proteome Discoverer searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Static modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of Cys, and dynamic modifications were set to oxidation of Met and N-terminal acetylation. Protein hits were filtered for high confidence peptide matches, with a maximum protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1% calculated by employing a reverse database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
The quiescent state is the prevalent mode of cellular life in most cells. <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is a useful model for studying the molecular basis of the cell cycle, quiescence, and aging. Previous studies indicate that heterogeneous ribosomes show a specialized translation function to adjust the cellular proteome upon a specific stimulus. Using nano LC-MS/MS, we identified 69 of the 79 ribosomal proteins (RPs) that constitute the eukaryotic 80S ribosome during quiescence. Our study shows that the riboproteome is composed of 444 accessory proteins comprising cellular functions such as translation, protein folding, amino acid and glucose metabolism, cellular responses to oxidative stress, and protein degradation. Furthermore, the stoichiometry of both RPs and accessory proteins on ribosome particles is different depending on growth conditions and among monosome and polysome fractions. Deficiency of different RPs resulted in defects of translational capacity, suggesting that ribosome composition can result in changes in translational activity during quiescence.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Mass spectrometry, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Buenos Aires CONICET
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Departamento Química Biológica, Buenos Aires, Argentina; CONICET Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (IQUIBICEN), Buenos Aires, Argentina

### Submitter
maria pia valacco

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Portela
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Departamento Química Biológica, Buenos Aires, Argentina; CONICET Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (IQUIBICEN), Buenos Aires, Argentina


