### Accession
PXD027249

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of two bacterial species

### Description
The species of two bacterial colonies were determined by sequencing their DNA and comparing it with databases. Their adaptation to extreme conditions (conditions similar to those found in the planet Mars) were studied by proteomics, comparing the proteome obtained from a culture under standard laboratory conditions with the proteome obtained from a culture under extreme conditions. The techniques used were 2-DE electrophoresis, Difference in gel electrophoresis (2-D DIGE) and protein analysis by mass spectrometry Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/ Ionization – Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF).

### Sample Protocol
All procedures were performed in a UV-irradiated laminar flow hood using ethanol-sterilized tools and sterilized gloves. The colonies were isolated and 2 broth cultures were grown with agitation in Erlenmeyer flasks. Growth was monitored by optical density at 600 nm until achievement of an absorbance of 2.7. After identifying the species of 2 of the colonies, 2 broth cultures from each of them were grown at the same conditions. When the growth was maximum, 1 of the broth culture from each bacteria was subject to extreme. Then, the 4 cultures were analyzed by proteomics. The techniques used were 2-DE electrophoresis, Difference in gel electrophoresis (2-D DIGE). Protein spots from the Coomassie stained 2-DE gels were digested and analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF with the method previously described. Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used.  Theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric point were calculated for each protein with the Compute pI/MW tool (ExPASy, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland).

### Publication Abstract
The exploration of Mars is one of the main objectives of space missions since the red planet is considered to be, or was in the past, potentially habitable. Although the surface of Mars is now dry and arid, abundant research suggests that water covered Mars billions of years ago. Recently, the existence of liquid water in subglacial lakes has been postulated below the South pole of Mars. Until now, experiments have been carried out on the survival of microorganisms in Martian surface conditions, but it remains unknown how their adaptation mechanisms would be in the Martian cryosphere. In this work, two bacterial species (<i>Bacillus subtilis</i> and <i>Curtobacterium flacumfaciens</i>) were subjected to a simulated Martian environment during 24&#x2009;h using a planetary chamber. Afterward, the molecular machinery of both species was studied to investigate how they had been modified. Proteomes, the entire set of proteins expressed by each bacterium under Earth (named standard) conditions and Martian conditions, were compared using proteomic techniques. To establish this evaluation, both the expression levels of each protein, and the variation in their distribution within the different functional categories were considered. The results showed that these bacterial species followed a different strategy. The <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> resistance approach consisted of improving its stress response, membrane bioenergetics, degradation of biomolecules; and to a lesser extent, increasing its mobility and the formation of biofilms or resistance endospores. On the contrary, enduring strategy of <i>Curtobacterium flacumfaciens</i> comprised of strengthening the cell envelope, trying to protect cells from the extracellular environment. These results are especially important due to their implications for planetary protection, missions to Mars and sample return since contamination by microorganisms would invalidate the results of these investigations.

### Keywords
2de, Metaproteomics, Maldi-tof ms, 2-dige, Culturomics

### Affiliations
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain
ES (+34) 915206455

### Submitter
Eva Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Garcia Lopez Eva; Cid Sanchez Cristina
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain


