### Accession
PXD012983

### Title
Cryptococcus neoformans TOR1 phosphoproteomics

### Description
The target of rapamycin (TOR) pathway is an evolutionarily conserved signal transduction system that is activated by varying nutrient and environmental signals and governs a plethora of eukaryotic biological processes. Nevertheless, its role in the human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans remains elusive. In this study, we investigated the TOR pathway by functionally characterizing two Tor-like kinases, Tor1 and Tlk1, in C. neoformans. We successfully deleted TLK1, but not TOR1. TLK1 deletion did not result in any evident in vitro phenotypes, except for a minor role in diamide and polyene resistance, suggesting that Tlk1 is mainly dispensable for the growth of C. neoformans. We further demonstrated that Tor1, but not Tlk1, is essential and the target of rapamycin by constructing and analyzing conditionally regulated strains and sporulation analysis of heterozygous mutants in the diploid strain background. To analyze the functions of Tor1 in more detail, we constructed constitutive TOR1 overexpression strains. Tor1 negatively regulated thermotolerance and the DNA damage response, which are two important virulence factors of C. neoformans. We also found that TOR1 overexpression reduced Mpk1 phosphorylation, which is required for cell wall integrity and thermoresistance, and Rad53 phosphorylation, which governs the DNA damage response pathway. Tor1 is localized to the cytoplasm but enriched in the vacuole membrane. Phosphoproteomics and transcriptomics revealed that Tor1 regulates a variety of biological processes, including metabolic processes, cytoskeleton organization, ribosome biogenesis, autophagy, and stress response. Finally, screening rapamycin-sensitive and -resistant kinase and transcription factor mutants revealed that the TOR pathway may crosstalk with a number of signaling pathways, including the Hog1 pathway. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that a single Tor1 kinase plays a variety of roles in the fungal meningitis pathogen C. neoformans.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates were prepared from each sample (H99 WT, TOR1oe mutant strain, and rapamycin (3 ng/ml)-treated WT) with lysis buffer. The protein concentration of each cell lysate was determined using a Pierce BCA protein kit. The samples were reduced and alkylated using DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. The trypsin-digested protein lysates were purified with Sep-Pak C18 columns. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 Mag Sepharose beads and lyophilized for liquid chromatography-tandem mass analysis (LC-MS/MS). Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with nano HPLC system. All phosphopeptide samples were reconstituted in solution A (water/ acetonitrile (98:2, v/v), 0.1% formic acid), and then injected into an LC- nano ESI-MS/MS system. Samples were first trapped on the Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column and washed for 6 min with 98% solution A at a flow rate of 4 μl min-1, and then separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column at a flow rate of 400 nl min-1. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 2% to 35% solution B (water/acetonitrile (2:98, v/v), 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, 35% to 90% over 10 min, followed by 90% for 5 min, and finally 5% for 15 min.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by searching the C. neoformans H99S protein database (http://www.uniprot.org) for the MS/MS spectra using the Sequest TH search algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). The MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. PhosphoRS node was used to calculate individual site probabilities for phosphorylated peptides with the following search parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications, and allowing two missed trypsin cleavages for peptide identification. Peptide identification was filtered by a 1% FDR cut-off. A PhosphoRS probability score ≥0.75 was required to confirm the site of phosphorylation. Spectral counts were used to estimate relative phosphopeptide abundance in the WT, TOR1oe mutant strains and rapamycin-treated cells. The data were further normalized by dividing each ratio by the median value of the ratio of each LC-MS/MS run, resulting in normalized relative phosphopeptide abundance. Student’s t-test was used to assess the statistical significance of the difference between the samples.

### Publication Abstract
The target of rapamycin (TOR) pathway is an evolutionarily conserved signal transduction system that governs a plethora of eukaryotic biological processes, but its role in <i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i> remains elusive. In this study, we investigated the TOR pathway by functionally characterizing two Tor-like kinases, Tor1 and Tlk1, in <i>C. neoformans</i> We successfully deleted <i>TLK1</i>, but not <i>TOR1</i><i>TLK1</i> deletion did not result in any evident <i>in vitro</i> phenotypes, suggesting that Tlk1 is dispensable for the growth of <i>C. neoformans</i> We demonstrated that Tor1, but not Tlk1, is essential and the target of rapamycin by constructing and analyzing conditionally regulated strains and sporulation analysis of heterozygous mutants in the diploid strain background. To further analyze the Tor1 function, we constructed constitutive <i>TOR1</i> overexpression strains. Tor1 negatively regulated thermotolerance and the DNA damage response, which are two important virulence factors of <i>C. neoformans</i><i>TOR1</i> overexpression reduced Mpk1 phosphorylation, which is required for cell wall integrity and thermoresistance, and Rad53 phosphorylation, which governs the DNA damage response pathway. Tor1 is localized to the cytoplasm, but enriched in the vacuole membrane. Phosphoproteomics and transcriptomics revealed that Tor1 regulates a variety of biological processes, including metabolic processes, cytoskeleton organization, ribosome biogenesis, and stress response. TOR inhibition by rapamycin caused actin depolarization in a Tor1-dependent manner. Finally, screening rapamycin-sensitive and -resistant kinase and transcription factor mutants revealed that the TOR pathway may crosstalk with a number of stress signaling pathways. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that a single Tor1 kinase plays pleiotropic roles in <i>C. neoformans</i>.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Cryptococcus, Cntor1

### Affiliations
Yonsei University
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Dong-Gi Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Sun Bahn
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea


