### Accession
PXD022904

### Title
Biochemical characterization of protease activity of Nsp3 from SARS-CoV-2 and its inhibition by nanobodies

### Description
Of the 16 non-structural proteins (Nsps) encoded by SARS CoV-2, Nsp3 is the largest and plays important roles in the viral life cycle. Being a large, multidomain, transmembrane protein, Nsp3 has been the most challenging to characterize. Encoded within the multidomain Nsp3 is the papain-like protease PLpro that cleaves not only the viral protein but also polyubiquitin and the ubiquitin-like modifier ISG15 from host cells. We here compare the interactors of PLpro and Nsp3 and find a largely overlapping interactome. Intriguingly, we find that near full length Nsp3 is a more active protease compared to the minimal PLpro. Using a MALDI-TOF based assay, we screen 7538 approved clinical compounds and identify five compounds that inhibit PLpro. Despite their ability to inhibit PLpro with IC50s in the low micromolar range, the inhibitors do not have any appreciable antiviral activity in cellular SARS-CoV2 infection assays. We therefore engineered nanobodies that bind to the S1 site of PLpro with nanomolar affinity and inhibit the enzyme. Our work highlights the importance of studying Nsp3 and provides tools and valuable insights to investigate Nsp3 biology.

### Sample Protocol
A549 human alveolar epithelial cells were transfected with empty vector in triplicate or with vectors expressing SARS CoV2 Nsp3ΔTM or PLpro fused to a 2xStrep tag at the N-terminus (4 replicates each). 12hr later, cells were stimulated with 50ng/ml IFN- (Cell Signalling Technologies) for 36hr. Cells were lysed in ice-cold IP buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1mM AEBSF) and clarified by centrifugation. Viral proteins were affinity purified from 4mg lysates by tumbling with 40µl Strep-Tactin Sepharose (IBA Life Sciences) for 90min at 4ºC. Beads were washed two times with IP buffer containing 500mM NaCl and 0.5% NP-40 and twice more with IP buffer without detergent. 90% of the final wash was transferred to a fresh LoBind tube (Eppendorf) for processing for On-bead digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis  The beads from HA-Nsp3, HA-PLpro and control immunoprecipitations were resuspended in 100 µl of 100mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0). The proteins were reduced by adding final 5mM DTT and alkylated by adding final 20mM Iodoacetamide following samples were subjected to on-bead tryptic digestion by adding a digestion buffer (2M Urea+500ng of sequencing grade trypsin per sample) and incubated at 30oC temperature on a Thermomixer for about 16hrs. Post digestion, samples were cleaned using SDB-RP stage-tip cleaning and eluted peptides were immediately snap frozen and vacuum dried in a speed vac  The Vacuum dried peptides are reconstituted in 17 µl of 50mM TEABC (pH8.0). 3ul of anhydrous ACN and   4 ul of TMT reagent (32ug of TMT reporter tag) of each TMT reporter tag (TMT 10 plex kit, Product number: 90110 and A37725., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature on a Thermo mixer with a gentle agitation (600 rpm) for 2 hrs. The TMT labelling has been performed to each sample as, HA-PLpro- sample 1-3 was labelled to 126, 127N and 127C and HA-Nsp3 sample 1-4=3 was labelled to 128N, 129C and 129N and HA-Empty sample 1-3 was labelled 129C, 130N and 130C reporter tags. Following, another 25 µl of 50mM TEABC was added to each sample and incubated further 10 minutes. TMT labeling efficiency was verified by taking a 5 µl from each sample pooled into a new collection tube and immediately vacuum dried and desalted using C18 Stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
The pooled micro-column based bRPLC fractions were reconstituted in 15 ul of 0.1% formic acid and 3% ACN buffer and subjected to LC-MS/MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer that is interfaced with 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system. Sample was loaded on to a 2 cm trapping column (at 5 ul/min flow rate using loading pump and analyzed on a 50cm analytical at 300 nl/min flow rate that is interfaced to the mass spectrometer using Easy nLC source and electro sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. LC gradient was applied from a 3% to 30% of solvent-B at 300 nl/min flow rate (Solvent-B: 80% ACN) for 105 minutes and 30% to 40% solvent-B for 15 minutes and 35% to 99% Solvent-B for 5 minutes which is maintained at 90% B for 10 minutes and washed the column at 3% solvent-B for another 10 minutes comprising a total of 140 min run with a 120-minute gradient in a data dependent MS3 mode (FT- IT CID MS2-FT MS3). The full scan MS1 was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and measured using ultra-high filed Orbitrap mass analyzer. The top 10 precursor ions were targeted for the MS2 and top 10 fragment ions were isolated by enabling synchronous precursor selection for MS3 and analyzed using Ultra high-filed Orbitrap mass analyzer. Precursor ions were isolated using quadrupole mass filter with 0.7 Da mass window and MS2 spectra was fragmented using collisional induced dissociation and recorded using Iontrap mass analyzer in a rapid mode. Top 10 fragment ions with a 1.2 Da isolation window was isolated and fragmented using beam-type collisional induced dissociation (HCD) at 65% normalized collision energy and analyzed using Ultra-high filed Orbitrap mass analyzer using 50,000 resolution at m/z 200. The AGC targets were set as 2E5 for MS1, 2E4 for MS2 and 5E4 for MS3 with 100 ms, 54 ms and 120 ms ion injections respectively.  The MaxQuant software suite (Tyanova et al, 2016) version 1.6.10.0 was used for database search with the following parameter. Reporter ion MS3 type: 9plex TMT at a reporter ion mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. The TMT isotopic reporter ion correction factors were manually entered as provided by the manufacturer. The following group specific parameters were used, A built-in Andromeda search engine was used by specifying Trypsin/P as a specific enzyme by allowing 2 missed cleavages, minimum length of 7 amino acids, Oxidation of (M), Acetyl (Protein-N-terminal), Deamidation N and Q were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation Cys was selected as fixed modification. First search tolerance of 20 ppm and main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm were selected. Global Parameters: Uniprot Human protein database appended with SARS-COV2 NSP3 with twin strep-tag (release 2017-02; 42,101 sequences) was used for the database search and 1% peptide and protein level FDR was applied. For protein quantification, min ratio count was set at 2 for accurate reporter ion quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Of the 16 non-structural proteins (Nsps) encoded by SARS CoV-2, Nsp3 is the largest and plays important roles in the viral life cycle. Being a large, multidomain, transmembrane protein, Nsp3 has been the most challenging Nsp to characterize. Encoded within Nsp3 is the papain-like protease domain (PLpro) that cleaves not only the viral polypeptide but also K48-linked polyubiquitin and the ubiquitin-like modifier, ISG15, from host cell proteins. We here compare the interactors of PLpro and Nsp3 and find a largely overlapping interactome. Intriguingly, we find that near full length Nsp3 is a more active protease compared to the minimal catalytic domain of PLpro. Using a MALDI-TOF based assay, we screen 1971 approved clinical compounds and identify five compounds that inhibit PLpro with IC50s in the low micromolar range but showed cross reactivity with other human deubiquitinases and had no significant antiviral activity in cellular SARS-CoV-2 infection assays. We therefore looked for alternative methods to block PLpro activity and engineered competitive nanobodies that bind to PLpro at the substrate binding site with nanomolar affinity thus inhibiting the enzyme. Our work highlights the importance of studying Nsp3 and provides tools and valuable insights to investigate Nsp3 biology during the viral infection cycle.

### Keywords
Ubiqutylation, Isg15, Sars cov-2

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, Sir James Black Centre, Dow Street, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Yogesh Kulathu
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, Sir James Black Centre, Dow Street, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK


