### Accession
PXD029571

### Title
Comparative secretome analysis of Staphylococcus aureus strains with different within-herd intramammary infection prevalence

### Description
This investigation reports a differential proteomic analysis of the secretome of six S. aureus strains belonging to two genotypes with opposite within-herd prevalence, GTB (high) and GTS (low), corresponding to sequence types (ST) 8 and 398, respectively. Total proteins released in the growth medium were subjected to high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry and differential analysis with Proteome Discoverer by label-free approach.  Here, we reported both the characterization of secretome proteins and a panel of differential proteins specific of S. Aureus depending on high or low within-herd prevalence. GTB/ST8 (High) released more immunoglobulin-binding proteins, complement and antimicrobial peptide inhibitors, enterotoxins, and metabolic enzymes, while GTS/ST398 (Low) released more leukocidins, hemolysins, lipases, and peptidases. Furthermore, GTB/ST8 (High) released the von Willebrand factor protein, staphylokinase, and clumping factor B, while GTS/ST398 (Low) released the staphylococcal coagulase and clumping factor A. In conclusion, our results provide an in-depth characterization of secretome proteins of the three S. aureus GTB/ST8 and three GTS/ST398 strains with high and low within-herd prevalence. We describe the role of extracellular proteins in S. Aureus pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus strains were collected from the milk of cows with subclinical mastitis belonging to herds with different prevalence of intramammary infection (IMI). These animals were characterized by Repetitive-Sequence polymerase chain reaction (RS-PCR) and Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) (1-2). (1) Cremonesi P, Pozzi F, Raschetti M, Bignoli G, Capra E, Graber HU, Vezzoli F, Piccinini R, Bertasi B, Biffani S, Castiglioni B, Luini M. Genomic characteristics of Staphylococcus aureus strains associated with high within-herd prevalence of intramammary infections in dairy cows. J. Dairy Sci., 2015, 98, 6828–6838. (2) Capra E, Cremonesi P, Pietrelli A, Puccio S, Luini M, Stella A, Castiglioni B. Genomic and transcriptomic comparison between Staphylococcus aureus strains associated with high and low within herd prevalence of intra-mammary infection. BMC Microbiol., 2017, 17, 1–16. Three strains, identified as GTS/ST398, had been isolated from herds with low IMI prevalence (range: 2-4%), and three strains, identified as GTB/ST8, had been collected in herds with high IMI prevalence (range: 49-62%) (1). Briefly, the culture suspensions of S. aureus were incubated at 37°C with agitation until the mid-exponential phase was achieved, at about 3.5 hours of incubation (2). To separate bacterial cells and secreted proteins, bacterial suspensions were centrifuged at 9,300 g for 5 minutes, and supernatants were then transferred to new sterile Eppendorf tubes. Bacterial culture supernatants were concentrated 10x in Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units with Ultracel-10 membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Protein concentration was evaluated with the Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Finally, the supernatants of each sample obtained were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) for shotgun proteomic analysis, as described previously (3). (3) Pisanu S, Cubeddu T, Pagnozzi D, Rocca S, Cacciotto C, Alberti A, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps in sheep mastitis. Vet Res. BioMed Central Ltd; 2015;46: 59. All peptide samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnanoLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), as described by Pisanu et al. (4). (4)  Pisanu S, Cacciotto C, Pagnozzi D, Puggioni GMG, Uzzau S, Ciaramella P, Guccione J, Penati M, Pollera C, Moroni P, Bronzo V, Addis MF. Proteomic changes in the milk of water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) with subclinical mastitis due to intramammary infection by Staphylococcus aureus and by non-aureus staphylococci. Sci Rep, 2019, 9 (1), 15850.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4; Thermo Scientific) software to obtain protein identification using Sequest-HT as search engine with Staphylococcus aureus database (137,957 sequences retrieved from UniProt Knowledgebase (UniprotKB), release 2021_02), and percolator as algorithm to evaluate correct and incorrect spectrum identifications (4). Differential analysis was conducted by label-free (LFQ) using precursor ion quantification approach. Precursor ion abundances were calculated using intensity as an abundance parameter, normalized to evaluate the significance of ratio abundance among the identified proteins in two different experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> is a major pathogen causing intramammary infection and mastitis in dairy cows. <i>S. aureus</i> genotypes (GT) can differ significantly in their ability to diffuse and persist in the herd; while the association of virulence gene carriage with epidemiological behavior remains unclear, a role for secreted proteins has been postulated. We characterized the secretome of six <i>S. aureus</i> strains belonging to two genotypes with opposite within-herd prevalence, GTB (high) and GTS (low), corresponding to sequence types (ST) 8 and 398, by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry and differential analysis with Proteome Discoverer. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029571. Out of 720 identified proteins, 98 were unique or more abundant in GTB/ST8 and 68 in GTS/ST398. GTB/ST8 released more immunoglobulin-binding proteins, complement and antimicrobial peptide inhibitors, enterotoxins, and metabolic enzymes, while GTS/ST398 released more leukocidins, hemolysins, lipases, and peptidases. Furthermore, GTB/ST8 released the von Willebrand factor protein, staphylokinase, and clumping factor B, while GTS released the staphylococcal coagulase and clumping factor A. Hence, GTB/ST8 secretomes indicated a higher propensity for immune evasion and chronicity and GTS/ST398 secretomes for cellular damage and inflammation, consistent with their epidemiological characteristics. Accordingly, GTS/ST398 secretions were significantly more cytotoxic against bovine PBMCs <i>in vitro</i>. Our findings confirm the crucial role of extracellular virulence factors in <i>S. aureus</i> pathogenesis and highlight the need to investigate their differential release adding to gene carriage for a better understanding of the relationship of <i>S. aureus</i> genotypes with epidemiological behavior and, possibly, disease severity.

### Keywords
Mastitis, Bacterial virulence, Lc-ms/ms, Mammary gland, Label-free proteomics, Biological dataset

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche,
Alghero, Sardinia, Italy.
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Lodi, 26900, LO, Italy

### Submitter
Salvatore Pisanu

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Filippa Addis
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Lodi, 26900, LO, Italy


