### Accession
PXD003817

### Title
Tomato clade proteome -  Green-fruited Solanum habrochaites lacks fruit-specific carotenogenesis due to metabolic and structural blocks

### Description
Members of the tomato clade exhibit wide diversity in fruit coloration, growth habit, leaf morphology and mating preferences. However, the mechanisms governing inter-species diversity in fruit coloration are largely unknown. Therefore, a proteomic approach combined with carotenoid profiling and carotenogenic gene expression was used to decipher the diversity in carotenogenesis in green-fruited Solanum habrochaites, orange-fruited S. galapagense, and red-fruited S. pimpinellifolium with S. lycopersicum, cv. Ailsa Craig (tomato).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from fruit tissue were extracted using the protocol described in Kilambi etal. 2013. For proteome profiling, MUDPIT approach (GELC-MS) was followed.  A corresponding sample from SL was extracted and analyzed in parallel with respective wild species right from the protein extraction to LC-MS separation. In-gel digestion was carried out following the protocol described in Shevchenko etal. 2006. Eluted peptides after concentration in speedvac were desalted through C18 spincolumns (ThermoScientific) and after aliquoting and drying, the peptides were stored at -80ºC. The trypsin digests were analyzed using Easy-nLCII coupled to LTQ Orbitrap-Velos Pro mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). For separation on nano-LC-MS/MS, an aliquot of dried peptides was re-suspended in solvent A (5%ACN+95%water(v/v)) and 300ng of peptides were loaded onto a trapcolumn (IntegraFrit100µmx2.5cm, 5µm, C18 NewObjective, USA) and eluted on a BiobasicC18picofritcolumn (75 µm x 10 cm, 5 µm, New Objective, USA) at a flowrate of 350nL/min using solventA (water/ACN(95/5) with0.1%formicacid) and solventB (ACN/water(95/5) with 0.1% formicacid). For SH-SL samples, the gradient was- 5%-15%B (0-5min), 15%-95%B) (6-80min), 95%B hold (81-83min), 95%-5%B (84-86min), 5%B hold (87-90min). For SP-SL and SG-SL fruit samples, the gradient was- 5%-30%B(0-100min), 30%-95%B (101-103min),95%B hold (104-106min),95%-5%B (107-113min), 5%B hold(114-118min). Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent method in positive mode with Xcalibur (version2.2,Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was calibrated for both positive and negative modes with Pierce LTQ Velos positive and negative calibration solutions (Thermo Scientific). The survey scans were performed in Orbitrap at are solution of 60,000 using a mass range of 350-2000. MS/MS spectra were obtained in iontrap (IT) using collision induced dissociation (CID) for top 20 peaks resulting from each survey scan. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion period was enabled with a repeat count of 1, and a lockmass of 445.120030 was used for mass accuracy. The top20 peaks were fragmented by CID using normalized collision energy of 35% with an isolation window of 2m/z. Automatic gain control targets (AGC) for full MS and MSn were set at1,000,000 (Orbitrap) and10,000 (IT) for SH-SL. For SG-SL and SP-SL the values were set at 500,000 (Orbitrap) and 10,000 (IT). Full MS data were acquired in profile mode while the MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PDversion1.4, Thermo Scientific). Independent searches were performed for each fraction of an individual sample. Data obtained from SL were searched against the S.lycopersicum iTAG2.3 proteome sequence (ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG2.3_release/ITAG2.3_proteins.fasta, downloaded on February5, 2013, 26705 sequences and 9322189 residues). For SP and SG, data were searched against S.pimpinellifolium database (ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/genomes/Solanum_pimpinellifolium/annotations/Spimpinellifolium_genome_protein_annot.fa) containing 32,715sequences, 11112863residues, downloaded on April25, 2013). For SH, data were searched against protein database generated from SH RNA-Seq data obtained from Julin Maloof`s lab (14,369 sequences, 6321576 residues, downloaded on March 26, 2015). Peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 5ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. In Sequest search engine, trypsin was selected as a protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspargine and glutamine were selected as fixed and variable modifications respectively. Peptides were filtered for high confidence, and a minimum number of two matched peptides were considered for assigning proteinIDs. Percolator tool was used to assess peptide confidence; peptides with qvalue≤0.01 (equivalent to a power of 1 at a P <0.05) were selected, which was estimated based on the number of decoy hits. Label-free quantitation (Sieve2.1software,ThermoScientific) was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins in SH-SL, SP-SL, SG-SL pairs after passing stringent selection criteria (P value≤0.05,minimum2-foldchange(eitherup-ordown-regulation), minimum two peptides for identification, FDR=1%).

### Publication Abstract
Members of the tomato clade exhibit a wide diversity in fruit color, but the mechanisms governing inter-species diversity of coloration are largely unknown. The carotenoid profiles, carotenogenic gene expression and proteome profiles of green-fruited Solanum habrochaites (SH), orange-fruited S. galapagense, and red-fruited S. pimpinellifolium were compared with cultivated tomato [S. lycopersicum cv. Ailsa Craig (SL)] to decipher the molecular basis of coloration diversity. Green-fruited SH, though it showed normal expression of chromoplast-specific phytoene synthase1 and lycopene &#x3b2;-cyclase genes akin to orange/red-fruited species, failed to accumulate lycopene and &#x3b2;-carotene. The SH phytoene synthase1 cDNA encoded an enzymatically active protein, whereas the lycopene &#x3b2;-cyclase cDNA was barely active. Consistent with its green-fruited nature, SH's fruits retained chloroplast structure and PSII activity, and had impaired chlorophyll degradation with high pheophorbide a levels. Comparison of the fruit proteomes with SL revealed retention of the proteome complement related to photosynthesis in SH. Targeted peptide monitoring revealed a low abundance of key carotenogenic and sequestration proteins in SH compared with tomato. The green-fruitedness of SH appears to stem from blocks at several critical steps regulating fruit-specific carotenogenesis namely the absence of chloroplast to chromoplast transformation, block in carotenoid biosynthesis, and a dearth of carotenoid sequestering proteins.

### Keywords
Tomato clade, Fruit proteome, Chromoplast formation, Chlorophyll degradation, Red/orange and green fruited species

### Affiliations
Repository of Tomato Genomics Resources, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India
Associate Professor at University of Hyderabad

### Submitter
Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi

### Lab Head
Dr Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi
Repository of Tomato Genomics Resources, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India


