### Accession
PXD039805

### Title
Brain Endothelial Cells Exposure to Malaria Parasites Links Type I Interferon Signalling to Antigen Presentation, Immunoproteasome Activation Endothelium Disruption, and Cellular Metabolism

### Description
Cerebral malaria (CM) lethality is attributable to brain edema induction but the cellular mechanisms involving brain microvascular endothelium in CM pathogenesis are unexplored. Activation of the STING-INFb-CXCL10 axis in brain endothelial cells (BECs) is a prominent component of the innate immune response in cerebral malaria (CM) development in mouse models. Using a T cell-reporter system, we show that Type 1 IFN signaling in BECs exposed to Plasmodium berghei-infected erythrocytes (PbA-IE), functionally enhances MHC Class-I antigen presentation through gamma-interferon independent immunoproteasome activation and impacted the proteome functionally related to vesicle trafficking, protein processing, and folding and antigen presentation. In vitro assays show that Type 1 IFN signaling and immunoproteasome activation are also involved in the dysfunction of the endothelial barrier through disturbing gene expression in the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. We demonstrate that IE exposure induces a substantial increase in BECs glucose uptake while glycolysis blockade abrogates INFb secretion impairing immunoproteasome activation, antigen presentation, and Wnt/ ß-catenin signaling. Metabolome analysis show that energy demand and production are markedly increased in BECs exposed to IE as revealed by enriched content in glucose and fatty acid catabolites. In accordance, glycolysis blockade in vivo delayed the clinical onset of CM in mice. Our results unveiled that Type 1 IFN signaling and subsequent immunoproteasome activation in BECs contribute to enhanced antigen presentation and the impairment of the endothelial barrier function. We also show that Type 1 IFN signaling and its downstream effects are licensed by dramatic increase in glucose uptake with an impact on energy metabolism pathways. This work raises the hypothesis that Type 1 IFN- immunoproteasome induction response in BECs contributes to CM pathology and fatality (1) by increasing antigen presentation to cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, which is a determinant of brain cytotoxic edema and (2) by promoting endothelial barrier dysfunction, that likely favors brain vasogenic edema.

### Sample Protocol
Brain endothelial cell cultures from five mouse brains of IFNAR1 KO and wild-type mice were prepared in six-well plates and exposed to 5 x106 PbA-IE/well, in the absence of IFN-γ supplementation. Twenty-four hours after stimulation, un-phagocytosed schizonts were washed out and BMECs were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer followed by precipitation with acetone. For precipitation, acetone was chilled at 20° overnight. 4 x volume chilled acetone was added to the lysate and incubated at 20° overnight. After that, the sample was centrifuged at 15000g for 15 minutes and protein pellets were isolated and sent to for mass spectrometric analysis. Cell pellets were solubilized with 10 μL of 8M urea and 10 μL of 1% Protease MAX in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 following sonication in a water bath for 5 min. Following 79 μL of 50 mM Tris-HCl was added together with 1 μL of 100x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) before the probe sonicated with VibraCell probe (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 40 s, with pulse 2/2, at 20% amplitude. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). 17 Sample processing and mass spectrometric analysis was performed at the the Proteomics Biomedicum (Karolinska Institute, Stockholm). Briefly, an aliquot of 15 μg sample was transferred to a new tube and equalized with 50 mM Tris-HCl to a total volume of 90 μL. Proteins were reduced with the addition of 3 μL of 250 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 37°C for 45 min and alkylated with 4.5 μL of 500 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (1.5 μL of 0.2 μg/μL) and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped with 5 μL cc. formic acid (FA), incubating the solutions at RT for 5 min. The sample was cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate with 40 μL bed volume (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Biological samples were labeled with TMT-6plex reagents in random order adding 120 μg TMT-reagent in 30 μL dry acetonitrile (ACN) to each digested sample resolubilized in 70 μL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and incubating at room temperature (RT) for 2 h. The labeling reaction was stopped by adding 11 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating at RT for 15 min before combining them in one vial.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot Server v2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd., UK) search engine against mouse protein database (SwissProt). A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed for full 18 tryptic digestion, while setting the precursor and the fragment ion mass tolerance to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while TMT6plex on lysine and N-termini, oxidation on methionine as well as deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as dynamic modifications. Initial search results were filtered with 5% FDR using the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer. Quantification was based on the TMT-reporter ion intensities. Proteome discrimination of three samples per genotype (IFNAR1 KO or wild-type) was obtained using all proteome features with high-dimensional analysis methods.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1149107.].

### Keywords
Cerebral malaria, Endotherial cells, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Type i interferon

### Affiliations
Proteomics Biomedicum, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Proteomics Biomedicum, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


