### Accession
PXD007516

### Title
Proteomics analysis of milk from cows with Staphylococcus aureus subclinical mastitis

### Description
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS) based label free quantitative proteomics analysis was applied for identification of differentially expressed proteins among the whey samples isolated from, 1) milk from cows with no history of mastitis, negative for S. aureus and somatic cell count (SCC) >2×105 cells\ml and  2) milk samples from sub-clinical mastitis., i.e., positive for S. aureus and SCC >2×105 cells\ml.

### Sample Protocol
Whole milk samples was subjected to centrifugation to skimming and removal of fat. Casein micelles were pelleted and whey were separated.  The volume of extract containing 10 µg of whey proteins was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. The resultant peptides were separated by on-line reverse phase high pressure liquid chromatography and transferred through the nano-spray source. into an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (linear ion trap-orbitrap) hybrid analyzer. One full MS scan (400- 1500 m/z) at a resolution of 240000 and ten data dependent MS/MS scans were performed simultaneously.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant-Andromeda software (version 1.3.0.5) (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany) was used for processing the raw spectra and protein identification was carried out by searching against reference database of Bos taurus proteomes (UniProt Proteome ID:UP000009136; update 10 May 2015). Search was perfomed with the following parameters: Precursor mass accuracy of 7 ppm and MS/MS accuracy of 0.5 Da, variable modification of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.  Protein identification was considered valid with at least one unique or “razor” peptide. In order to carry out the statitsical anaylsis, “ProteinGroups.txt” file of MaxQuant output files was imported in imported in Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3) (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany).  Followed which LFQ intensities were logarithmized with base two and replacement of the missing values with the lowest intensity value. The differentially expressed proteins were identified by applying two-way Student-t test between the control and subclinical mastitis group and error correction using Benjamini–Hochberg method (p value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> is the most common contagious pathogen associated with bovine subclinical mastitis. Current diagnosis of <i>S. aureus</i> mastitis is based on bacteriological culture of milk samples and somatic cell counts, which lack either sensitivity or specificity. Identification of milk proteins that contribute to host defense and their variable responses to pathogenic stimuli would enable the characterization of putative biomarkers of subclinical mastitis. To accomplish this, milk whey samples from healthy and mastitic dairy cows were analyzed using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. In total, 90 proteins were identified, of which 25 showed significant differential abundance between healthy and mastitic samples. In silico functional analyses indicated the involvement of the differentially abundant proteins in biological mechanisms and signaling pathways related to host defense including pathogen-recognition, direct antimicrobial function, and the acute-phase response. This proteomics and bioinformatics analysis not only facilitates the identification of putative biomarkers of <i>S. aureus</i> subclinical mastitis but also recapitulates previous findings demonstrating the abundance of host defense proteins in intramammary infection. All mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier <i>PXD007516</i>.

### Keywords
Maxquant software, Bovine mastitis, Maxquant-andromeda, Cow milk proteomics, Perseus software, Whey, Label free quantitative analysis, Staphylococcus aureus, Ltq orbitrap velos mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Centre for Infectious Medicine,  Freie Universität Berlin,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin,  Germany.

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Centre for Infectious Medicine,  Freie Universität Berlin,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin,  Germany.


