### Accession
PXD013032

### Title
Identification of Siglec-E-ligand candidates on BCL-1 mouse B cell line by proximity labeling

### Description
Siglec-E is a member of Siglec family of glycan recognition proteins involved in the regulation of myeloid cell activities.  Siglec-E preferentially recognizes disialic acid, a glycan epitope consisting of two sialic acids conjugated in alpha2-8 linkage (Zhang JQ et al., Eur J Immunol. 2004, 34:1175-84).  BCL-1, a mouse B cell line, expresses disialic acid epitope (Wang SH et al., Glycobiology. 2013, 23:677-89).  In this experiment, we attempted at identifying the ligands of Siglec-E on BCL-1 by applying the proximity labeling method we developed (Chang L et al., J Proteome Res. 2017, 16:3929-41).

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling of Siglec-E ligands on B cells was conducted as described previously (Chang et al., J Proteome Res 2017, 16:3929-41).  In brief, 10×10^6 cells were first incubated on ice with human IgG (1 mg/ml) to block FcγR(s), then with a mixture of Siglec-E-Fc (10 μg; a recombinant fusion protein consisting of the extracellular domain of mouse Siglec-E, FLAG tag and human IgG1 Fc fragment) and peroxidase-conjugated anti-FLAG antibody (5 μg; Sigma A8592) on ice for 1h.  TREM1-Fc was used as a negative control.  The cells were washed twice with Tris-buffered saline (TBS; 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl), and then incubated with TBS containing 10 μM biotin-tyramide and 10 mM H2O2 at room temperature for 10 min.  The cells were washed three times with TBS, lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitor (Complet Ultra, Roche) and then centrifuged (15,000 g, 30 min) to obtain cleared cell lysate.  Biotin-labeled proteins were captured with streptavidin-magnetic beads (Dynabeads Streptavidin-MyOne C1, ThermoFisher) from the cleared lysate, and eluted in 1×SDS-PAGE sample buffer by boiling at 100°C for 5 min.  The eluate was subjected to SDS-PAGE, silver staining, band excision (5 areas), and de-staining.  Proteins in the de-stained gels were subjected to reduction, alkylation, in-gel trypsin digestion, and Orbitrap Fusion as described previously (Chang et al., J Proteome Res 2017, 16:3929-41).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher), and peptide identification was performed by search engines Mascot (version 2.3.2) and SEQUEST against the Swiss-Prot database (v2015_12). Label-free quantification was performed using the peak area of each precursor ion calculated from extracted ion chromatogram during data processing using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node with mass precision 2 ppm. The abundance of identified protein was calculated from the top three of all unique and razor peptides in Peptide and Protein Quantifier node, and was used to calculate the relative protein abundance between experimental samples.

### Publication Abstract
Siglecs are a family of receptor-type glycan recognition proteins (lectins) involved in self-nonself discrimination by the immune system. Identification of Siglec ligands is necessary to understand how Siglec-ligand interaction translates into biological outcomes. However, this is challenging because the interaction is weak. To facilitate identification of Siglec ligands, we adopted a proximity labeling method based on the tyramide radicalization principle. Cells that express Siglec ligands were labeled with Siglec-peroxidase complexes and incubated with biotin tyramide and hydrogen peroxide to generate short-lived tyramide radicals that covalently label the proteins near the Siglec-peroxidase complex. A proof-of-principle experiment using CD22 (Siglec-2) probe identified its known ligands on B cells, including CD22 itself, CD45, and IgM, among others, demonstrating the validity of this method. The specificity of labeling was confirmed by sialidase treatment of target cells and using glycan recognition-deficient mutant CD22 probes. Moreover, possible interactions between biotin-labeled proteins were revealed by literature-based protein-protein interaction network analysis, implying the presence of a molecular cluster comprising CD22 ligands. Further application of this method identified CD44 as a hitherto unknown Siglec-15 ligand on RAW264.7-derived osteoclasts. These results demonstrated the utility of proximity labeling for the identification of Siglec ligands, which may extend to other lectins.

### Keywords
B cell, Sialic acid, Lc-msms, Mouse, Siglec-e, Ligand

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


