### Accession
PXD041373

### Title
Kinetics of peptides generated during static INFOFEST in vitro digestion of mealworms and crickets compared to chicken breast

### Description
Mealworms and crickets are edible protein-dense insects that can be produced more sustainably than animal proteins from livestock, and are therefore promising alternative protein sources for human consumption. The protein amount provided by a food source is, however, dependent on the protein digestibility. To evaluate hydrolysis of insect proteins compared to the highly digestible chicken breast, mealworms and crickets that underwent different food preparation and processing steps (blanching, oven-drying, freeze-drying and dechitinization) were subjected to the static INFOGEST in vitro digestion protocol. Peptide patterns were created by sampling in vitro digesta multiple times throughout the in vitro digestion protocol (one sample in the oral phase, and ten in the gastric as well as the intestinal phase). Peptides in digesta were isolated, and samples from the different time points were measured by LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The in vitro digestion samples were centrifuged (13'000 x g, 4°C, 15 min) with subsequent filtration of supernatants through Amicon columns (Ultracel YM-30, Millipore, Switzerland). Peptides were then separated by a Rheos 2200 HPLC (Flux Instruments AG, Switzerland) with an XTerra MS C18 column (3.5 µm, 1.0 mm, Waters, USA), and measured with a linear ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ, Thermo Scientific, Switzerland) in three overlapping narrow-mass window spanning from 100 to 1300 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The three raw files per sample were merged and a protein identification using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, UK) was performed within a custom database containing the main proteins from each species. Mascot search settings were the following: enzyme: none; maximum miscleavages: 1; peptide and MS/MS tolerance: 0.8 Da; variable modifications: deamidated (NQ), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), phospho (ST); significance threshold p<0.05; ions score cut-off: 20. Protein selection for database was based on a previously performed protein identification of the products prior to in vitro digestion by LC-MS analysis after tryptic in-gel digestion. For each sample, the amino acids within all identified peptides of one protein were mapped along the protein sequence, summed up, and shown in color-code according to their abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acheta domesticus, Chicken, Insect; peptide pattern; infogest; protein hydrolysis; tenebrio molitor

### Affiliations
Agroscope Schwarzenburgstrasse 161 3003 Bern Switzerland
Agroscope

### Submitter
Reto Portmann

### Lab Head
Dr Reto Portmann
Agroscope Schwarzenburgstrasse 161 3003 Bern Switzerland


