### Accession
PXD001676

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of paired colorectal cancer and non-tumorigenic tissues reveal proteins and pathways perturbed in colorectal cancer

### Description
Proteomics is a dynamic field emerged dramatically the post genomic era which has been extensively employed to study altered protein expression to gain insight into the development process and pathways involved in cancer and uncover potential protein markers. Membrane proteomes of an expanded cohort of paired CRC and adjacent non-tumorigenic tissues (1 female and 7 males) were profiled using high resolution nanoLC-MS/MS-based proteomics, which identified 1,000-1,300 proteins in each of the two tissue types. 184 proteins were differentially expressed (P < 0.05, fold change > 1.5); 69 proteins were up- regulated and 115 proteins were down-regulated in the CRC tissues relative to non-tumorigenic tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Cohort of eight paired primary CRC tissue samples and their corresponding adjacent non-tumorigenic tissues were used .Membrane proteins were extracted by Triton-X114 phase partitioning, in-gel trypsin digested into ten fractions and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis by LTQ orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were converted to mzXML format  using freeware Readw.exe program and processed through global proteome machine software (GPM; version 2.2.1), an open source protein identification system that uses X!Tandem algorithm

### Publication Abstract
Modern proteomics has proven instrumental in our understanding of the molecular deregulations associated with the development and progression of cancer. Herein, we profile membrane-enriched proteome of tumor and adjacent normal tissues from eight CRC patients using label-free nanoLC-MS/MS-based quantitative proteomics and advanced pathway analysis. Of the 948 identified proteins, 184 proteins were differentially expressed (P&lt;0.05, fold change&gt;1.5) between the tumor and non-tumor tissue (69 up-regulated and 115 down-regulated in tumor tissues). The CRC tumor and non-tumor tissues clustered tightly in separate groups using hierarchical cluster analysis of the differentially expressed proteins, indicating a strong CRC-association of this proteome subset. Specifically, cancer associated proteins such as FN1, TNC, DEFA1, ITGB2, MLEC, CDH17, EZR and pathways including actin cytoskeleton and RhoGDI signaling were deregulated. Stage-specific proteome signatures were identified including up-regulated ribosomal proteins and down-regulated annexin proteins in early stage CRC. Finally, EGFR(+) CRC tissues showed an EGFR-dependent down-regulation of cell adhesion molecules, relative to EGFR(-) tissues. Taken together, this study provides a detailed map of the altered proteome and associated protein pathways in CRC, which enhances our mechanistic understanding of CRC biology and opens avenues for a knowledge-driven search for candidate CRC protein markers.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Mass spectrometery

### Affiliations
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Manveen Sethi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Susan Fanayan
Macquarie University


