### Accession
PXD023511

### Title
ChIRP-MS of the lncRNA SAMMSON in uveal melanoma

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) can exhibit cell-type or even cancer-type specific expression profiles, making them highly attractive as therapeutic targets. PAN cancer RNA sequencing data revealed sustained expression of the SAMMSON lncRNA in uveal melanoma (UM), the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults. Currently, there are no effective treatments for UM patients with metastatic disease, resulting in a median survival time of 6-12 months. We aimed to investigate the therapeutic potential of SAMMSON inhibition in UM.

### Sample Protocol
75 x 106 – 100 x 106 cells were cultured in 145 cm2 dishes at a maximum confluency of 80%, washed once with ice-cold PBS, and UV cross-linked in ice-cold PBS at 254 nm with an increasing intensity up to 400 mJ/cm2. Cells were scraped in ice-cold PBS, and split equally among eight microcentrifuge tubes. ChIRP lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% NP-40, 0.1% SDS) (8) was supplemented with fresh 0.1% sodiumdeoxycholate, 60 U/mL Superase-In Rnase inhibitor (Invitrogen), 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Cell pellets were resuspended in supplemented ChIRP lysis buffer, and sonicated with a Bioruptor (Diagenode) until lysates appeared clear. 5 µL lysate was treated with proteinase K (Sigma), and gDNA was purified using a PCR clean-up kit (Machery-Nagel). Purified gDNA was run on a 1% agarose gel to ensure proper fragment size (<500 bp). 10% of the ChIRP sample was used for RNA extraction of input material. Thereafter, 6.23 µL of 50 µM SAMMSON or LacZ biotinylated capture probes (LGC Biosearch Technologies) were bound to 100 µL of equilibrated Rnase-free Dyna-One C1 magnetic beads (Thermo) per sample and were incubated overnight at 4°C. Next day, ChIRP lysates were pre-cleared with 30 µL Rnase-free Dyna-One C1 magnetic beads by end-to-end rotation for 30 min at 4 °C. After pre-clearing, SAMMSON or LacZ probe-bound beads were added and lysates were rotated for 3h at 4°C. Bead-bound fractions were washed three times with supplemented ChIRP lysis buffer. 10% of the sample was used for RNA extraction to validate RNA pulldown on RT-qPCR. Next, beads were washed three times with Rnase-free trypsin digestion buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 2 mM CaCl2), and were ultimately resuspended in 20 µL 20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5. 750 ng trypsin was added directly on the beads, and digestion was left overnight at 37 °C. Next day, an additional 250 ng trypsin was added and incubated for 3 h at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 2 % formic acid. All experiments were performed in biological triplicates for label-free quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analysed using the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant (MaxQuant v1.6.0.1). Spectra were searched against the human UniProt sequence database. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The minimum label-free quantitation ratio count was 2, and the Fast LFQ option was disabled. After the searches were completed, LFQ intensities were imported in Perseus (v1.5.8.5) for downstream analysis. LFQ intensities were log 2 transformed, and contaminant proteins, reverse hits, and protein only identified by site were excluded from the analysis. Three valid values in at least one sample group (i.e. pulldown of SAMMSON or LacZ) was used for a protein to be included in further analysis. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution of intensities. A two-sided t-test (0.05 FDR, 1000 randomizations) was performed to identify differential proteins in volcano plots. Reactome was used to perform overrepresentation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) can exhibit cell-type and cancer-type specific expression profiles, making them highly attractive as therapeutic targets. Pan-cancer RNA sequencing data revealed broad expression of the SAMMSON lncRNA in uveal melanoma (UM), the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults. Currently, there are no effective treatments for UM patients with metastatic disease, resulting in a median survival time of 6-12 months. We aimed to investigate the therapeutic potential of SAMMSON inhibition in UM. Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO)-mediated SAMMSON inhibition impaired the growth and viability of a genetically diverse panel of uveal melanoma cell lines. These effects were accompanied by an induction of apoptosis and were recapitulated in two uveal melanoma patient derived xenograft (PDX) models through subcutaneous ASO delivery. SAMMSON pulldown revealed several candidate interaction partners, including various proteins involved in mitochondrial translation. Consequently, inhibition of SAMMSON impaired global, mitochondrial and cytosolic protein translation levels and mitochondrial function in uveal melanoma cells. The present study demonstrates that SAMMSON expression is essential for uveal melanoma cell survival. ASO-mediated silencing of SAMMSON may provide an effective treatment strategy to treat primary and metastatic uveal melanoma patients.

### Keywords
Lncrna, Sammson, Chirp-ms

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology UGent Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB-UGent

### Submitter
Louis Delhaye

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology UGent Department of Biomolecular Medicine


