### Accession
PXD031168

### Title
The H. pylori CagA Oncoprotein Induces DNA Double Strand Breaks Through Fanconi Anemia Pathway Downregulation and Replication Fork Collapse

### Description
The proteins from the Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway of DNA repair maintain DNA replication fork integrity by preventing the unscheduled degradation of nascent DNA at regions of stalled replication forks. Here, we ask if the bacterial pathogen H. pylori exploits the fork stabilisation machinery to generate double stand breaks (DSBs) and genomic instability. Specifically, we study if the H. pylori virulence factor CagA generates host genomic DSBs through replication fork destabilisation and collapse. An inducible gastric cancer model was used to examine global CagA-dependent transcriptomic and proteomic alterations, using RNA sequencing and SILAC-based mass spectrometry, respectively. The transcriptional alterations were confirmed in gastric cancer cell lines infected with H. pylori. Functional analysis was performed using chromatin fractionation, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and single molecule DNA replication/repair fiber assays. We found a core set of 31 DNA repair factors including the FA genes FANCI, FANCD2, BRCA1, and BRCA2 that were downregulated following CagA expression. H. pylori infection of gastric cancer cell lines showed downregulation of the aforementioned FA genes in a CagA-dependent manner. Consistent with FA pathway downregulation, chromatin purification studies revealed impaired levels of Rad51 but higher recruitment of the nuclease MRE11 on the chromatin of CagA-expressing cells, suggesting impaired fork protection. In line with the above data, fibre assays revealed higher fork degradation, lower fork speed, daughter strands gap accumulation, and impaired re-start of replication forks in the presence of CagA, indicating compromised genome stability. By downregulating the expression of key DNA repair genes such as FANCI, FANCD2, BRCA1, and BRCA2, H. pylori CagA compromises host replication fork stability and induces DNA DSBs through fork collapse. These data unveil an intriguing example of a bacterial virulence factor that induces genomic instability by interfering with the host replication fork stabilisation machinery.

### Sample Protocol
CagA was induced in SILAC labelled MKN-28 cells by the withdrawal of doxycycline for 72 h and cells were harvested. In the “forward” experiment, CagA was expressed in cells grown in the “heavy medium” by withdrawing doxycycline from the medium. While in the “reverse” experiment, CagA was expressed in cells grown in the “light medium”. Total cells extracts were prepared by re-suspending pellets in 3x packed cell volume of ice-cold suspension buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with complete protease inhibitors (Roche), HALT phosphatase inhibitor (Pierce), and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). After incubation on ice for 5 min, an equal volume of 2x gel loading buffer (4% SDS, 200 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH 6.8, 20% glycerol) was added and samples were boiled for 5 min at 95°C, sonicated, and spun down at 13,500 g at room temperature for 15 min. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay reagent (Pierce). Equal amounts of CagA control and CagA-expressing extracts were mixed, boiled in 1X SDS loading buffer for 5 min, and 100 μg were run on a 12% Bis-Tris gel (NuPAGE, Thermo) for 30 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer. The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo) and each lane was divided into 4 equal fractions of different MW. For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol) and reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56 °C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-QAQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40 °C. A 215-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (32) version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labelled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The proteins from the Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway of DNA repair maintain DNA replication fork integrity by preventing the unscheduled degradation of nascent DNA at regions of stalled replication forks. Here, we ask if the bacterial pathogen <i>H. pylori</i> exploits the fork stabilisation machinery to generate double stand breaks (DSBs) and genomic instability. Specifically, we study if the <i>H. pylori</i> virulence factor CagA generates host genomic DSBs through replication fork destabilisation and collapse. An inducible gastric cancer model was used to examine global CagA-dependent transcriptomic and proteomic alterations, using RNA sequencing and SILAC-based mass spectrometry, respectively. The transcriptional alterations were confirmed in gastric cancer cell lines infected with <i>H. pylori.</i> Functional analysis was performed using chromatin fractionation, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and single molecule DNA replication/repair fiber assays. We found a core set of 31 DNA repair factors including the FA genes FANCI, FANCD2, BRCA1, and BRCA2 that were downregulated following CagA expression. <i>H. pylori</i> infection of gastric cancer cell lines showed downregulation of the aforementioned FA genes in a CagA-dependent manner. Consistent with FA pathway downregulation, chromatin purification studies revealed impaired levels of Rad51 but higher recruitment of the nuclease MRE11 on the chromatin of CagA-expressing cells, suggesting impaired fork protection. In line with the above data, fibre assays revealed higher fork degradation, lower fork speed, daughter strands gap accumulation, and impaired re-start of replication forks in the presence of CagA, indicating compromised genome stability. By downregulating the expression of key DNA repair genes such as FANCI, FANCD2, BRCA1, and BRCA2, <i>H. pylori</i> CagA compromises host replication fork stability and induces DNA DSBs through fork collapse. These data unveil an intriguing example of a bacterial virulence factor that induces genomic instability by interfering with the host replication fork stabilisation machinery.

### Keywords
H. pylori; dna replication; caga; dna double strand breaks; fanconi anemia; h2ax

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore


