### Accession
PXD011630

### Title
Integrative analysis identifies key molecular signatures underlying neurodevelopmental deficits in fragile X syndrome

### Description
Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by epigenetic silencing of FMR1 and loss of FMRP expression. Here we describe the establishment of an isogenic human pluripotent embryonic stem cell model of FXS. Using CRISPR/Cas9 to introduce indels in exon 3 of FMR1 and result in complete loss of FMRP (FMR1KO). We show that FMRP-deficient neurons exhibit a number of phenotypic abnormalities including neurite outgrowth and branching deficits and impaired electrophysiological network activity as measured by multi-electrode arrays. RNA-Seq and proteome analysis of FMRP-deficient neurons revealed transcriptional dysregulation in pathways related to neurodevelopment, neurotransmission, and the cell cycle.

### Sample Protocol
100ul of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer were added and the mixture was boiled for 10 min to denature proteins. After cooling down, the proteolytic enzymes LysC and trypsin were added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Digestion was performed overnight at 37C. Peptides were acidified using tri-fluoro-acetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% for SDB-RPS binding, and 20ug was loaded on two StageTip plugs.  The StageTips were washed twice with 1% TFA and once with 0.2% TFA and centrifuged at 500xg. After washing the purified peptides were eluted by 60ul of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 19% ddH2O, 1%ammonia). The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A* (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and afterwards mixed for 10 minutes at 1000rpm. Peptide concentrations were determined by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) measurement at A280nm. The sample concentrations were adjusted to 1.0ug per injection. All peptide samples were analyzed with nanoflow Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Denmark) coupled to Q Exactive mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Denmark). Peptides were separated on in-house packed column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm length) with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Column temperature was kept at 60°C. Peptide separation was achieved by 100 min gradients. Peptides were loaded with 0.1% formic acid and eluted with a nonlinear gradient of increasing buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) and decreasing buffer A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. Buffer B was increased slowly from 2% to 220% over 55 minutes and ramped to 40% over 40 minutes and then to 98%, where it was held for 5 minutes before being drop down to 2% again for column re-equilibration. Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 275 °C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 60,000 with an automatic gain control target value (AGC) of 3 ×106 using a scan range of 350− 1650 m/z and maximum injection times (IT) of 15ms. This was followed by a data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy= 28) of up to 15 most abundant precursor ions. The MS/MS scans were obtained at 15,000 resolution with AGC target of 5×104 and maximum injection time of 25ms. Repeated sequencing of peptides was reduced by dynamically excluding previously targeted peptides for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All data files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite 1.5.5.1 (ww.maxquant.org) with the Andromeda search engine32. MS/ MS spectra were searched against an in silico tryptic digest of Homo Sapiens proteins from the UniProt sequence database. All MS/MS spectra were searched with the following MaxQuant parameters for peptide identification: acetyl and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Precursors were initially matched to 4.5 ppm tolerance and 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide matches was set to 1% based on Andromeda score, peptide length, and individual peptide mass errors. Peptide length was minimum 7 amino acids, minimum Andromeda score was 40 and maximal peptide mass was 4600Da. The second peptide feature was enabled. The match between runs option was also enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant33. Protein quantification needed minimum two unique or razor peptides per protein group and minimum ratio count was set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fxs, Human, Isogenic, Neuron, Proteomics, Hpsc, Hf

### Affiliations
Translational Laboratory in Genetic Medicine, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore (A*STAR), 8A Biomedical Grove, Immunos, Level 5, Singapore 138648
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Niels Henning Skotte

### Lab Head
Dr Mahmoud Pouladi
Translational Laboratory in Genetic Medicine, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore (A*STAR), 8A Biomedical Grove, Immunos, Level 5, Singapore 138648


