### Accession
PXD042332

### Title
Evaluation of the impacts of detergent introduction on the target identification performance of TPP

### Description
In this study, we assessed the target identification performance of TPP in the presence of a commonly used non-ionic detergent or a zwitterionic detergent using a pan-kinase inhibitor staurosporine, our results showed that the addition of either of these detergents significantly impaired the identification performance of TPP at the optimal temperature for soluble target protein identification. Further investigation showed that detergents destabilized the proteome and increased protein precipitation. By lowering the applied temperature point, target identifi-cation performance with detergents is significantly improved and is comparable to that in the absence of detergents. Our findings provide valuable insight into how to select the appropriate temperature range when detergents are used in TPP. In addition, our results also suggest that the combination of detergent and heat may serve as a novel precipitation-inducing force that can be applied for target protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
K562 cells were suspended in the lysis buffer (PBS with 1% EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail or 0.4% NP40 or 1%CHAPS) followed by freeze-thawing three times with liquid nitrogen.  The lysate was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. The supernatant was either incubated with 20 μM staurosporine or DMSO. After incubation,The resulting samples were heated at 52 ℃ (or 49℃) for 3 min. Subsequently, the samples were centrifugated to remove the precipitates. After centrifugation, the supernatant proteins were denatured and carbamylated and subjected to an FASP protocol. Digestion was carried out for 20 h at 37°C using Trypsin at a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1. The residual peptides were collected and dried in SpeedVac. The peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with a micro-flow LC system and FAIMS interface. Specially, 10 μg peptides were separated on a commercial 15 cm x 1 mm i.d. column (ACQUITY UPLC Peptide CSH C18 Column, 130Å, 1.7 μm; Waters). Binary buffers (A, 0.1% FA; B, 80% ACN and 0.1% FA) were used. Peptides were separated by linear gradients from 6% B to 32% B for 80 min followed by a linear increase to 45% B in 14 min at the flow of 50 μL/min. FAIMS parameters were set as followings: compensation voltage, -45 V; total carrier gas flow, 3.5 L/min. Full MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution (m/z = 200) spanning from m/z 350 to 1400 with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 45 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with a resolution of 30,000 (m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were analyzed with Spectronaut (Biognosys AG, version 17) using the directDIA analysis module. A non-redundant Uniprot human database containing 20,185 proteins (downloaded in 2022) was imported as a FASTA file for di-rectDIA searching. The other parameters were set as default. MS2 intensity of each protein was exported as protein intensity. Bayes t-test was performed between stau-rosporine and DMSO-treated groups via R (limma package).

### Publication Abstract
Although the use of detergents in thermal proteome profiling (TPP) has become a common practice to identify membrane protein targets in complex biological samples, surprisingly, there is no proteome-wide investigation into the impacts of detergent introduction on the target identification performance of TPP. In this study, we assessed the target identification performance of TPP in the presence of a commonly used non-ionic detergent or a zwitterionic detergent using a pan-kinase inhibitor staurosporine, our results showed that the addition of either of these detergents significantly impaired the identification performance of TPP at the optimal temperature for soluble target protein identification. Further investigation showed that detergents destabilized the proteome and increased protein precipitation. By lowering the applied temperature point, the target identification performance of TPP with detergents is significantly improved and is comparable to that in the absence of detergents. Our findings provide valuable insight into how to select the appropriate temperature range when detergents are used in TPP. In addition, our results also suggest that the combination of detergent and heat may serve as a novel precipitation-inducing force that can be applied for target protein identification.

### Keywords
Mild detergents; thermal proteome profiling; target protein identification

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)

### Submitter
yuying ye

### Lab Head
Dr Mingling Ye
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)


