### Accession
PXD022599

### Title
The contact allergen NiSO4 triggers a distinct molecular response in primary human dendritic cells compared to bacterial LPS

### Description
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is the most prevalent form of immunotoxicity in humans. Dendritic cells (DC) play a central role in the pathogenesis of ACD, particularly during the sensitization phase to a specific allergen. Upon activation, DCs maturate and migrate to draining lymph nodes which is accompanied by major metabolic and phenotypic alterations that facilitate the presentation of the captured antigen to prime naïve T cells. Nevertheless, knowledge on the molecular effects during maturation of DCs in the context of ACD remain scarce. Here, we present a global proteomic analysis of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDC) treated with NiSO4, the most prominent cause of ACD. Proteomic alterations induced after treatment with NiSO4 were compared to the bacterial trigger lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Both substances possess a similar TLR4 binding capacity, which may help to identify allergy-specific effects compared to bacterial activation.  MoDCs treated for 24 h with 2.5 µg/ ml LPS displayed a very strong immunological response, characterized by upregulation of DC activation markers, secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and stimulation of T cell proliferation. Similar immunological responses were observed after treatment with 400 µM NiSO4 but less pronounced. Both triggered TLR4 and TREM1 pathways. However, NiSO4 in addition, also activated hypoxic and apoptotic pathways, which might have overshadowed initial signaling. Moreover, our proteomic data support the importance of Nrf2 as a key player in mediating sensitization since many Nrf2 targets genes were strongly upregulated on protein level selectively after treatment with NiSO4. Strikingly, NiSO4 stimulation induced cellular hypocholesterolemia which was counteracted by the induction of genes and proteins relevant for cholesterol biosynthesis. Our proteomic study allowed for the first time to better characterize some of the fundamental differences between NiSO4 and LPS-triggered activation of MoDCs, providing an important contribution to the molecular understanding of contact allergy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, and label-free quantification was used for protein quantification. The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were processed using MaxQuant Version 1.6.3.10  and the Homo sapiens UniProtKB reference proteome (24-09-2019, 74349 reviewed and unreviewed entries). LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed before calculation of p-values using the student’s t-test. These steps were conducted with R-3.5.0.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DC) play a central role in the pathogenesis of allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), the most prevalent form of immunotoxicity in humans. However, knowledge on allergy-induced DC maturation is still limited and proteomic studies, allowing to unravel molecular effects of allergens, remain scarce. Therefore, we conducted a global proteomic analysis of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDC) treated with NiSO<sub>4</sub>, the most prominent cause of ACD and compared proteomic alterations induced by NiSO<sub>4</sub> to the bacterial trigger lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Both substances possess a similar toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 binding capacity, allowing to identify allergy-specific effects compared to bacterial activation. MoDCs treated for 24 h with 2.5 &#x3bc;g/ml LPS displayed a robust immunological response, characterized by upregulation of DC activation markers, secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and stimulation of T cell proliferation. Similar immunological reactions were observed after treatment with 400 &#x3bc;M NiSO<sub>4</sub> but less pronounced. Both substances triggered TLR4 and triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (TREM) 1 signaling. However, NiSO<sub>4</sub> also activated hypoxic and apoptotic pathways, which might have overshadowed initial signaling. Moreover, our proteomic data support the importance of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) as a key player in sensitization since many Nrf2 targets genes were strongly upregulated on protein and gene level selectively after treatment with NiSO<sub>4</sub>. Strikingly, NiSO<sub>4</sub> stimulation induced cellular cholesterol depletion which was counteracted by the induction of genes and proteins relevant for cholesterol biosynthesis. Our proteomic study allowed for the first time to better characterize some of the fundamental differences between NiSO<sub>4</sub> and LPS-triggered activation of MoDCs, providing an essential contribution to the molecular understanding of contact allergy.

### Keywords
Allergic contact dermatitis, Monocyte-derived dendritic cells, Proteomics, Nickel, Lps

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Kristin Schubert

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


