### Accession
PXD014958

### Title
Slow growing behavior in African trypanosomes during adipose tissue colonization

### Description
When Trypanosoma brucei parasites, the causative agent of sleeping sickness, colonize the adipose tissue, they rewire gene expression. Whether this adaptation affects population behavior and disease treatment remained unknown. By using a mathematical model, we estimate that the population of adipose tissue forms (ATFs) proliferates slower than blood parasites. Analysis of the ATFs proteome, measurement of protein synthesis and proliferation rates confirm that the ATFs divide on average every 12hr, instead of 6hr in the blood. Importantly, the population of ATFs is heterogeneous with parasites doubling times ranging between 5hr and 35hr. Slow-proliferating parasites remain capable of reverting to the fast proliferation profile in blood conditions. Intravital imaging shows that ATFs are refractory to drug treatment. We propose that in adipose tissue, a subpopulation of T. brucei parasites acquire a slow growing behavior, which contributes to disease chronicity and treatment failure.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated on a 4–12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris precast gel (Life Technologies) for 10 min at 180 V in 1x MOPS buffer, fixated with 7% acetic acid, 40% methanol, stained with 0.25% Coomassie Blue G-250, 45% ethanol, 10% acetic acid and cut into one slice which was chopped to pieces. Destaining was performed in 50% ethanol, 50 m M ammonium bicarbonate until the bands were faint. Protein reduction and alkylation was achieved using 10 m M Dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50mM 2-Iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively. Trypsin MS Grade (Sigma-Aldrich) digestion was performed over night at 37 degC with 1 μg per sample. Peptides were eluted and desalted using Solid Phase Extraction Disk C18 (3 M ) material. Peptides (5 μL in 0.1% formic acid) were reverse-phase separated using an EASYnLC 1000 HPLC system with a 25 cm capillary (75 μm inner diameter; New Objective) self-packed with Reprosil C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) for chromatography. This column was coupled via a Nanospray Flex Source (ESI) to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were sprayed into the mass spectrometer running a 200 min optimized gradient from 2 to 40% ACN with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 225 nL/min. Measurements were performed in positive mode and with a resolution of 70000 for full scan and resolution of 17500 for MS/MS scan. For HCD fragmentation, the 10 most intense peaks were selected and excluded afterwards for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 using default search parameters. A specific digestion with trypsin was defined, allowing for a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Minimum peptide length was defined to 7 amino acids and maximum peptide mass to 4600 Da. FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein level. Second peptides, match between runs with a time window of 0.7 min and protein quantification performed with unique peptides only, with a minimum count of 2, were enabled. Label-free quantification was activated with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2 and FastLFQ was performed. Raw files were searched against a protein database composed by the Trypanosoma brucei TREU927 proteome (version 33, TriTrypDB), the Mus musculus reference proteome (UniProt) and the T. brucei Lister427 BES VSGs. In the protein groups output table, the ones assigned to contaminants or mouse proteins, reverse hits or proteins only identified by a modification site were discarded. Protein groups identified by less than 2 peptides (of which 1 needed to be unique) were also removed. A quantification was assigned to missing values using a beta-distribution scaled between 0.1 and 1.5 percentile of the log2 transformed measured LFQ intensity values, for each sample. Only protein groups identidied by LFQ intensity in at least 2 replicates of the same condition were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spatial proteomics; transcriptomics; gene annotation

### Affiliations
Figueiredo Lab, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Miranda Figueiredo
Figueiredo Lab, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, Portugal


