### Accession
PXD024012

### Title
Systemic Pathogenesis of Different Phenotypes of Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction.

### Description
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) accounts for ~50% of all heart failure cases. HFpEF is a heterogeneous condition with poorly understood molecular mechanisms related to different forms including acute and chronic HFpEF. Here, we utilised plasma samples collected from patients with different forms of HFpEF to identify unique molecular mechanisms and pathways. We performed unbiased, comprehensive proteomic analyses of 31 gender- and BMI-matched plasma samples from patients with acute HFpEF (n=8), chronic HFpEF (n=9) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM; n=14). We identified leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 (LRG1) as an aberrant protein across all three forms of HFpEF. We reported perturbations in signalling pathways in HFpEF mainly driven by complement/coagulation/protease and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, highlighting the haemostatic disturbances, notably platelet degranulation caused by systematically elevated platelet cytosolic Ca2+. We provided a publicly available online application (https://hao-chen-uts-99171821.shinyapps.io/HFpEF-Proteomics/) of our findings.

### Sample Protocol
All plasma samples were thawed and kept on ice during the entire process of proteomic experiment. Plasma sample preparation was adjusted from the previously described methods, stop-and-go-extraction tips (StageTips) (Doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00090). Briefly, 1 μL (~50-60 μg peptides determined by BCA assay) of plasma samples were resuspended in lysis buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 20 mM acrylamide monomer at a sample to buffer ratio of 1:25, and heated to 95°C for 10 minutes for denaturation, reduction and alkylation. The lysates were diluted 1:9 with water. Proteins were digested in sequencing grade trypsin (1 μg/μL; Promega, USA) overnight at 37°C, at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:250. The digestion was ceased by equal volumn of ethyl acetate containing 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by settling until two phases appeared.   The peptide mixtures were then cleaned, concentrated and enriched through StageTips. The StageTip was made by a core extracted from a 47 mm styrene divinyl benzene-reversed phase sulfonate disk using a 14G flat-ended needle. The core was then inserted into an ordinary 100 μL pipette tip from the top until it reaches the maximal depth. Prior to sample addition, the tips were cleaned by 100 μL 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 minute. The tips were equilibrated with 100 μL 0.1% TFA in water and 30% methanol/1% TFA and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 3 minutes for each. The two phases of each sample were mixed by vigorous vortex, followed by an extraction of the volume equivalent of ~10 μg digested peptides loaded onto each StageTip. The loaded peptides were washed twice by 100 μL 99% ethyl acetate/1% TFA, followed by a wash with 100 μL 0.2% TFA in water. To elute, 100 μL 5% ammonium hydroxide/80% acetonitrile was added in each tip and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 5 minutes into an autosampler vial (Thermo Fischer, USA). Samples in the vials were dried in SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher) at highpower for 1 hour. The peptides were then resuspended in 25 μL 0.1% formic acid.  The setup of mass spectrometry was previously described (Doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.013). Using an Acquity M-class nanoLC system (Waters, USA), 5 µL of the sample was loaded at 15 µL/min for 3 mintues onto a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (189 µm x 20 mm) before being washed onto a PicoFrit column (75 µmID x 300 mm; New Objective, USA) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (3 µm;Michrom Bioresources, CA). Peptides were eluted from the column and into the source of an Q ExtractiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) using the following program: 5-30% MS buffer B (98% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid) over 90 minutes, 30-80% MS buffer B over 3 minutes, 80% MS buffer B for 2 minutes, 80-5% for 3 minutes. The eluting peptides were ionised at 2400V. A Data Dependant MS/MS (dd-MS2) experiment was performed, with a survey scan of 350-1500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+ or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 12 peptides were selected fragmented in the HCD cell using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap analyser at 17,500 resolution and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range of 120-2000 Da. The mass of precursor peptides was then excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data files were searched using PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions, CA) against the PEAKS DB human proteome database (2019) and a database of common contaminants (2019) with the following parameter settings: fixed modifications =none; variable modications =propionamide, oxidised methionine, deamidated asparagine; enzyme =semi-trypsin; number of allowed missed cleavages =3; peptide mass tolerance =10 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance =0.05 Da. The results of the search were then filtered to include peptides with a -log10P score that was determined by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1%, in which decoy database search matches were <1% of the total matches.  All statistical analyses were performed in R (4.0.2). All proteomic data were total ion count (TIC)-normalised, followed by Log2-transformed prior to entering pipelines in R. Differential expression (DE) analysis of proteomes by disease groups was conducted using the lmFit and eBayes functions in the limma package, where an empirical linear model is fitted to the proteomic data to identify the DE proteins in each disease group comparison while adjusting for age, gender and diabetes in i) acute HFpEF vs HCM, ii) chronic HFpEF vs HCM and iii) acute HFpEF vs chronic HFpEF. The limma analyses were designed as multi-group comparison, that is, all samples in three disease groups were used to estimate the variance of proteins. We next performed the pairwise-contrasts between each two groups to identify the DE proteins. Pathway analyses were performed with mean-rank gene set tests using geneSetTest function implemented in limma package, in which t-statistics from DE proteins were ranked. Pathways were annotated by the Reactome database. Network plots of DE proteins were generated with the igraph package. Each node was representative of a DE protein; and each edge represented a pairwise Pearson correlation between each protein pair. Only the most correlated nodes were shown (Pearson correlation [r] >0.7), while colour of the edges is indicative of Pearson r. The edge width was coded proportional to the scores derived from STRING database. The functional classifications of nodes were annotated by DAVID. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to calculate the adjusted P values, also known as FDR, for all mentioned analyses. DE proteins were defined as FDR <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) accounts for around 50% of all heart failure cases. It is a heterogeneous condition with poorly understood pathogenesis. Here, we aimed to identify unique pathogenic mechanisms in acute and chronic HFpEF and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). We performed unbiased, comprehensive proteomic analyses of plasma samples from gender- and BMI-matched patients with acute HFpEF (<i>n</i> = 8), chronic HFpEF (<i>n</i> = 9) and HCM (<i>n</i> = 14) using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Distinct molecular signatures were observed in different HFpEF forms. Clusters of biomarkers differentially abundant between HFpEF forms were predominantly associated with microvascular inflammation. New candidate protein markers were also identified, including leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 (LRG1), serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) and inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain 3 (ITIH3). Our study is the first to apply systematic, quantitative proteomic screening of plasma samples from patients with different subtypes of HFpEF and identify candidate biomarkers for improved management of acute and chronic HFpEF and HCM.

### Keywords
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, Plasma, Biomarkers, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Technology Sydney.
University of technology Sydney

### Submitter
Matthew Padula

### Lab Head
Dr Lana McClements
School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Technology Sydney.


