### Accession
PXD033493

### Title
The plasma proteome is favorably modified by a high protein diet but not by additional resistance training in older adults - a 17-week randomized controlled trial

### Description
Background: The age-related loss of muscle mass significantly contributes to the development of chronic diseases, loss of mobility and dependency on others, yet could be improved by an optimized lifestyle. Objective: The goal of this randomized controlled trial was to compare the influence of a habitual diet (CON) with either a diet containing the recommended protein intake (RP) or a high protein intake (HP), both with and without strength training, on the plasma proteome in older adults. Methods: 136 women and men (65-85 years) were randomly assigned to three intervention groups. CON continued their habitual diet; participants of the HP and RP group consumed either high protein or standard foods. After 6 weeks of dietary intervention, HP and RP groups additionally started a strength training intervention twice per week for 8 weeks. 24h dietary recalls were performed every 7 to 10 days. Body composition was assessed and blood taken. Plasma proteomics were assessed with LC-MS. Results: Participants of the HP group doubled their baseline protein intake from 0.80±0.31 g/kg BW/d to 1.63±0.36 g/kg BW/d; RP increased the protein intake from 0.89±0.28 g/kg BW/d to 1.06±0.26 g/kg BW/d. The CON group kept the protein intake stable throughout the study. Combined exercise and HP initiated notable changes, resulting in a reduction in bodyfat and increased muscle mass. Proteomics analyses revealed 14 significantly affected proteins by HP diet, regulating innate immune system, lipid transport and blood coagulation, yet the additional strength training did not elicit further changes. Conclusions: Combined HP and resistance exercise in healthy older adults seem to induce favorable changes in the body composition. Changes in the plasma proteome due to the high protein diet point to a beneficial impact for the innate immune system, lipid transport and blood coagulation system, all of which are involved in chronic disease development.

### Sample Protocol
Following an overnight fast, blood samples were collected into EDTA-coated vacutainers. Samples were placed in the fridge prior to separation of plasma for analysis, and then separated into aliquots and stored in Eppendorf tubes at – 80°C until required for analysis. Sample Preparation Plasma samples were diluted 1:10 in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, 5 % SDS), heated at 90 °C for 5 min prior the protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. For enzymatic protein digestion, 20 μg of protein was used and the ProtiFi S-trap technology applied. In short, solubilized protein was reduced and carbamidomethylated by adding 64 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 48 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively. Before loading the samples onto S-trap mini cartridges, trapping buffer (90 % v/v methanol, 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate) was added. Thereafter, samples were thoroughly washed and subsequently digested using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix at 37 °C for two hours. Finally, peptides were eluted, dried and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analyses. LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5μl of 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides and subsequent dilution with 40 μl of loading solvent (97.9 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Thereof, 500 nL were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A pre-column (2 cm × 75 μm C18 Pepmap100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) run at a flow rate of 10 μl/min using mobile phase A (99.9 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) was used to preconcentrate peptides prior to chromatographic separation. Peptides were then separated on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 μm 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks)) by applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min and using a gradient of 7 % to 40 % mobile phase B (79.9 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 43 min, resulting in a 245 total LC run time of 85 min including washing and equilibration steps. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650 V. Additionally, the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode and a moderate MS data reduction was applied. Further parameters included a scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700 to record MS and MS/MS spectra and a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 – 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 100ms to achieve trapped ion mobility separation. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.16 s. Furthermore, the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 59 eV and the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was achieved using the publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine. Therefore, raw data were searched against the SwissProt database (version 141219 with 20380 entries). Further, search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of one unique peptide identifications per protein was used as search criterium. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.05 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Blood coagulation system, Life style intervention, Strength training, Lipid transport, Plasma proteomics, Innate immune system, Healthy aging, High protein foods

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


