### Accession
PXD013834

### Title
Chemical damage to mRNA triggers ribosome-based quality control in the cell

### Description
Maintaining the integrity of nucleic acids is an essential feature of all organisms. Unwanted modification of DNA, if left unrepaired, is deleterious to cellular homeostasis and could have far-reaching consequences that include genomic instability and accumulation of mutations. Similarly, accumulation of damaged RNA has been correlated with various neurodegenerative diseases. Given their inherent reactivity, nucleic acids are susceptible to damage from both endogenous and exogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as alkylation agents. We have recently begun to address how some of these modifications on mRNA impact the function of the ribosome and in particular the decoding process. We find that most modifications severely change the speed and accuracy of translation. These observations revealed that oxidation of RNA is most likely to stall the ribosome and necessitates the presence of quality-control processes to handle damaged mRNA. To this end, we have uncovered a connection between the process of no-go decay (NGD), which degrades mRNAs that stall translation, and chemical insults. In the absence of key NGD factors in yeast, the levels of damaged mRNA significantly increase and cells are rendered sensitive to oxidizing and alkylation agents. Furthermore, these agents activate ribosome quality control (RQC) of nascent peptides. Deletion of the E3 ligase responsible for the ubiquitination of the nascent peptides resulted in the accumulation of protein aggregates in the presence of oxidizing and alkylating agents. These observations suggest that chemical damage stalls translation, activating NGD and RQC. Interestingly, the addition of nucleic-acids-damaging agents was also found to result in K63-linked ubiquitination of ribosomal proteins. This signaling-mode of ubiquitination precedes DNA-damage marks, indicating that cells respond to RNA damage due to stalled ribosomes before DNA damage. Collectively our data highlights the burden of chemically-damaged mRNA on cellular homeostasis and suggests that organisms evolved ribosome-based mRNA-surveillance processes to rapidly degrade it.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell lysis and peptide digestion were followed according to the standard protocol of PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K--GG) Kit #5562 from Cell Signaling Technology. Specifically, 3-L cultures of mid-log growing cells were treated with 4NQO for 30 min at 300C . Cells were then pelleted, washed and resuspended in xx mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 140 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT), 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), 1 mM Pheylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Cells were by FastPrep-24 (MP Biomedicals, #116004500) with glass beads (Sigma, 425-600 um, #G8772-500G). Cells were processed at top speed for 1 min with 1 min resting on ice for 5 cycles. Debris were pelleted at 15,000 X g for 10 min at 4oC. The lysates were then clarified twice at 30,000 X g for 20 min at 4oC. The ribosome fraction from the lysate was enriched twice by centrifuging over sucrose cushion (1.1M sucrose, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM NH4Cl, 0.5 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM NEM, 1 mM PMSF) and centrifuge at 37,000 rpm for 16 hr at 4 oC. The polysome enriched fraction were resuspended in 10 mL RNase free water, then incubated with 0.1 M NaOH at 37oC for 30 min. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford.  Protein were precipitated with 10% Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4oC for 16 hr. Samples were then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 15min at 4 oC. Protein pellets were washed with 100% acetone (-20oC) and then resuspended in 8 M urea along with 5 mM NEM, 1 mM PMSF. The samples were reduced and alkylated with 200 mM chloroacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 hr at room temperature (RT) in the dark.  The urea concentration was adjusted to 1M by adding 25 mM NH4HCO3, pH was maintained above 8. Proteins were digested first by LysC protease (Wako Chemicals USA, LYSYL ENDOPEPTIDASE #NC9223464) at a final protease to protein ratio of 1:250 (w/w) for 16 hr at 37oC. Lysate were further digested by Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease #90057) at a protease to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37oC for 16 hr. The digestion was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. The precipitate in the sample was removed by centrifuging at 3,000 X g for 5min. The peptides were desalted following the protocol of the Sep-Pak C18 purification of lysate peptides from the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GlyGly) Kit  (#5562, Cell Signaling Technology). Pre-enrichment samples were collected at the end of the elution step. Peptides were then dried to dryness. K--GG peptide immunoprecipitation was performed following the protocol of Immunoaffinity purification (IPA) from the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GlyGly) Kit (#5562, Cell Signaling Technology). Following the final elution of the protocol, peptides were cleaned by using Millipore Ziptips (Millipore Sigma #Z720070), dried and stored. Nano-scale liquid chromatography (LC) separation of tryptic peptides was performed on a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Scientific). Of the digests, 4 µl was loaded onto a 20 μl nanoViper™ sample loop (Thermo Scientific), and separated on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC C18 column, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm x 25 cm (Thermo Scientific)) by the application of either a linear-2-hour gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for the analysis of the ribosome enriched samples and a linear-2-hour gradient from 4% to 36% acetonitrile for the analysis of subsequent glygly enrichment, with a column flow rate set to 250 nl/min.  Analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed online using a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) possessing a Nanospray Flex™ Ion source (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a stainless steel nano-bore emitter operated in positive electro-spray ionisation (ESI) mode at a capillary voltage of 1.9 kV. Settings that differed for detecting glygly enriched peptides are shown in brackets. Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans within a mass range of 380-1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 was performed, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3 x 106, and the maximum fill time set to 200 ms. High-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 15 (8) most intense peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, with an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 (1.3 x 104) counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, excluding precursors that had an unassigned, +1, +7 or +8 charge state. MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 ms (300 ms). Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 103 counts.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer™ software (version 2.0.0.802, Thermo Scientific), which was set up to search the S. cerevisiae proteome database, as downloaded from www.uniprot.org/proteomes (ID number UP000002311). Peptides were assigned using SEQUEST HT (Eng et al., 1994), with search parameters set to assume the digestion enzyme trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a static modification, while glygly on lysine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as dynamic modifications. The target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (strict) was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and which could not be differentiated based on the MS/MS analysis alone were grouped, to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Label-free quantification as previously described (Silva et al., 2006) was performed in Proteome Discoverer™ with a minimum Quan value threshold of 0.0001 using unique peptides, and “3 Top N” peptides used for area calculation. All samples were analyzed in triplicate, and the resulting values were averaged.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidation and alkylation of nucleobases are known to disrupt their base-pairing properties within RNA. It is, however, unclear whether organisms have evolved general mechanism(s) to deal with this damage. Here we show that the mRNA-surveillance pathway of no-go decay and the associated ribosome-quality control are activated in response to nucleobase alkylation and oxidation. Our findings reveal that these processes are important for clearing chemically modified mRNA and the resulting aberrant-protein products. In the absence of Xrn1, the level of damaged mRNA significantly increases. Furthermore, deletion of LTN1 results in the accumulation of protein aggregates in the presence of oxidizing and alkylating agents. This accumulation is accompanied by Hel2-dependent regulatory ubiquitylation of ribosomal proteins. Collectively, our data highlight the burden of chemically damaged mRNA on cellular homeostasis and suggest that organisms evolved mechanisms to counter their accumulation.

### Keywords
Ubiquitylation, Quality control, Ribosome collision

### Affiliations
Biology department, Washington University in St Louis, MO, USA
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Hani Zaher
Biology department, Washington University in St Louis, MO, USA


