### Accession
PXD001342

### Title
Soluble lymph node proteome during anthrax infection in mice

### Description
This study aimed to characterize a soluble proteome of popliteal lymph nodes during lymphadenitis induced by intradermal injection of Bacillus anthracis Sterne spores in mice using tandem LC-MS/MS. More than 380 proteins were detected in the normal intra-nodal lymph, while the infectious process resulted in the profound changes in the protein abundances and appearance of 297 unique proteins. These proteins belong to an array of processes reflecting response to wounding, inflammation and perturbations of hemostasis, innate immune response, coagulation and fibrinolysis, regulation of body fluid levels and vascular disturbance among others. The results demonstrate that the proteome of intra-nodal lymph serves as a sensitive sentinel of the processes occurring within the lymph nodes during infection. The acute innate response of the lymph nodes to anthrax is accompanied by cellular damage and inflammation with a large number of up- and down-regulated proteins many of which are distinct from those detected in serum.

### Sample Protocol
Groups of 4 mice (from the total of 20 challenged at day 0) were used at each time point post challenge (days 1 to 3). Only 2 mice survived at day 4, and one of them was also included in the analysis. Additionally, 4 naïve mice were used as controls. The soluble protein samples from individual mice corresponding to a particular time point were pooled, dried with SpeedVac, reconstituted in 8 M urea, reduced by 10 mM DTT for 30 min, alkylated by 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, and digested by trypsin at 37oC overnight. Tryptic peptides were further purified by Zip-Tip (Millipore) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a linear ion-trap mass spectrometer (LTQ, Orbitrap). After sample injection, the column was washed for 5 min with mobile phase A (0.4% acetic acid) and peptides eluted using a linear gradient of 0% mobile phase B (0.4% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 50% mobile phase B in 30 min at 250 nl/min, then to 100% mobile phase B for an additional 5 min. The LTQ mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode in which each full MS scan was followed by five MS/MS scans where the five most abundant molecular ions were dynamically selected for collision-induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were collected by Xcalibur 2.0.2 and searched against the NCBI mouse protein database using SEQUEST (Bioworks 3.3.1 software from ThermoFisher) using tryptic cleavage constraints. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 5 ppm and mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.25 Da. SEQUEST filter criteria were: Xcorr vs. charge 1.9, 2.2, 3.5 for 1+,  2+, 3+ ions; maximum probability of randomized identification of peptide < 0.01. Protein identifications and number of identifying spectra (peptide hits) for each sample were exported using >99% confidence limit for protein identification with peptides from a given protein identified at least in two independent samples obtained from naive mice or during infectious process. It needs to be noted that this MS-based proteomic approach identifies the protein-derived peptides and assigns them to the corresponding full-length proteins, but does not provide direct information on their proteolytic status. Therefore the MS list reflects presence of the full-length and fragmented proteins (peptidome). The proteins identified at the particular day post challenge from LNs of naïve (day 0) and infected mice (days 1 to 4) were compiled in a list, and the total number of spectral hits per time point for each protein was normalized by a number of MS experiments.

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to characterize a soluble proteome of popliteal lymph nodes during lymphadenitis induced by intradermal injection of Bacillus anthracis Sterne spores in mice using tandem LC-MS/MS and reverse-phase protein microarray with antibodies specific to epitopes of phosphorylated proteins. More than 380 proteins were detected in the normal intra-nodal lymph, while the infectious process resulted in the profound changes in the protein abundances and appearance of 297 unique proteins. These proteins belong to an array of processes reflecting response to wounding, inflammation and perturbations of hemostasis, innate immune response, coagulation and fibrinolysis, regulation of body fluid levels and vascular disturbance among others. Comparison of lymph and serum revealed 83 common proteins. Also, using 71 antibodies specific to total and phosphorylated forms of proteins we carried initial characterization of circulating lymph phosphoproteome which brought additional information regarding signaling pathways operating in the lymphatics. The results demonstrate that the proteome of intra-nodal lymph serves as a sensitive sentinel of the processes occurring within the lymph nodes during infection. The acute innate response of the lymph nodes to anthrax is accompanied by cellular damage and inflammation with a large number of up- and down-regulated proteins many of which are distinct from those detected in serum. MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001342.

### Keywords
Lymph node, Anthrax, Proteome, Mice, Lymph

### Affiliations
George Mason University, VA

### Submitter
Serguei Popov

### Lab Head
Dr Serguei Popov
George Mason University, VA


