### Accession
PXD006428

### Title
Hydroxylamine Chemical Digestion for Insoluble Extracellular Matrix Characterization

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is readily enriched by decellularizing tissues with non-denaturing detergents to solubilize and deplete the vast majority of cellular components. This approach has been used extensively to generate ECM scaffolds for regenerative medicine technologies and in 3D cell culture to model how the ECM contributes to disease progression. A highly-enriched ECM fraction can then be generated using a strong chaotrope buffer that is compatible with downstream bottom-up proteomic analysis or 3D cell culture experiments after extensive dialysis. With most tissues, an insoluble pellet remains that is rich in structural ECM components. Previously we showed that this understudied fraction represented approximately 80 percent of total fibrillar collagen from the lung and other ECM fiber components that are known to be covalently cross-linked. Here we present a hydroxylamine digestion approach for post-chaotrope insoluble ECM analysis with comparison to an established CNBr method for matrisome characterization. Because ECM characteristics vary widely among tissues, we chose five tissues that represent unique and diverse ECM abundances, composition and biomechanical properties. Hydroxylamine digestion is compatible with downstream proteomic workflows, yields high levels of ECM peptides from the insoluble ECM fraction and reduces analytical variability when compared to CNBr digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Three replicates of frozen femur, lung, liver, skin, and skeletal muscle harvested from the same female mouse (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were powderized in liquid nitrogen using a ceramic mortar and pestle. Weighed tissue (approximately 5 mg of each) was homogenized in freshly prepared high-salt buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 3 M NaCl, 25 mM EDTA, 0.25% w/v CHAPS, pH 7.5) containing 1x protease inhibitor (Halt Protease Inhibitor, Thermo Scientific) at a concentration of 10 mg/mL. Homogenization took place in a bead beater (Bullet Blender Storm 24, Next Advance, 1 mm glass beads) for 3 min at 4 ºC. Samples were then spun for 20 min 18,000 x g at 4 ºC, and the supernatant removed and stored as Fraction 1. A fresh aliquot of high-salt buffer was added to the remaining pellet at 10 mg/mL of the starting weight, vortexed at 4 ºC for 15 min, and spun for 15 min. The supernatant was removed and stored as Fraction 2. This high-salt extraction was repeated once more to generate Fraction 3, after which freshly prepared guanidine extraction buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride adjusted to pH 9.0 with NaOH) was added at 10 mg/mL and vortexed for 1 hour at room temperature. The samples were then spun for 15 min, the supernatant removed, and stored as Fraction 4. Fractions 1, 2, & 3 were combined and all fractions were stored at -20 ºC until further analysis. The remaining pellets of each tissue representing insoluble ECM proteins were treated with either hydroxylamine or cyanogen bromide.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-SRM and LC–MS/MS as described (17). Equal volumes from each post-digestion sample were combined and injected every third run and used to monitor technical reproducibility. Skyline was used for method development and to extract the ratio of endogenous light peptides to heavy internal standards from LC- SRM data for protein quantification as described (43). LC–MS/MS data was processed as previously described (12). Limits of detection, quantification, and dynamic range were determined for each peptide as previously described (11). To control for any technical variability introduced prior to chemical digestion we normalized the CNBr and NH2OH treated samples to the measured protein abundance of the sECM fraction. Principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares discriminate analysis (PLS-DA) were calculated using the MetaboAnalyst online platform with sum and range scaling normalizations (44). To control for any technical variability introduced prior to chemical digestion we normalized the CNBr and NH2OH treated samples to the measured protein abundance of the sECM fraction. Additionally, in order to ensure that the increased ratios (12C6/13C6) were a result of increased endogenous proteins signal and not a result of decreased QconCAT digestion efficiency, we analyzed a subset of each tissue extract with pre-digested QconCAT and found no evidence of reduced QconCAT digestion efficiency.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is readily enriched by decellularizing tissues with nondenaturing detergents to solubilize and deplete the vast majority of cellular components. This approach has been used extensively to generate ECM scaffolds for regenerative medicine technologies and in 3D cell culture to model how the ECM contributes to disease progression. A highly enriched ECM fraction can then be generated using a strong chaotrope buffer that is compatible with downstream bottom-up proteomic analysis or 3D cell culture experiments after extensive dialysis. With most tissues, an insoluble pellet remains after chaotrope extraction that is rich in structural ECM components. Previously, we showed that this understudied fraction represented approximately 80% of total fibrillar collagen from the lung and other ECM fiber components that are known to be covalently cross-linked. Here, we present a hydroxylamine digestion approach for chaotrope-insoluble ECM analysis with comparison to an established CNBr method for matrisome characterization. Because ECM characteristics vary widely among tissues, we chose five tissues that represent unique and diverse ECM abundances, composition, and biomechanical properties. Hydroxylamine digestion is compatible with downstream proteomic workflows, yields high levels of ECM peptides from the insoluble ECM fraction, and reduces analytical variability when compared to CNBr digestion. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006428.

### Keywords
Lc-srm, Chemical digestion, Collagen, Proteomics, Extracellular matrix, Matrisome, Mass spectrometry, Tissue extraction

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Denver
University of Colordao Denver - Anschutz Medical Campus

### Submitter
Alexander Barrett

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk C Hansen
University of Colordao Denver - Anschutz Medical Campus


