### Accession
PXD027507

### Title
A novel C1q domain-containing protein isolated from the bivalve mollusk Modiolus kurilensis recognizing glycans enriched with acidic galactans

### Description
C1q domain-containing (C1qDC) proteins are a group of biopolymers involved in immune response as pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in a lectin manner identifying and binding carbohydrate components of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).  In the current study, we present a new protein MkC1qDC-1 purified from the hemolymph plasma of Modiolus kurilensis bivalve mollusk widespread in the Northwest Pacific. The isolation procedure included ammonium sulfate precipitation followed by affinity chromatography on pectin-Sepharose. The full-length MkC1qDC-1 sequence was assembled based on mass-spectrometry data supplemented with N-terminal Edman sequencing, and included 156 amino acid residues displaying high homology to C1qDC proteins of bivalves. 2-D electrophoresis of purified MkC1qDC-1 showed a single polypeptide with 19 kDa mass and pI 5.2 in accordance with predicted values. The protein was functionally active after 1 h incubation in temperatures up to 50°C and stable over a wide pH range. MkC1qDC-1 demonstrated antibacterial properties against gram-negative and gram-positive strains.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry MkC1qDC-1 was dissolved in 6 M guanidinium-HCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8, 10 mM chloroacetamide, 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, heated at 95 °C for 5 min. The sample was diluted with water 10-fold and 1/100 trypsin/substrate was added. Digestion was done at 37 °C for 4 h. The digest was acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid final concentration, spun at 15000 ×g for 10 min, and desalted on home-made C18 stage tips as described previously (65). Peptides were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an RSLnano uHPLC pump (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on a 15 cm C18 Aurora column (IonOptiks)  using a 40 min gradient from 5−35% acetonitrile with 0.05% acetic acid. The instrument was operating in a high/high mode with a resolution of 120k/35k (MS and MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
De novo sequencing was done using the PEAKS 7.5 software suite (Bioinformatics Solutions) with 5 ppm / 0.01 Da mass accuracy (MS and MS/MS). The list of peptides was trimmed using a cut-off of 80% Average Local Confidence Score (ALC). These high-confidence peptides were assembled into longer stretches using ALPS, a de Bruijn assembler, using a k-value of 7 as described (66). This resulted in the assembly of 11 protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
C1q domain-containing (C1qDC) proteins are a group of biopolymers involved in immune response as pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in a lectin-like manner. A new protein MkC1qDC from the hemolymph plasma of <i>Modiolus kurilensis</i> bivalve mollusk widespread in the Northwest Pacific was purified. The isolation procedure included ammonium sulfate precipitation followed by affinity chromatography on pectin-Sepharose. The full-length MkC1qDC sequence was assembled using de novo mass-spectrometry peptide sequencing complemented with N-terminal Edman's degradation, and included 176 amino acid residues with molecular mass of 19 kDa displaying high homology to bivalve C1qDC proteins. MkC1qDC demonstrated antibacterial properties against Gram-negative and Gram-positive strains. MkC1qDC binds to a number of saccharides in Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent manner which characterized by structural meta-similarity in acidic group enrichment of galactose and mannose derivatives incorporated in diversified molecular species of glycans. Alginate, &#x3ba;-carrageenan, fucoidan, and pectin were found to be highly effective inhibitors of MkC1qDC activity. Yeast mannan, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), peptidoglycan (PGN) and mucin showed an inhibitory effect at concentrations three orders of magnitude greater than for the most effective saccharides. MkC1qDC localized to the mussel hemal system and interstitial compartment. Intriguingly, MkC1qDC was found to suppress proliferation of human adenocarcinoma HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner, indicating to the biomedical potential of MkC1qDC protein.

### Keywords
De-novo sequencing, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
university of edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
university of edinburgh


