### Accession
PXD013233

### Title
NFYB-1 regulates mitochondrial function and longevity via lysosomal prosaposin

### Description
Mitochondrial activity is critical for cellular vitality and organismal longevity, yet underlying regulatory mechanisms spanning these different levels of organization remain elusive. From RNAi screens for mitochondrial biogenesis, we discovered NFYB-1, a subunit of the NF-Y transcriptional complex, as an ancestral regulator of mitochondrial function. NFYB-1 loss leads to reduced mitochondrial gene expression and oxygen consumption, mitochondrial fragmentation, disruption of mitochondrial stress pathways, and abolition of organismal longevity triggered by mitochondrial impairment. Multi-omics analysis reveals that NFYB-1 is a potent repressor of the ER stress response, as well as lysosomal prosaposin. Surprisingly, limiting prosaposin expression alters ceramide and cardiolipin pools, restores mitochondrial fusion, gene expression and longevity. Thus, the NFYB-1/prosaposin axis coordinates lysosomal to mitochondrial communication to enhance cellular mitochondrial function and organismal health.

### Sample Protocol
For sample collection and preparation, day 1 N2, nfyb-1(cu13), isp-1(qm150) and isp- 1(qm150); nfyb-1(cu13) strains were synchronized by egglay, >5000 worms were collected in M9. Samples were washed thrice in M9 and once in distilled water and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at – 80°C. N≥5 independent biological replicates were used for analysis.Protein extraction from C. elegans: Lysis buffer (6M Guanidinium chloride, 2.5mM TCEP(Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine), 10mM CAA (chloroacetamide), 100mM Tris-HCl) was added to each sample (20 μl to 10 μl of worm pellet). Samples were heated at 95o C for 5-10 minutes, lysed with the Bioruptor (30s sonication, 30s breaks, 10 cycles, 2-3 repeats) and centrifuged at 20000g for 20 minutes. 2μl of the protein supernatant was then diluted at least 10 times with 20mM Tris to 20μl to reduce the concentration of GuCL to lower than 0.6M. Protein concentration was then measured by Nano Drop. Samples were then diluted 10 times and digested with trypsin (1:2000) (Promega, Mass Spec Grade) overnight at 37oC. the digestion was stopped by adding 50% of FA to 1% (final concentration). LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 120 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 10 min at 200 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 30000 using a minimum AGC target of 8e3 and 55 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the C.elegans reference proteome (proteome ID UP000001940, downloaded May 2017 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are multidimensional organelles whose activities are essential to cellular vitality and organismal longevity, yet underlying regulatory mechanisms spanning these different levels of organization remain elusive<sup>1-5</sup>. Here we show that Caenorhabditis elegans nuclear transcription factor Y, beta subunit (NFYB-1), a subunit of the NF-Y transcriptional complex<sup>6-8</sup>, is a crucial regulator of mitochondrial function. Identified in RNA interference (RNAi) screens, NFYB-1 loss leads to perturbed mitochondrial gene expression, reduced oxygen consumption, mitochondrial fragmentation, disruption of mitochondrial stress pathways, decreased mitochondrial cardiolipin levels and abolition of organismal longevity triggered by mitochondrial impairment. Multi-omics analysis reveals that NFYB-1 is a potent repressor of lysosomal prosaposin, a regulator of glycosphingolipid metabolism. Limiting prosaposin expression unexpectedly restores cardiolipin production, mitochondrial function and longevity in the nfyb-1 background. Similarly, cardiolipin supplementation rescues nfyb-1 phenotypes. These findings suggest that the NFYB-1-prosaposin axis coordinates lysosomal to mitochondria signalling via lipid pools to enhance cellular mitochondrial function and organismal health.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Mitochondria, Transcriptomics, Ageing, Proteomics, Ceramide, Nfyb-1, Cardiolipin, Single shot, Stress response, Label-free, Prosaposin

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany CECAD, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Adam Antebi
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany CECAD, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


