### Accession
PXD021404

### Title
Pathway Analysis of Dominant CHIP E3 Ligase-Dependent Protein Steady State Changes Highlight a Role in Neuronal Cell Membrane Integrity Linked to the Actin Cytoskeleton

### Description
Functional integrity of the E3-ubiquitin ligase CHIP is essential for healthy aging in the brain. By virtue of its association with the core molecular chaperone machinery, studies into the physiological role(s) of CHIP have been dominated by its involvement in the quality control and degradation of unfolded, aggregated and/or mutated proteins. To elucidate the dominant CHIP-dependent changes in protein steady state levels in human neurons we conducted an unbiased proteomic analysis in genetically engineered wild-type and CHIP knockout iPSC-derived cortical neurons. Rather than a broad effect on protein homeostasis, pathway analysis highlighted a focused cohort of CHIP-responsive proteins involved in actin cytoskeleton signalling and membrane integrity.  In support of the pathway analysis CHIP KO cell-lines had enhanced sensitivity to mechanical and chemical membrane damage.  Consistent with recent studies on the identification of a non-canonical HSP-independent E3-activity for CHIP, the lack of general quality control defects in knock-out cells suggests that the major readout of CHIP function in cortical neurons is the regulation of native folded substrates involved in maintaining cellular ‘health’. Thus, CHIP-mediated regulation of the of cytoskeletal- and membrane-related proteins is likely to make a vital contribute to the neuroprotective activity of CHIP.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation:  Biological triplicates, each comprised of duplicate wells, of wild-type , parental and CHIP-/-  neurons were lysed on the plate using, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 plus 8 M urea . Protein lysates were centrifuged at 14000 g/20 min/8 °C and supernatant was subsequently transferred to clean tubes. Proteins were digested using trypsin protease (Promega, WI, USA; cleaving after lysine and arginine if proline is not followed) using filter aided sample preparation as described previously. Briefly, protein concentration was determined using the RC-DC assay (Bio-rad, CA, USA) and 100 µg of protein was loaded on to a Microcon, Ultracel-30 spin column with 30 kDa cutoff (Millipore, MA, USA). Urea buffer (8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5) was added to the column and the column was centrifuged at 14000 g/15 min/20 °C. Protein reduction was performed using 100 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) in urea buffer for 30 min on a thermoblock set at 37 °C/600 rpm. The column was centrifuged at 14000 g/15 min/20 °C and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using 300 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA). Protein alkylation took place in the dark at RT for 20 min followed by another centrifugation at 14000 g for 15 min. Ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM) was added to the column followed by centrifugation at 14000 g for 20 min. Trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added at a 1:100 ratio and protein was digested overnight at 37 °C. The filter column was centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min to collect ther peptides into clean Eppendorf tube. The peptide concentration was determined using Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assays (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and a NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Samples were desalted on C18 Micro spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Liquid chromatography peptide separation: Desalted tryptic peptides were dissolved in 100 μl of 5 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05 % TFA and the peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Samples were diluted in order to load normalised peptide amount corresponding approximately to 3.7 µg of peptides per injection. Peptides were separated onEksigent Ekspert nanoLC 400 (SCIEX, CA, USA) liquid chromatograph online connected to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Toronto, Canada). Samples were pre-concentrated on a cartridge trap column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm) packed with C18 PepMap100 sorbent with 5 μm particle size (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) using a mobile phase composed of 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 2 % ACN. Pre-concentrated peptides were separated on a capillary analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 500 mm) packed with C18 PepMap100 sorbent, 2 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water while mobile phase B was composed of 0.1 % (v/v) FA in ACN. The analytical gradient started from 2% B, the proportion of mobile phase B increased linearly up to 40% B in 120 min, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Separated peptides were ionized by a nano-electrospray ion source, where the temperature and flow rate of the drying gas was set to 150 °C and 12 psi. Voltage at the capillary emitter was 2.65 kV. Measurement of each biological replicate was repeated three times to give technical triplicates. SWATH data were acquired in high sensitivity positive mode. Precursor range was set from 400 Da up to 1200 Da and it was divided to 67 precursor SWATH windows with 12Da width and 1 Da overlap. Accumulation per SWATH windows was set to 50.9 ms.. Product ions were scanned in a range from 360 to 1360 Da. Rolling collision energy setting with 15 mV collision energy spread was used.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent measurement to generate an in-house spectral library: The spectral library sample was prepared by equimolar pooling of all samples. The spectral library was measured. Briefly, pooled spectral library samples were measured in information dependent mode (IDA). Precursor range was set from 400 Da up to 1250 Da in MS mode and from 200 Da up to 1600 Da in MS/MS mode. Cycle time was set to 2.3 sec and during each cycle the top 20 most intensive precursor ions were fragmented. The precursor exclusion time was set to 12 sec. IDA data were searched against a Homo sapiens reference database (Uniprot+TrEmbl, 2016_02, 70005 entries) in ProteinPilot 4.5 (AB-SCIEX, Canada). The reference database contained decoy sequences of all proteins. Trypsin was set as a protease and carbamidomethyl was defined as a fixed modification. Tolerated mass error in MS1 and MS2 was set to predefined TripleTOF 5600 settings. No emphasis to a particular variable modification was given. The FDR calculation was performed by searching the MS/MS data against the decoy database. A total of 1424 proteins (FDR<1 %)  and 8713 peptides (FDR<1 %) (see Supplementary table 2) were identified. The identified proteins and corresponding spectra from the resulting GROUP file were imported into SWATH™ Acquisition MicroApp 1.0 a plugin of PeakView 1.2.0.3. (AB-SCIEX, Canada) to generate a spectral library. A maximum of 4 peptides with no miscleavages, no post-translational modifications and peptide confidence above 99% per protein were imported into the spectral library. Each peptide was represented by a maximum of 6 transitions. The resulting spectral library contained 1424 proteins (FDR<1 %) and out of these 1353 proteins were quantitated. Transitions to build up the spectral library are available in Supplementary table 2. SWATH data extraction and statistical analysis: Quantitative data extraction was performed in SWATH™ Acquisition MicroApp 1.0 plugin with the in-house spectral library prepared as described above. Quantitative SWATH data were extracted using a method with +- 4 min extraction window around the expected retention time. The retention time window was determined based on retention time variability in the dataset. Product ion chromatograms of transitions were extracted +- 0.05 Da around the expected product ion mass. Product ion chromatograms were used to determine peak areas for each transition. Extracted data were further analysed in MarkerView 1.2.1.1. (AB-SCIEX, Canada) on a peptide and protein level. The SRM like nature of SWATH data enabled the determination of summed intensities per each protein by summing corresponding transition peak areas. Extracted and summed data were normalised on total ion current. Pairwise t-testing of summed protein peak areas was applied to determine changes in protein level across compared samples (Supplementary table 1). The differences in protein expression level among of wild-type and CHIP-/- SH-SY5Y cells KO (clone-6) was done pairwise and in each biological replicate separately. Pearson correlation coefficient of fold-changes among biological replicates was determined to define their likeliness.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Neurons, Proteomics, Swath, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, EH4 2XR Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kathryn Ball
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, EH4 2XR Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom


