### Accession
PXD005535

### Title
The rhomboid protease PARL regulates apoptosis via proteolytic maturation of Smac/DIABLO in mitochondria

### Description
Substrates of the mitochondrial protease PARL were identified using quantitative N-terminal ChaFRADIC:

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria samples were pelleted at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and lysed in 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.8 in the presence of cOmplete™ Mini (EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor provide by Roche). Cysteines were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Per sample an aliquot corresponding to 40 µg of protein was precipated and dissolved in 10% SDS. Samples were diluted with 5 volumes of labeling buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate in 20% isopropanol) and to each sample a different iTRAQ 8plex reagent was added. Samples were incubated for 2 h at 25°C and multiplexed. Afterwards, the reaction was quenched by incubation with 60 mM glycine for 10 min at RT followed by addition of 130 mM hydroxylamine and incubation for 10 min at RT. The pooled sample was again ethanol precipitated and pellet were resuspended in 6 M GuHCl, 50 mM Na2HPO4 pH 7.8 and diluted 10-fold with 50 mM Na2HPO4 to reach a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl. Afterwards, 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 1 mM CaCl2 and sequencing grade trypsin (1:20 enzyme:protein, w:w, Promega) were added and digestion was carried out at 37°C for 14 h. The sample was desalted using C18 solid-phase tips and completely dried under vacuum. Peptides were resuspended and subjected to N-terminal ChaFRADIC. Nine N-terminal peptide enriched fractions were desalted using Poros Oligo R3 reversed-phase material (Applied Biosystems), eluates were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Per fraction, 50% were analysed by nano LC-MS using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer online-coupled to a nano RSLC HPLC System (both Thermo Scientific). LC separations were performed by using a linear gradient ranging from 3 to 42% of solvent B (84% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 50 or 90 min, depending on the sample amount. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring full MS scans at a resolution of 70,000 followed by MS/MS of the 15 most abundant ions at a resolution of 17,500 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Target values and maximum injection time were set to 1 × 106 ions and 120 ms for MS and 2 x 105 ions and 200 ms for MS2 scans. Peptides were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30 and the first fixed mass was set to 100 m/z. For flow-through and +1-fractions, fragmentation of singly charged peptides was allowed excluding m/z values of singly charged ions occurring in previous blank runs. For enriched fractions with charge state of +3 and above, 10% ammonia solution was placed in front of the source to compensate for iTRAQ-induced charge state enhancement.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against a human Uniprot database (September 2014; 20,195 target sequences) with Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science). The reporter ion quantifier node was used for quantification, the percolator node for false discovery rate assessment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parl substrates, Chafradic, N-terminomics

### Affiliations
Protein Dynamics ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr René Zahedi
Protein Dynamics ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany


