### Accession
PXD037485

### Title
Label-based proteomic comparison of four Persimon cultivars from south Italy

### Description
Differentiation of Persimmon ecotypes by label-based proteomics analysis. The aim of the study is to identify quantitative differences in proteomic profile occurring in the fruits harvested at commercial ripening. The proteomic data obtained by TMT-based analysis will be related to agronomic data, chemical-physical characteristics, data on the main metabolites of interest for the organoleptic and nutritional properties of the fruits.

### Sample Protocol
Diospyros kaki fruits from each ecotype were pealed, freeze-dried and crushed using a mortar containing liquid N2 and extracted through a modified version of the phenol extraction method Thus, 1 g the fine powdered samples, added with 0.01g of Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVVP), were suspended in a buffer consisting in 0,7 M sucrose, 0.1M KCl, 0.5 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.8), 50 mM EDTA, 40 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 30µL of protease inhibitors cocktail for plant tissues.The mixture was homogenized with T10 basic ULTRA-TURRAX® - IKA, afterward, an equal volume of Tris-HCl saturated phenol, pH 8.1 was added, and the solution was incubated on a shaker for 20 min at 4°C.The phenolic phase was precipitated by adding six volumes of 0,1 M ice-cold ammonium acetate (NH4CH3CO2) in methanol. Protein pellets were air-dried and then solubilized in 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. Samples were shortly sonicated and left on a shaker at 22°C overnight. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit™. An aliquot of protein sample from each cultivar (100 μg) was submitted to sample preparation and TMT-labeling as reported in the manufacturer’s instruction sheet. The samples were labelled with the TMT6plex Label Reagent Set according to the scheme: Cioccolatino TMT-126, Vaniglia TMT-127, Lampadina TMT-128N, Cachi tipo TMT-129. Pooled TMT-labelled peptide mixtures were fractionated by using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (150 mm ×75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), and eluted with a gradient of solvent B within 2h. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 375–1500, nominal resolution of 70,000), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan m/z range 110–2000, using a normalized collision energy of 32%, an automatic gain control target of 100,000, a maximum ion target of 120 ms, and a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion value of 30 s was also used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed for protein identification and relative quantification by using Proteome Discoverer vs 2.4 (PD2.4) software (Thermo Scientific), enabling the database search by Mascot algorithm v. 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, UK) using the D. lotus protein database (51693 protein sequences), deriving from the corresponding sequenced genome (Akagi et al., 2020), and a database containing the most common protein contaminants. The following criteria were selected: carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT6-plex modification of lysine and peptide N-terminal as fixed modifications; oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, pyroglutamate formation of Gln/Glu as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.05 Da. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 2, respectively. Protein candidates were considered confidently identified based on at least two sequenced peptides and an individual Mascot Score greater or equal to 30 were. Results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate. Protein abundance values were obtained from TMT reporter ion intensities in the MS/MS spectra from PD2.4 elaboration. Results were finally filtered to retain only proteins that were significantly changed in at least one by one comparison between cultivars, considering an abundance ratio p-value < 0.01 and a fold change of abundance ±1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Together with phenological and genomic approaches, gel-based and label-free proteomic as well metabolomic procedures were separately applied to plants to highlight differences between ecotypes, to estimate genetic variability within/between organism populations, or to characterize specific mutants/genetically modified lines at metabolic level. To investigate the possible use of tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics in the above-mentioned contexts and based on the absence of combined proteo-metabolomic studies on <i>Diospyros kaki</i> cultivars, we here applied integrated proteomic and metabolomic approaches to fruits from Italian persimmon ecotypes with the aim to characterize plant phenotypic diversity at molecular level. We identified 2255 proteins in fruits, assigning 102 differentially represented components between cultivars, including some related to pomological, nutritional and allergenic characteristics. Thirty-three polyphenols were also identified and quantified, which belong to hydroxybenzoic acid, flavanol, hydroxycinnamic acid, flavonol, flavanone and dihydrochalcone sub-classes. Heat-map representation of quantitative proteomic and metabolomic results highlighted compound representation differences in various accessions, whose elaboration through Euclidean distance functions and other linkage methods defined dendrograms establishing phenotypic relationships between cultivars. Principal component analysis of proteomic and metabolomic data provided clear information on phenotypic differences/similarities between persimmon accessions. Coherent cultivar association results were observed between proteomic and metabolomic data, emphasizing the utility of integrating combined <i>omic</i> approaches to identify and validate phenotypic relationships between ecotypes, and to estimate corresponding variability and distance. Accordingly, this study describes an original, combined approach to outline phenotypic signatures in persimmon cultivars, which may be used for a further characterization of other ecotypes of the same species and an improved description of nutritional characteristics of corresponding fruits.

### Keywords
Cultivar comparison, Qexactive, Persimon, Tmt

### Affiliations
CNR ISPAAM
National research Council of Italy. Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM-CNR)

### Submitter
anna maria salzano

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
National research Council of Italy. Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM-CNR)


