### Accession
PXD034622

### Title
Dapagliflozin ameliorates diabetes-induced spermatogenic dysfunction by modulating the adenosine metabolism along the gut microbiota-testis axis

### Description
Male infertility is one of the most common complications of diabetes mellitus (DM). Dapagliflozin is widely used to manage the type II DM. This study aimed to assess the dapagliflozin’s effects on the spermatogenesis by administering either dapagliflozin (Dapa) or a vehicle (db) to diabetic male db/db mice, and using littermate male db/m mice as the control group (Con). We further performed the integrative analyses of the cecal shotgun metagenomics, cecal/plasmatic/testicular metabolomics, and testicular proteomics. We found that dapagliflozin treatment significantly alleviated the diabetes-induced spermatogenic dysfunction by improving sperm quality, including the sperm concentration and the sperm motility. The overall microbial composition was reshaped in Dapa mice and 13 species (such as Lachnospiraceae bacterium 3-1) were regarded as potential beneficial bacteria. Metabolites exhibited modified profiles, in which adenosine, cAMP, and 2’-deoxyinosine being notably altered in the cecum, plasma, and testis, respectively. Testicular protein expression patterns were similar between the Dapa and Con mice. In vivo results indicated that compared with db group, dapagliflozin treatment alleviated apoptosis and oxidative stress in testis tissues by down-regulating 2’-deoxyinosine. This was further validated by in vitro experiments using GC-2 cells. Our findings support the potential use of Dapa to prevent the diabetes-induced impaired sperm quality and to treat diabetic male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
We weighed and ground samples into cell powder using a mortar and liquid nitrogen. Then we added four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1% Protease Inhibitor, 1% Phosphatase Inhibitor) and treated with sonication. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected. The total protein concentration was determined with the BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein quantity and volume from each sample were adjusted to the same, and TCA were added to a final concentration of 20% and the proteins were precipitated at 4 °C for 2 hours. The protein pellets were collected by centrifugation at 4,500 g for 5 min and washed with pre-cold acetone 3 times. 100 mM TEAB was added and the precipitation was dispersed by ultrasound. We used trypsin at a 1:50 mass ratio for the overnight digestion. Then the solutions were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The digested peptides were desalted with C18 SPE (3M) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) and then separated on a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.) using NanoElute Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 24% over 72 min, 24% to 32% over 12 min, and climbing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min. All at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. The peptides separated by the UPLC system were then subjected to Capillary for ionization, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, USA) for analysis. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6 kV. The peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed in TOF. The m/z scan range was 100 to 1,700 for the second-level mass spectrum. The data acquisition used a parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) procedure. We selected precursors with charge states 0 to 5 for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle and set the dynamic exclusion time as 30 s to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions. The overall procedures for phosphoproteomics were similar, except that the peptides were dissolved in solvent C (0.1% formic acid in water) and separated by an ionopticks C18 reversed-phase analytical column. The elution gradient was set as: 0–50 min，2%~22%；50–52 min，22%~35%；52–55 min，35%~90%；55–60 min，90%. The flow rate was set constantly at 300nL/min. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum length of peptide segment was set as 7 amino acid residues and the maximum modification number of the peptide segment was set to 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Alkylation (cysteine) was specified as fixed modification, while oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-term), desamidization (asparagine and glutamine) were specified as variable modifications. The FDRs of both protein identification and peptide spectrum matching (PSM) were set to 1%. The addition of phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) as modifications was used for phosphoproteomic data. We compared the expression of each protein with paired t-test and determined differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and differentially phosphorylation sites (DPSs) with |fold change (FC)|≥2.0 and p-value <0.05. We used statistical analysis methods including principal component analysis (PCA) and Pearson’s correlation coefficient to test sample repeatability. Statistical significance (p<0.05) was assessed by using Student’s t-test. For the annotation and enrichment of DEPs, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database were classified against all identified proteins by 2-sided Fisher’s exact probability test. The KEGG with an adjusted p-value<0.05 was considered significant. To find the functional correlation of different groups between DEPs or DPPs, we performed clustering analysis by hierarchical clustering and visualized it by heatmap based on p-values from Fisher’s exact test. The horizontal dimension of the heatmap represented Fisher’s exact test results of different groups, while the longitudinal one described functional classification.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum length of peptide segment was set as 7 amino acid residues and the maximum modification number of peptide segment was set to 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Alkylation (cysteine) was specified as fixed modification, while oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-term), desamidization (asparagine and glutamine) were specified as variable modifications. The FDRs of both protein identification and peptide spectrum matching (PSM) were set to 1%. Addition of phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) as modifications was used for phosphoproteomic data.

### Publication Abstract
Male infertility is one of the most common complications of diabetes mellitus (DM). Dapagliflozin is widely used to manage the type II DM. This study aimed to assess the dapagliflozin's effects on the spermatogenesis by administering either dapagliflozin (Dapa) or vehicle (db) to male db/db mice, and using littermate male db/m mice as the control (Con). We further performed the integrative analyses of the cecal shotgun metagenomics, cecal/plasmatic/testicular metabolomics, and testicular proteomics. We found that dapagliflozin treatment significantly alleviated the diabetes-induced spermatogenic dysfunction by improving sperm quality, including the sperm concentration and sperm motility. The overall microbial composition was reshaped in Dapa mice and 13 species (such as Lachnospiraceae bacterium 3-1) were regarded as potential beneficial bacteria. Metabolites exhibited modified profiles, in which adenosine, cAMP, and 2'-deoxyinosine being notably altered in the cecum, plasma, and testis, respectively. Testicular protein expression patterns were similar between the Dapa and Con mice. In vivo results indicated that when&#xa0;compared with db group, dapagliflozin treatment alleviated apoptosis and oxidative stress in testis tissues by down-regulating 2'-deoxyinosine. This was further validated by in vitro experiments using GC-2 cells. Our findings support the potential use of dapagliflozin to prevent the diabetes-induced impaired sperm quality and to treat diabetic male infertility.

### Keywords
Diabetic male infertility; dapagliflozin; gut microbiota; metabolites; testicular protein expression

### Affiliations
Peking University Third Hospital
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China;

### Submitter
Jing Hang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Hang
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China;


