### Accession
PXD033326

### Title
Proteome quantification in WASP wild-type and deficient macrophages using DIA-MS

### Description
We knocked out Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein (WASP) in an iPSC line and derived the cells to differentiate into macrophages. We found deficiency of WASP results in overexpression of splicing factors and irregulaly sized nulcear speckles.  We performed DIA-MS based quantative proteome analysis for WASP wild-type and deficient macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
The iPSC derived macrophages including 3 wild-type replicates and 2 replicates for 3 WASP-KO clones were harvested after one-month differentiation and were lysed in RIPA buffer. The protein concentration  was determined by BCA protein assay kit. The protein samples were digested and prepared following filter aided sample preparation protocol. The peptide samples were injected in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC for DIA-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data wre analyzed by Spectronaut software against the Pan-Human library. The protein candidates were used for differential expression analysis and visulaized in vocano plot using XLSTAT software, and the gene ontology enrichment analysis was done using ShiyGo v0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Dia-ms, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Bioscience Program, Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
KAUST

### Submitter
Baolei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Mo Li
Bioscience Program, Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


