### Accession
PXD040219

### Title
Venom gland transcriptome and venom proteome of the Tibellus oblongus  spider unveil molecular diversity of polypeptide toxins

### Description
The Tibellus genus spider is an active hunter that does not spin webs and remains highly underinvestigated in terms of the venom composition. Here, we present a combination of venom glands transcriptome cDNA analysis, venom proteome analysis for unveiling of the Tibellus genus spider venom composition.

### Sample Protocol
Dried proteins were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer followed by reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60°C. After that, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the samples to the final concentration of 15 mM. The mixture was incubated in the darkness at room temperature for 30 min. The resultant protein content (25-30 µg per sample)was digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega), endoproteinase Asp-N (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), and endoproteinase Glu-C (Promega). The enzymes were added at the ratio of 1:75 w/w to the total protein content and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C for trypsin, Lys-C and Asp-N and at room temperature for Glu-C, digests were performed according to the protocols [DOI:10.1038/nprot.2016.057]. After the reaction was stopped with 3% formic acid (final concentration), the samples were dried up using CentriVap micro IR Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco Corporation, Kansas City, USA) at 45°C. Dried peptides were stored at −45°C until the LC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatographic separation of the sample was performed using Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Two home-made columns (150 mm × 75 µm) with stationary phases Aeris™ 1.7 µm PEPTIDE XB-C18 100 Å and Aeris™ 3.6 µm WIDEPORE XB-C18 200 Å (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) were used for the separation of peptide samples. The second phase has wider pores and therefore is more appropriate for separation of bigger molecules such as peptides arising from digestion with Asp-N, Glu-C and Lys-C. A combination of mobile phase A, composed of 0.05% formic acid, 0.05%trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water, and mobile phase B, composed of 0.05% formic acid, 0.05% TFA, 10% water in acetonitrile (ACN), was used for analytical separation in the elution gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Two gradients with different lengths were applied for peptide separation. For the first column with smaller pores the concentration of mobile phase B had an increase from 0% to 60% over the first 60 min, then to 90% B over 10 min followed by washing with 90% B for 20 min. For the second column longer and flatter gradient was applied, the concentration of mobile phase B was increasing up to 50% in 100 min, then up to 90% in 20 min followed by washing during 15 min. Mass spectrometric analysis of all samples was performed on a high-resolution Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode with two sets of parameters used with shorter and longer gradients correspondingly.

### Data Protocol
The protein sequence database in FASTA format was built based on transcriptomics results, containing 217 toxins, for 88 of which more than one isoform was given. The mass spectrometry raw data were converted to mzML format using Msconvert software [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2377]. The identifications were obtained using Identipy search engine [DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00640]. The digest specificity was set corresponding to the proteases used (some having low digestion efficiency) with no more than 4 missed cleavages limitation. Carbamido methylation was set as a fixed modification of cysteine residues, and as a variable modification of methionine, histidine, lysine, and tryptophan residues due to the high concentration of alkylation agent used. The C- terminal residue amidation was also set as a variable modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, correspondingly. The post-search filtering to 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide-spectrum match level as well as data analysis, comparison, and visualization was performed using in-house scripts based on Pyteomics library [10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00717]. The spectra considered dubious or suspicious based on the automated analysis were checked manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spider; venom; multiprotease;

### Affiliations
Laboratory of physical and chemical methods for structure analysis, Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences
Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, RAS

### Submitter
Anna Lobas

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail V. Gorshkov
Laboratory of physical and chemical methods for structure analysis, Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, Federal Research Center of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences


