### Accession
PXD009251

### Title
Comparative hippocampal synaptic proteomes of rodents and primates: differences in neuroplasticity-related proteins

### Description
Key to the human brain’s unique capacities are a myriad of neural cell types, specialized molecular expression signatures, and complex patterns of neuronal connectivity. Neurons in the human brain communicate via well over a quadrillion synapses. Their specific contribution might be key to the dynamic activity patterns that underlie primate-specific cognitive function. Recently, functional differences were described in transmission capabilities of human and rat synapses. To test whether unique expression signatures of synaptic proteins are at the basis of this, we performed a quantitative analysis of the hippocampal synaptic proteome of four mammalian species, two primates, human and marmoset, and two rodents, rat and mouse. Abundance differences down to 1.15-fold at an FDR-corrected p-value of 0.005 were reliably detected using SWATH mass spectrometry. The high measurement accuracy of SWATH allowed the detection of a large group of differentially expressed proteins between individual species and rodent versus primate. Differentially expressed proteins between rodent and primate were found highly enriched for plasticity-related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosome isolation -- Synaptosomes were isolated as described previously (Pandya et al., 2017). In short, to correct for differences in amount of input material between different species, we used 50 l of homogenization buffer per mg of tissue to ensure that the homogenization conditions were identical between species. Post-homogenization, the samples were spun at 1000 x g for 10 min. and the supernatant was loaded on a sucrose gradient of 1.2/0.85M followed by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 2 h. Synaptosomes were collected at the interface of 1.2/0.85M, mixed with 5 ml homogenization buffer and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min to obtain the synaptosomal pellets, which were stored at -80 °C prior to the FASP procedure.  FASP in-solution digestion of proteins -- Samples were digested using the FASP in-solution digestion protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009) with some modifications according to (Pandya et al., 2017). 10 g of synaptosomes from each sample was incubated with 75 l 2% SDS 1 uL 50 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine  reducing agent at 55 °C for 1 hour at 900 rpm. Next, the sample was incubated with 0.5 uL 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate  for 15 min at RT with shaking, after which samples were transferred to YM-30 filters (Microcon®, Millipore) after addition of 200 l 8 M Urea in Tris buffer (pH 8.8). Samples were washed with 8M Urea in Tris buffer 5 times by spinning at 14,000 x g for 10 min each followed by 4 washes with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, the samples were incubated with 100 l of Trypsin overnight in a humidified chamber at 37 °C for 12 h. Digested peptides were eluted from the filter with 0.1% acetic acid. The peptides in solution were dried using a speedvac and stored at -20 °C prior to LC-MS analysis.  SCX fractionation -- Peptides obtained from 100 g of synaptosomes following the FASP procedure were fractionated using strong cation-exchange chromatography as described previously (Gonzalez-Lozano et al., 2016). Peptide samples were loaded onto a 4.6 x 100 mm polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC) and separated using a non-linear gradient of 60 min at 200 l/ min solvent A (10mM KH2PO4, 20 % acetonitrile, pH 2.9) and solvent B (solvent A + 500 mM KCl). From 0-10 min, flow of 100% solvent A, from 10- 35 min solvent B was increased to 65%. In the next 5 min, solvent B was increased to 100% followed by 8 min of wash with 100% solvent A. In total 40 fractions of 200 l each were collected. Fractions were pooled in the following manner: 16-20 min (Fraction 1), 21-22 min (Fraction 2), 23-24 min (Fraction 3), 25-26 min (Fraction 4), 27-28 min (Fraction 5), 28-38 min (Fraction 6). Fraction 6 was desalted using Oasis column prior to LC-MS/MS DDA analysis.  Micro-LC and data-dependent data acquisition mass spectrometry of SCX fractions -- Peptides were analyzed by micro LC MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) coupled to the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex). Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5μm particle size, Dionex) and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (100 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size). The acetonitrile concentration in the mobile phase was increased from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The eluted peptides were electro-sprayed into the TripleTOF MS. The micro-spray needle voltage was set to 5500V. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with a single MS full scan (m/z 350−1250, 150 msec) followed by a top 25 MS/MS (m/z 200- 1800, 150 msec) at high sensitivity mode in UNIT resolution, precursor ion > 150 counts/s, charge state from +2 to +5) with an exclusion time of 16 sec once the peptide was fragmented. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and a spread energy of 5eV.  Micro-LC and SWATH mass spectrometry -- The conditions used for LC in SWATH MS-based experiments were the same as those of the DDA experiments. SWATH experiments consisted of a parent ion scan of 150 msec followed by SWATH window of 8 Da with scan time of 80 msec, and stepped through the mass range between 450-770 m/z. The total cycle time was about 3.2 sec, which yielded in general 9-10 measurement points across a typical peptide with an elution time of 30 sec. The collision energy for each window was determined based on the appropriate collision energy for a 2+ ion, centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry -- LC-MS data measured in DDA mode was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008). An initial search using a 0.07 Da peptide mass tolerance was followed by a correction of systematic mass errors. The calibrated data was then subjected to the main search with a 0.006 Da peptide mass tolerance. The minimum peptide length was set to 6, with at most two miss-cleavages allowed. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications with cysteine beta-methylthiolation set as fixed modification.  MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteome using the UniProt (release February 2016) FASTA database that includes both reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) records and both canonical and isoform sequences. The Biognosys iRT FASTA database was also included in order to ensure that iRT peptides were included in the search results, as these were used to normalize retention times in downstream analysis. For both peptide and protein identification a false discovery rate of 0.01 was set. The computation of iBAQ (Schwanhausser et al., 2011) in-silico estimated absolute protein abundances (by dividing the protein intensity by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides) was enabled.  SWATH data extraction and analysis -- A spectral library was made from the MaxQuant analysis of DDA data using Spectronaut 6.0.6880.14 (Bruderer et al., 2015). The Q-value threshold for peptides imported from the MaxQuant msms.txt output table was set to 0.01, all other settings were left to default. Next, Spectronaut was used to extract peptide abundances from the raw SWATH data. The retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT and profiling peak refinement was enabled. Finally, across-run normalization based on total peak areas was performed by Spectronaut.   Peptide abundances were exported as a Spectronaut report and further processed using the R language for statistical computation (R Core Team, 2014), in which we considered each unique precursor as a peptide (e.g., the same peptide sequence observed with distinct modifications or charge was considered a distinct peptide). Spectronaut's fragment group Q-values were used to discriminate high confidence peptides. For the validation of SWATH capabilities using three technical replicates, all peptides with a Q-value higher than 10-3 in any sample were removed.  For the pairwise comparison between (groups of) species, we used the subset of peptides that are present in all species and quantified with high confidence in either group. The former condition was reached by comparing the in-silico digestion of the respective FASTA database of all species. The latter is formalized as having a Q-value smaller than, or equal to, 10-4 over all samples (while allowing for one outlier within each species) in either group. Protein abundances were computed by summation of the normalized peak area of their respective peptides. Peptides that map ambiguously to multiple genes in the spectral library were discarded. Finally, the protein abundance matrix was Loess normalized using the normalizeCyclicLoess function from the limma R package (Smyth et al., 2005), which was set to ‘fast’ and iterations were set to 10.

### Publication Abstract
Key to the human brain's unique capacities are a myriad of neural cell types, specialized molecular expression signatures, and complex patterns of neuronal connectivity. Neurons in the human brain communicate via well over a quadrillion synapses. Their specific contribution might be key to the dynamic activity patterns that underlie primate-specific cognitive function. Recently, functional differences were described in transmission capabilities of human and rat synapses. To test whether unique expression signatures of synaptic proteins are at the basis of this, we performed a quantitative analysis of the hippocampal synaptic proteome of four mammalian species, two primates, human and marmoset, and two rodents, rat and mouse. Abundance differences down to 1.15-fold at an FDR-corrected <i>p</i>-value of 0.005 were reliably detected using SWATH mass spectrometry. The high measurement accuracy of SWATH allowed the detection of a large group of differentially expressed proteins between individual species and rodent vs. primate. Differentially expressed proteins between rodent and primate were found highly enriched for plasticity-related proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Marmoset, Synapse, Synaptosome, Rat, Mouse, Proteomics, Swath, Species

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
VU University

### Submitter
Frank Koopmans

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands


