### Accession
PXD040374

### Title
Structural basis of activation and inhibition of the Ca2+/calmodulin-sensitive adenylyl cyclase 8 (XL-MS)

### Description
Membrane adenylyl cyclases (ACs) catalyze the conversion of ATP to cAMP, a second messenger involved in different signaling pathways. AC8 is one of the 9 membrane-bound isoforms, present in the brain and implicated in cognitive functions. AC8 is regulated by Ca2+/CaM and different G proteins but structural evidence on its regulation is scarce. We solved the structure of full-length AC8 in complex with Gas and CaM. ACs contain large stretches of disordered/highly flexible domains that cannot be resolved with cryo-EM. To overcome this limitation, we have studied AC8's interaction with CaM, Gas and Gbg using crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS).

### Sample Protocol
AC8, Gαs and Gβγ were concentrated and buffer exchanged into 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.02 % GDN, 0.5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM MnCl2, 100 uM GTPγS. CaM was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. 60 ug of protein were used for AC8 crosslinking, 30 ug of AC8 for the interactions. The G proteins were activated with GTPγS prior to crosslinking. The proteins were crosslinked with the following ratios: AC8:Gαs 1:1.5, AC8:Gβγ 1:3, AC8:CaM 1:2, AC8:CaM: Gαs 1:2:1.5. All samples were incubated for 30 min at 25 °C. Primary amines were crosslinked with 1 mM disuccinimidyl suberate (1:1 DSS-d0 : DSS-d12; 25 °C, 1 h, 300 rpm), the reaction was quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Carboxyl group and primary amino group crosslinking was performed with 44 mM pimelic dihydrazyde-d0 (ABCR) mixed at a 1:1 ratio with PDH-d8 (Sigma-Aldich) and 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmoorpholinium chloride (25 °C, 1 h, 300 rpm). The samples were desalted using Zeba Spin Desalting columns and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The samples were resuspended in 50 uL 8 M urea, disulfide bonds were reduced with 2.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (37 °C, 30 min). Free thiol groups were alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, dark, 30 min). 25 uL of 150 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added, followed by 0.6 ug LysC. The samples were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C, until 320 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added together with 1.2 ug trypsin. The samples were incubated over night at 37°C with slight agitation. The next day, formic acid was added to 2% and the samples were desalted and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The samples were fractionated using size-exclusion chromatography (Superdex 30 Increase column 300 x 3.2 mm, GE Healthcare). Fractions were collected and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The samples were injected onto an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Scientific) system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 um; Thermo Scientific) with a gradient from 11-40% B (A: 2 % ACN, 0.15 % FA; B: 80 % ACN, 0.15 % FA) in 60 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  All samples were acquired in duplicates, in DDA with a cycle time of 3 seconds and a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS1 Orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000, charge states between +3 and +7 were selected in a range of 350-1500 m/z and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation in a linear ion trap at a collision energy of 35 %. Fragment ions were detected in in the ion trap.  In addition, PDH/DMTMM samples were measured in duplicates with a method similar to the method above but with fragment detection in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched with Spectromine v.3 (Biognosys) to identify the present proteins. Identified proteins with > 5 % LFQ intensity of the target protein were used for the generation of a FASTA file for crosslink identification with xQuest v. 2.1.5. Databases were reversed and shuffled, trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme, max. missed cleavages = 2, carbamidomethylation on cysteines was included as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as a variable modification. The peptide lengths were set to 4-40 amino acids, MS1 error tolerance was set to 15 ppm, MS2 tolerance was set to 0.2 Da. For the orbitrap detection method the MS2 tolerance, crosslink MS2 tolerance and peak matching tolerances (cp_tolerance, cp_tolerancexl) were set to ± 15 ppm. The minimum peak number was set to 10. Crosslinked peptides were filtered with a mass tolerance window of ± 5 ppm, TIC ≥0.1, minimally 3 matched ions and a delta score of <0.9. To achieve <5 % false discovery rate, the xQuest score cutoff was set at less than 5 % of decoy hits compared to target hits. All spectra were checked and filtered manually with at least 3 bond breakages. For AC8 heteromeric/inter-protein XLs, homomeric/intra-protein XLs, monolinks and homomultimeric links/intermolecular selflinks were exported. For the interactors we only exported hetero- and homomeric XLs, as well as homomultimeric links (dimerization links). Crosslinks between 2 peptides sharing the same sequence were considered to be intermolecular selflinks.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a chronic liver abnormality that exhibits high variability and can lead to liver cancer in advanced stages. Hepatic ablation of SIRT6 results in fatty liver disease, yet the potential mechanism of SIRT6 deficiency, particularly in relation to downstream mediators for NAFLD, remains elusive. Here we identify Serpina12 as a key gene regulated by Sirt6 that plays a crucial function in energy homeostasis. Specifically, Sirt6 suppresses Serpina12 expression through histone deacetylation at its promoter region, after which the transcription factor, Cebp&#x3b1;, binds to and regulates its expression. Sirt6 deficiency results in an increased expression of Serpina12 in hepatocytes, which enhances insulin signaling and promotes lipid accumulation. Importantly, CRISPR-Cas9 mediated Serpina12 knockout in the liver ameliorated fatty liver disease caused by Sirt6 ablation. Finally, we demonstrate that Sirt6 functions as a tumor suppressor in the liver, and consequently, deletion of Sirt6 in the liver leads to not only the spontaneous development of tumors but also enhanced tumorigenesis in response to DEN treatment or under conditions of obesity.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Xl-ms, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland; Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr M. Korkhov
Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland; Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


