### Accession
PXD011609

### Title
Differential proteomic analysis of actinic keratosis, Bowen's disease and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma by label-free LC-MS/MS

### Description
BACKGROUND: The boundaries between actinic keratosis (AK), Bowen's disease (BD), and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) are sometimes not clear. Large-scale proteomic profiling studies of these lesions are also non-existent.  OBJECTIVE: To evaluate proteomic changes between normal epidermis, AK, BD and cSCC that could support a molecular classification and improve our understanding of disease progression.  METHODS: Microdissected formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples of normal epidermis (n = 4, pooled), AK (n = 10), BD (n = 10) and cSCC (n = 10) were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Following normalization and multiple testing adjustments, differential abundance analysis was performed using Linear Models for Microarray data. Proteins were filtered for significance (adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05) and fold change of at least ±1.5. Comparative bioinformatics analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. Proteomic findings were subsequently substantiated using immunohistochemistry.  RESULTS: 2073 unique proteins were identified. cSCC had the highest number of differentially abundant proteins (63 proteins) followed by BD (58 proteins) and AK (46 proteins). Six proteins (APOA1, ALB, SERPINA1, HLA-B, HP and TXNDC5) were differentially abundant in cSCC compared to AK. Immunohistochemical analysis corroborated changes in MIF, RPL37A and TXNDC5. IPA analysis predicted that cell proliferation, angiogenesis and inflammatory reactions were significantly activated in cSCC compared to BD and AK. Cell death and DNA damage were predicted to be inhibited in BD.  CONCLUSION: Our study supports the concept that AK and BD are precursors of cSCC. The identification of proteome changes indicates disruption of repair, pro-apoptotic, and tumor promoting pathways. Our findings will help select targets for classification and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Rehydrated tissue sections were used for laser capture microdissection (LCM) using the PALM Laser Microbeam instrument (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, 07740 Jena, Germany) as before [16]. Microsections of the normal epidermis layer from healthy individuals was collected as controls. Microdissected tissues were washed from the adhesive caps with 300 μl 0.1% w/v RapiGest™ SF Surfactant (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) in a 1.5 ml boil-proof microcentrifuge tube (Axygen Scientific, Union City, CA, USA). Following a vigorous vortex, the homogenate was sonicated continuously for 1 min with a step tip probe (15% intensity; Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT, USA) and incubated at 95˚C for 30 min. Following centrifugation at 16,000 × g at 4˚C for 20 min, the protein yield was quantified using Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Protein extracts were then reduced in 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 60˚C followed by alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteolytic digestion was performed following the addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:40 trypsin:protein ratio; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) followed by overnight incubation at 37˚C. Rapigest™ (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) detergent was cleaved by acidification to pH<2, 37˚C incubation for 30 min and removed from the samples by centrifugation (13,000 × g, 20 min, 4˚C). Peptide mixtures were desalted using 1cc Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters Corporation); final yields were determined by Qubit quantitation and 10 μg aliquots vacuum were concentrated using Savant Speedvac Plus sample concentrator (Thermo Savant, Holbrook, NY, USA) and stored at −20˚C.  Equal quantities of peptides from each control sample were pooled prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptide mixtures (2 μg) were prepared in 6 μL of loading buffer [3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)] for reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC–MS/MS) analysis. Samples were separated by a Nano flow Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex Corp, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a Nano spray ionization ion source. Peptides (1.5 μg, 3 μL) were loaded at a flow rate of 200 nL/min onto an in-house C18-reversed phase column with mobile phase buffers A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), over a 2 h linear gradient (10–35% B for 120 min; 35–95% B for 3 min, 95% B 1 min). In addition, 30 min runs using peptide standard (30 fmol pre-digested BSA, Gene Search, Cat # P8108S, 500 pmol) were performed after every six runs. MS data was acquired using the parameters previously described [16] with the exception that no inclusion or exclusion list was added in the data acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer™ software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version: 2.1.0.81). Peak lists were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.4.0) against SwissProt database (06/07/2016), selected for Homo sapiens (20,274 entries) and trypsin digestion with a maximum of one missed cleavage. Scaffold Q+ (version 4.4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to visualize MS/MS based peptide, and label-free comparative protein quantification was achieved by measuring

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Actinic keratosis; bowen’s disease; cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma; mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Professor in Dermatology, Department of Dermatology Westmead Clinical School, Westmead Hospital

### Submitter
Ali Azimi

### Lab Head
Dr PROFESSOR PABLO FERNANDEZ PENAS
Professor in Dermatology, Department of Dermatology Westmead Clinical School, Westmead Hospital


