### Accession
PXD018515

### Title
Pro-cognitive treatments restore hippocampal proteomic and kinome alterations in Ts65Dn mice

### Description
Down syndrome is the main genetic cause of intellectual disability and is due to triplication of human chromosome 21 (HSA21). Green tea extracts containing epigallocatechin-3-gallate (green tea) improve cognition both in mouse models and individuals with Down syndrome. We here analyzed the proteome and phosphoproteome alterations in a Down syndrome mouse model, the partial trisomic Ts65Dn mice, and the effect produced by the green tea extract and environmental enrichment (EE). Trisomic hippocampi presented a dysregulated proteome, especially when looking at the phosphorylation level in cognitive-related categories (synaptic proteins, neuronal projection, neuron development, microtubule),  and GTPases/kinase activity and chromatin related categories. Green tea, EE, and their phospholipids in the plasma membrane and regulates signal transduction pathways, transcription factors, DNA methylation, mitochondrial function and phosphorylation, and autophagy to exert many of its beneficial biological actions Of interest for DS, it inhibits the activity of the Dual Specificity Tyrosine-Phosphorylation-Regulated Kinase 1A (DYRK1A), a DS candidate gene located in the 21q22.2 human chromosome region4,5. Previous work from our group showed that EGCG partially rescues the effects of overexpression of a DS candidate gene, DYRK1A, on the proteome and phosphoproteome of the hippocampus of TgDyrk1A mice6. However, the extent to which these mechanisms apply to a trisomy scenario is unknown. To get insight in these mechanisms we analyzed changes in protein abundances and phosphorylation in Ts65Dn mice, and their disomic counterparts in baseline conditions and upon three treatments known to improve cognition in Ts65Dn: i) green tea extract containing EGCG, ii) environmental enrichment (EE), and iii) their combination.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampi of the selected mice were processed at the same time and homogenized with a RIPA-modified buffer (50 mM tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate with the addition of 5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM sodium orthovanadate, and protease inhibitors from the Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Roche). Samples were sonicated using Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 5 min with 30 on/off cycles, maintaining the samples on ice, and were centrifuged for 10 min 10,000 rpm at 4 ºC. Proteins from the supernatants were precipitated overnight at -20 °C by adding a volume of ice-cold acetone in six-fold excess. The acetone-precipitated proteins were solubilized in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea and 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water). Final protein content was quantified using the BCA assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 37 °C, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 25 °C, 30 min). Then samples were diluted with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate up to 2 M urea, digested overnight with Lys-C at 37 °C, and then diluted two-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted using a C18 MicroSpin 300A silica column (The Nest Group Inc), evaporated to dryness using a speedvac, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using titansphere chromatography. Briefly, tryptic peptides were desalted and completely evaporated to dryness, and then they were dissolved with 100 μl of Loading Buffer [80% ACN (vol/vol) and 6% TFA (vol/vol)] at ~1 μg/μl concentration of peptides. Samples were passed through a constricted TiO2 loaded spin tip, previously equilibrated with Loading Buffer, applying 2x50 μl and using a centrifuge at ~50 g in order to achieve a complete binding. TiO2 spin tip was washed once with 50 μl of Loading Buffer and once with 50 μl of Washing Buffer [50% ACN (vol/vol) and 0.1% TFA (vol/vol)]. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted from the TiO2 spin tip with 30 μl of Elution Buffer (85% NH3-H2O, pH 11.0) into a tube that contains 30 μl of 20% formic acid. Second elution was made in the same tube with 3 μl Elution Buffer 2 [(80% ACN (vol/vol) and 2% formic acid (vol/vol)]. The eluted phosphopeptides were evaporated to dryness and dissolved with 0.1% formic acid in water for being analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS).   For each sample, 2 μg of tryptic peptides from digested hippocampal tissue and phospho-enriched peptides from 100 μg of the same tissue were injected in an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano-LC (EASY-nLC, Proxeon). The performance of the orbitrap system was assessed in a previous publication showing coefficients of variations below 20% in single-shot technical replicates in HeLa cells for both proteome and phosphoproteome quantification23. Nano-LC was equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography column of 25 cm with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos, NTCC-360/75-3-25L), and a Nano Trap Column Acclaim PepMap100 100 μm x 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100A (Thermo, 164199). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% of buffer A and 7% of buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nL/min during 5 min and linearly changed to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B after 240 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 16 min with 90% buffer A and 10% buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile).   The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with the nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and the source temperature at 250°C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior to the analyses. The background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 1 microscan at resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and survey scans were recorded over a mass range of m/z 350−2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 106, dynamic exclusion was set at 60 seconds, and the charge-state filter disqualifying singly charged peptides for fragmentation was activated. Following each survey scan, the top 20 most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5,000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) and collision-induced dissociation MultiStage activation (CID MSA) for proteome and phosphoproteome respectively, were acquired in the linear ion trap, AGC was set to 5x104 and isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 0.1 milliseconds and maximum injection time of 100 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The acquired MS2 spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot sequence database for Mus musculus (17,263 forward entries; version from July 2015). The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. In the case of phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine was also added as variable modifications. We allowed a maximum of two mis-cleavages, 4.5 ppm as mass tolerance for precursor ions, and 0.5 Da as mass tolerance for fragment ions. FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level, and protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. The MaxQuant algorithm was used to retrieve accurate extracted ion currents (XICs) per each peptide feature for quantification purposes. Areas under the curve for each peptide were calculated and later used to estimate protein intensities during the statistical analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using the R package MSstats version 2.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
Down syndrome (DS) is the main genetic cause of intellectual disability due to triplication of human chromosome 21 (HSA21). Although there is no treatment for intellectual disability, environmental enrichment (EE) and the administration of green tea extracts containing epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) improve cognition in mouse models and individuals with DS. Using proteome, and phosphoproteome analysis in the hippocampi of a DS mouse model (Ts65Dn), we investigated the possible mechanisms underlying the effects of green tea extracts, EE and their combination. Our results revealed disturbances in cognitive-related (synaptic proteins, neuronal projection, neuron development, microtubule), GTPase/kinase activity and chromatin proteins. Green tea extracts, EE, and their combination restored more than 70% of the phosphoprotein deregulation in Ts65Dn, and induced possible compensatory effects. Our downstream analyses indicate that re-establishment of a proper epigenetic state and rescue of the kinome deregulation may contribute to the cognitive rescue induced by green tea extracts.

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Ts65dn, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Center for Genomics Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Proteomics Unit, Center for Genomics Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


