### Accession
PXD030714

### Title
A ubiquitinome analysis to study the functional roles of the proteasome associated deubiquitinating enzymes USP14 and UCH37

### Description
The removal of (poly)ubiquitin (Ub) chains at the proteasome is a key step in the protein degradation pathway that determines which proteins are degraded and ultimately decides cell fate. Specific polyubiquitin linkages may lead to distinct cellular effects, with several linkage types associated with proteasomal degradation and others with lysosomal degradation, protein cellular localization or signaling events. Three different deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are associated to the human proteasome, PSMD14/RPN11, USP14 and UCH37/UCHL5. The functional roles and specificities of these proteasomal DUBs remains elusive. To reveal the specificities of these proteasome associated DUBs, we use SILAC based quantitative ubiquitinomics to study the effects of CRISPR-Cas9 based knockout of each of these DUBs on the dynamic cellular ubiquitinome. We report distinct effects on the ubiquitinome and the ability of the proteasome to clear proteins upon removal of either USP14 or UCH37, while the removal of both simultaneously suggests less redundancy for these DUBs than previously anticipated. We also investigated whether the small molecule inhibitor b-AP15 has the potential to specifically target USP14 and UCH37 by comparing treatment in wild-type versus double-knockout cells. Strikingly, we observed broad and severe off-target effects, questioning the alleged specificity of the inhibitor. In conclusion, this work presents novel insights into the function of proteasome associated DUBs and illustrates the power of in-depth ubiquitinomics for screening the activity of DUBs and of DUB modulating compounds.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry Analysis of the global proteome and enrichment for diglycine remnant containing peptides using antibody based enrichment was performed as earlier [44]. Briefly, peptides were fractionationed using high pH reverse-phase chromatography. For the reverse phase chromatography column, a protein digest: stationary phase ratio of 1:50 was used, and peptides were eluted in three fractions using increasing amounts of acetonitrile (7%, 13.5% and 50%). Fractions and flowthrough were subsequently dried to completeness by lyophilization. For immunoprecipitation of diGly peptides, ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) antibodies coupled to beads (PTMscan, product #5562, Cell Signaling Technologies) were used. After immunoprecipitation, the supernatant was stored for further global proteome analysis.  Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific, #164564) and separated on an in-house packed 50 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a linear gradient of 0–32% acetonitrile (in 0.1 % formic acid) during 60 or 90 min. The eluate was directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of electrospray ionization (ESI). For global DDA proteomics, data were recorded on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, essentially as described in [44]. Full MS1 scans were recorded in the range of 375 – 1,400 m/z at 120,000 resolution. Fragmentation of peptides with charges 2 - 5 was performed using HCD. The collision energy was set at 30 % and previously fragmented peptides were excluded for 60 seconds.  The resolution of tandem mass spectra (MS2) was set at 30,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4 and the maximum injection time (IT) was set to 50 ms. MS2 spectra were recorded in centroid mode. The sequence of sampling was blanks first and then in order of increasing peptide input amounts to avoid any contamination of previous samples..  The relative abundances of specific proteins in the KO cells were estimated using a label free targeted proteomics approach, essentially as described in [50]. Briefly, a parallel reaction monitoring regime (PRM) was used to select for a set of previously selected peptides on an Orbitrap Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode and running Tune version 3.3. Precursors were selected in the quadrupole with an isolation width of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with HCD using 30 % collision energy (CE). MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution. The maximum injection time was set to dynamic with a minimum of 9 points measured across the chromatographic peak. See Supplementary Table XXX for the m/z isolation list.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis Analysis of raw mass spectrometry data was performed using the MaxQuant software suite (v 1.5.6.4) [51] for DDA data and Skyline [52] for PRM data. Downstream analysis was performed using Perseus (v 1.6.1.1) and in-house software packages. Volcano plots were based on one sample t-tests  and 1.5-fold was chosen as a cutoff for significant up- or downregulation, unless stated otherwise. The settings in MaxQuant were chosen as described earlier [44]. For the LFQ analysis of the proteasome pulldown assay, an imputation step was included to cope with missing values, using a normal distribution with standard settings (i.e., width 0.3, downshift 1.8).  Functional enrichment analysis was performed using GOrilla [53,54]. A p-value threshold of 10-6 was set as a cutoff for the ubiquitinated peptides. For the background list, all identified proteins in the global proteome analysis in this paper were taken. Amino acid sequence logos were created using the web service Icelogo [55]. Dependency analysis was performed using DepMap [56,57].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deubiquitinase (dub), Ubiquitin, Ubiquitinomics, Ubiquitinome, Usp14, Parallel reaction monitoring, Silac, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Uch37/uchl5, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rottterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rottterdam


