### Accession
PXD017499

### Title
Interacting proteins of SnRK2.4 by IP-MS

### Description
This project is designed to identify the interacting protein of SnRK2.4 through IP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings were pulled off from agar plate with tweezers and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Samples were then ground into fine power with a mortar and pestle in the presence of liquid nitrogen. Next, proteins were extracted in 50 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Thermo Scientific, IL). Insoluble cellular debris were removed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min, and proteins in the supernatant were quantified with the Bradford method assay.  Immunoprecipitation and the subsequent sample preparation for proteomics were performed according to previous descriptions (2).  Briefly, 10 mg of proteins were incubated with 300 µL of anti-FLAG M2 resin (Sigma, MO) for 2 h at 4 °C with gentle agitation. Unspecific-binding proteins were removed by washing the resin three times with 50 mM Tris HCl and 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.4). Subsequently, FLAG-tagged SnRK2.4 and its associated proteins were eluted with 150 ng/μL 3 X FLAG peptide (Sigma, MO). The eluted samples were cleaned by a short-run SDS-PAGE (30 min at 100 V), which effectively remove salts and the 3 X FLAG peptide that would otherwise compromise protein identification. Protein bands of interests were cut from the gel and were then digested with trypsin. Specifically, three fractions were collected for each sample: the major band corresponding to SnRK2.4, proteins above this band, and proteins below this band. The resulting peptides from each fraction were furthered desalted by Ziptip prior to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis. Four biological replicates were conducted from both the WT and the transgenic plants, thus yield 24 samples for proteomic identification (8 samples X 3 fractions/sample = 24).

### Data Protocol
Seedlings were pulled off from agar plate with tweezers and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Samples were then ground into fine power with a mortar and pestle in the presence of liquid nitrogen. Next, proteins were extracted in 50 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Thermo Scientific, IL). Insoluble cellular debris were removed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min, and proteins in the supernatant were quantified with the Bradford method assay.  Immunoprecipitation and the subsequent sample preparation for proteomics were performed according to previous descriptions (2).  Briefly, 10 mg of proteins were incubated with 300 µL of anti-FLAG M2 resin (Sigma, MO) for 2 h at 4 °C with gentle agitation. Unspecific-binding proteins were removed by washing the resin three times with 50 mM Tris HCl and 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.4). Subsequently, FLAG-tagged SnRK2.4 and its associated proteins were eluted with 150 ng/μL 3 X FLAG peptide (Sigma, MO). The eluted samples were cleaned by a short-run SDS-PAGE (30 min at 100 V), which effectively remove salts and the 3 X FLAG peptide that would otherwise compromise protein identification. Protein bands of interests were cut from the gel and were then digested with trypsin. Specifically, three fractions were collected for each sample: the major band corresponding to SnRK2.4, proteins above this band, and proteins below this band. The resulting peptides from each fraction were furthered desalted by Ziptip prior to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis. Four biological replicates were conducted from both the WT and the transgenic plants, thus yield 24 samples for proteomic identification (8 samples X 3 fractions/sample = 24).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms; snrk2.4

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Pacific Northwest National Lab

### Submitter
Tong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Tong Zhang
University of Florida


