### Accession
PXD006460

### Title
Quantitative proteomics study of Mecp2 KO versus wild type mice

### Description
Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in the transcriptional regulator MeCP2. RTT is characterized by having apparently normal development until 6-18 months, when a progressive decline in motor and language functions begins and breathing abnormalities and seizures present. Here we present the first proteomic analysis in a RTT mouse model. Examining whole cortex tissue in symptomatic males (Mecp2Jae/y) and wild-type littermates, we have identified 465 proteins significantly altered. Pathway analysis identified biological pathways ubiquitous to multiple cell types as well as cell type specific pathways, underscoring the contributions of multiple central nervous system (CNS) cell populations to the disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
An amount corresponding to 40 µg of protein based on a BCA assay with BSA as a reference standard (Pierce, Rockford, IL) was processed by SDS-PAGE using a 4-20% polyacrylamide gel (Biorad, Hercules, CA). The gel was run for 5 minutes at 120 volts and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 protein stain comprised of 0.05% Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (w/v) / 50% methanol (v/v) / 10% acetic acid (v/v) for 30 minutes at room temperature. The mobility region was excised into 1 mm cubes and destained overnight in 15% methanol (v/v) / 10% glacial acetic acid (v/v). The next day the gel slices were destained for an additional 4 hours until the stain was completely removed. The gel cubes were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. The reducing and alkylating buffers were removed and the gel cubes were placed into acetonitrile and allowed to evaporate to dryness at room temperature. Trypsin gold (Promega, Madison, WI) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample at a 1:20 trypsin to total protein ratio and allowed to digest at 37°C for 16 hours. The digests were aliquoted into fresh tubes and extraction buffer consisting of 50% acetonitrile (v/v) / 5% formic acid (v/v) was added and left at room temperature for 2 hours then combined with each sample’s overnight trypsin digest. Samples were vacuum centrifuged to dryness, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (v/v), and BCA assayed with undigested BSA as a reference to determine peptide total concentrations.  In each LC-MS/MS injection, 1 µg of peptides were separated on a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA). A 3 µL injection was loaded in 5% acetonitrile (v/v) / 0.1% formic acid (v/v) at a 4 µL/minute flowrate for 4 minutes onto a 100 µm I.D. fused-silica pre-column packed with 2 cm of 5 µm (200Å) Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom, Auburn, CA) and eluted using a flowrate of 300 nL/minute onto a 75 µm inner diameter analytical column packed with 25 cm of 3 µm (100Å) Magic C18AQ particles to a gravity-pulled tip. A linear gradient was applied to elute peptides from 100% solvent A consisting of 0.1% formic acid (v/v) to 35% solvent B comprised of 99% acetonitrile (v/v) / 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in 90 minutes. Ions were introduced by positive electrospray ionization via liquid junction into a Q-Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo, Waltham, MA) operating in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A total of 6 injections were performed to analyze each sample corresponding to the precursor m/z ranges 501-552, 553.5-604.5, 606-657, 658.5-709.5, 711-762, and 763.5-814.5 using a modified application of the precursor acquisition independent from ion count (PAcIFIC) approach. The sequential inclusion list for each precursor m/z range included 35 precursor m/z centers and stepped 1.5 m/z per inclusion list center to provide an overlap of 1 m/z between each inclusion list precursor m/z range assayed. Centroid MS/MS data were acquired at 17,500 FWHM resolution with an AGC target value of 2e5, a maximum IT of 80 ms, an isolation width of 2.5 m/z, a fixed first mass of 140 m/z, normalized collision energy of 27, and default charge state of 2.

### Data Protocol
Protalizer (Vulcan Analytical, Birmingham, AL) was used to automate the analysis of DIA data and combine the results from the 6 injections per sample. Peptides and source proteins were identified by an X! Tandem Sledgehammer MS/MS database search following deconvolution of MS/MS spectra by retaining fragment ions within 70% of the maximum intensity of each fragment ion when compared across sequential MS/MS scans using a 0.01 m/z tolerance. The mouse Swiss-Prot reference proteome was used for all searches that was downloaded March 17th, 2015 and contained 16,704 sequences (not including reversed sequence decoys used to determine the false discovery rate). A precursor tolerance of 2.5 m/z and fragment tolerance of 20 ppm was applied with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and false protein discovery rate of 1%. Potential modifications included in each search were oxidation of M residues, pyro-glutamic acid at N-terminal E and Q residues, N-terminal acetylation, as well as phosphorylation at S, T, and Y sites. Carbamidomethylation of C residues was searched as a fixed modification. Peptides assigned to different proteins in separate files were assigned to a single top match determined by the protein entry most often assigned by X! Tandem. Relative quantification of peptides was performed by MS2 area-under-the-curve (AUC) chromatogram intensities using a minimum of 5 and maximum of 9 b/y fragment ions in either a +1 or +2 charge state with intensities at least 10% of the strongest fragment ion assigned to each peptide in MS/MS spectra. Peptides not consistently detected in each file that were acquired with the same PAcIFIC assay were extracted in the files they were not detected using normalized retention time. The intensities of peptide MS2 chromatograms were normalized by up to 25 peptides quantified in each sample that had the least amount of intensity variation and the most similar retention time to correct for retention time-dependent matrix effects. The normalized MS2 chromatograms for each peptide were then placed in a relative scale with 1 being the smallest amount detected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rett syndrome, Mouse brain cortex, Dia

### Affiliations
Vulcan Analytical
Associate Professor Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Michael Heaven

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Olsen
Associate Professor Virginia Tech


