### Accession
PXD013514

### Title
Uterine fluid proteomic analysis of fertile and subfertile hens before and after insemination

### Description
Avian uterine fluid (UF) and uterovaginal sperm storage tubules (SST) are key components for acceptance of sperm in SST, sperm functions maintenance during weeks, sperm release out of SST, and their ascending through the uterus. The study of UF and SST is essential to better understand sperm storage process. The objectives were to identify proteins modulated in the hen’s oviduct by sperm, and to highlight their role during sperm storage. Two genetic lines of hens exhibiting long (F+) or short (F-) sperm storage ability were used. GeLC-MS/MS strategy was used to establish a quantitative inventory of proteins regulated after insemination in both lines. Consequently the identification of high (ANXA4/ANXA5/OCX32) and low (HSPA8/PIGR) fertility markers was investigated in uterovaginal junction by immunohistochemistry. Our results demonstrated that sperm induced a significant and rapid change in the UF proteomic content, as well as in the SST epithelium. In F+ hens, the ANXA4 protein mobilization in apical part of SST cells after insemination was associated to increased levels of some proteoglycans and binding proteins, as well as antimicrobial eggshell matrix protein (OCX32) in the UF. We also observed increased levels of lipid transporters involved in egg formation (VTG1-2, APOA1-4-H). In F- hens, insemination induced increased levels of PIGR in both UF and SST, of ANXA5 in SST, of UF enzymes exhibiting metallopeptidase activity, and mucins. In conclusion, sperm induced significant changes in the UF proteomic content. This study also provides evidence that the SST immune system is major to regulate sperm storage.

### Sample Protocol
All samples from each group were pooled by condition (F+ before AI, F+ after AI, F- before AI and F- after AI) for GeLC-MS/MS analysis. Fifty µg of proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue (PageBlue™ Protein Staining Solution, Fermentas®) before to section each lane into 20 slices and digest with trypsin (Sequencing grade). Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1 software. The instrument was operated in positive mode in data-dependent mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (from 300 to 1800 m/z) were acquired with a resolution set at 60,000. The 20 most intense ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated (isolation width: 2 m/z; 1 microscan) and fragmented using CID mode (energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled). Dynamic exclusion was active during 30 s with a repeat count of one. Polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z, 445.1200025) ions were used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF as previously described (Labas, Grasseau et al. 2015). The identification of proteins was established using MASCOT search engine (v 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). The peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against the chordata section of nr NCBI database (1601319 sequences, downloaded on 2014/01). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with two missed cleavages using carbamidomethylcysteine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Mascot results obtained from the target and decoy database searches were incorporated in Scaffold 4 software (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software, Portland, USA). Peptide and protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms (Keller, Nesvizhskii et al. 2002). Peptides were considered distinct if they differed in sequence. A false discovery rate was calculated as < 1% at the peptide or protein level. The abundance of identified proteins was estimated by calculating the emPAI using Scaffold software.

### Publication Abstract
Avian uterine fluid (UF) and uterovaginal sperm storage tubules (SST) are key components in accepting sperm in SST, maintaining sperm function for several weeks, releasing sperm from SST and their ascent through the uterus. To improve the understanding of sperm storage processes requires investigating UF and SST. This study aimed to identify proteins modulated by sperm in the hen's genital tract and to highlight their role during sperm storage. Two genetic lines of hens exhibiting long (F+) or short (F-) sperm storage ability were used. GeLC MS/MS analysis was used to establish a quantitative inventory of proteins regulated after insemination in both lines. The proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013514. Immunohistochemistry was used to identify high (ANXA4/ANXA5/OCX32) and low (HSPA8/PIGR) fertility markers in the uterovaginal junction. Our results demonstrated that sperm induced a significant and rapid change in the UF proteomic content and also in the SST epithelium. In F+ hens, mobilization of the ANXA4 protein in the apical part of SST cells after insemination was associated with increased levels of some proteoglycans and binding proteins, and also antimicrobial eggshell matrix protein (OCX32) in the UF. We also observed increased levels of lipid transporters involved in egg formation (VTG1-2, APOA1-4-H). In F- hens, insemination induced increased levels of PIGR in both UF and SST, of ANXA5 in SST, of UF enzymes exhibiting metallopeptidase activity and mucins. In conclusion, sperm induced significant changes in the UF proteomic content. This study also provides evidence that the SST immune system plays a major role in regulating sperm storage.

### Keywords
Insemination, Sperm storage, Uterin fluid

### Affiliations
INRA
Equipe Interactions Cellulaires et Fertilité INRA Centre Val de Loire UMR de Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements

### Submitter
Lucie Combes-Soia

### Lab Head
Dr Nadine Gerard
Equipe Interactions Cellulaires et Fertilité INRA Centre Val de Loire UMR de Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements


