### Accession
PXD003107

### Title
Combining Untargeted and Targeted Proteomic Strategies for Discrimination and Quantification of Cashmere Fibers

### Description
Cashmere is regarded as a specialty and luxury ﬁber due to its scarcity and high economic value. For fiber quality assessment, it is technically very challenging to distinguish and quantify the cashmere fiber from yak or wool fibers because of their highly similar physical appearance and substantial protein sequence homology. To address this issue, we propose a workflow combining untargeted and targeted proteomics strategies for selecting, verifying and quantifying biomarkers for cashmere textile authentication. Untargeted proteomic surveys were first applied to identify 174, 157, and 156 proteins from cashmere, wool and yak fibers respectively. After marker selection at different levels, peptides turned out to afford much higher selectivity than proteins for fiber species discrimination. Collective use of these peptide makers allowed us to discriminate and quantify cashmere fibers in commercial finished fabrics that have undergone heavy chemical treatments. Cashmere proportion measurement in fabric samples using our proteomic approach was in good agreement with results from traditional light microscopy, yet our method can be more readily standardized to become an objective and robust assay for assessing authenticity of fibers and textiles.

### Sample Protocol
Fiber Sample Preparation Ethanol was added to completely immerse the fibers. After shaking gently at room temperature for 30 min, the ethanol was filtered out with a Buchner funnel. The dichloromethane/methanol (2:1, v/v) solution was added to wash the fibers by shaking for 24 h before the solvent was removed by filtration. Extraction buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 5 M urea, 2.4 M thiourea, 5% DTT, pH 8.5) of 500 μl was added to the pretreated fibers, and left in contact with fibers for 16 h at 50 ℃ under gentle shaking. Extracted fibers were taken out with tweezers, and the extraction solution was centrifuged under 12000g for 10 min. The supernatant was kept at -80 ℃ and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay.  Protein Digestion and Dimethyl Labeling Proteins (~100 μg) in the extraction solution were precipitated by acetone at a protein-to-acetone ratio of 1:5 (v/v) for 2 h at -20 ℃, then centrifuged at 6000g for 10 min. After washing for 3 times with cold acetone, the pellet was dried under nitrogen gas and resuspended with 8 M urea and reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 ℃ for 2 h in a thermo mixer (Thermo Fisher Sicentific, USA). The solution was centrifuged and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in darkness for 40 min. Additional 30 mM DTT was added to consume the excess iodoacetamide, followed by vortexing and incubation for at 37 ℃ for 30 min. Urea was diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of less than 1 M. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 ℃ for 2h, followed by adding fresh trypsin at 1:50 (w/w) and incubation at 37 ℃ overnight. After acidification, the protein digest was desalted with C18-SepPak columns (Waters, Milford, USA) and lyophilized under vacuum.  For triplex dimethyl labeling of peptides, 20 μg tryptic digest of each fiber sample was suspended in 100 μl TEAB solution (100 mM, pH 8.0). Then 4 μl of formaldehyde (CH2O, CD2O and 13CD2O, 4%, v/v) was added to specific samples for differential isotope labeling. The same volume of fresh 0.6 M cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was added subsequently to the light and intermediate-labeled peptides and the labeled cyanoborohydride (NaBD3CN) was added to the heavy-labeled peptides, and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Then 20 μl of 1% ammonium solution was added and vortexed for 10 min. Finally, 8 μl of 5% formic acid was added to quench the reaction. In each triplex labeling set, the peptides of the reference and two process replicates of one fiber sample were labeled with light, intermediate and heavy isotope tags respectively. Triplex-labeled peptides from different samples were mixed at equal amount, and desalted prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on an Eksigent NanoLC connected to TripleTOFTM 5600 mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystem, USA) with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The sample (~1 μg peptides) dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) was loaded onto a trap column (10 mm×100 μm, 5 μm C18 resin) and separated on an analytical column (100 mm×75 μm) in-house packed with C18-AQ 3 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany), using a gradient of 5-36% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 98% acetonitrile) over 82 min at flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer acquisition method was set to the following parameters: 2300 V ion spray voltage, 30 psi curtain gas, 10 psi ion source gas, and 150 ℃ interface heater temperature.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (v4.5, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) equipped with Paragon Algorithm was employed to obtain the relative ratios of proteins identified in each fiber sample against reference. The software performs automatic recalibration such that typical mass errors for MS and MS/MS data were below 20 ppm. The Uniprot databases of wool (Ovis aries, Nov-2013, 4221 entries), cashmere (Capra hircus, Nov-2013, 2004 entries) and yak (Bos mutus grunniens & Bos grunniens mutus, Nov-2013, 18907 entries) were combined to build a collective fiber proteome database. Trypsin was set as the specific enzyme and Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification. ProteinPilot automatically clusters the identified proteins into protein groups sharing common peptides. Only protein identifications with >99% confidence were retained, resulting in FDR <1% as calculated by a decoy database search. For quantification analysis, dimethyl labeling was specified to be the quantification method. Only peptides of unique sequences (not shared with other proteins) and free of miscleavages or variable modifications contributed to protein ratio calculation. Protein ratios in specific fiber samples vs reference were derived from at least two unique quantified peptides, and they were normalized using the median protein ratio.  Protein ratios for different fiber samples were reformed into an Excel matrix which was then imported into SIMCA software (v14.0, Umetrics AB, Sweden) for multivariate statistical analysis. Partial least squares-discriminate analysis (PLS-DA) was employed to identify biochemical patterns. The value of variable importance in the projection (VIP) in PLS-DA model and the result of ANOVA tests between different groups were combined to determine biomarker candidates. Proteins with VIP >1.0 and ANOVA p-value <0.01 were regarded as putative markers for fiber species specification.

### Publication Abstract
Cashmere is regarded as a specialty and luxury fiber due to its scarcity and high economic value. For fiber quality assessment, it is technically very challenging to distinguish and quantify the cashmere fiber from yak or wool fibers because of their highly similar physical appearance and substantial protein sequence homology. To address this issue, we propose a workflow combining untargeted and targeted proteomics strategies for selecting, verifying and quantifying biomarkers for cashmere textile authentication. Untargeted proteomic surveys were first applied to identify 174, 157, and 156 proteins from cashmere, wool and yak fibers, respectively. After marker selection at different levels, peptides turned out to afford much higher selectivity than proteins for fiber species discrimination. Subsequently, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) methods were developed for ten selected peptide markers. The PRM-based targeted analysis of peptide markers enabled accurate determination of fiber species and cashmere percentages in different fiber mixtures. Furthermore, collective use of these peptide makers allowed us to discriminate and quantify cashmere fibers in commercial finished fabrics that have undergone heavy chemical treatments. Cashmere proportion measurement in fabric samples using our proteomic approach was in good agreement with results from traditional light microscopy, yet our method can be more readily standardized to become an objective and robust assay for assessing authenticity of fibers and textiles. We anticipate that the proteomic strategies presented in our study could be further implicated in discovery of quality trait markers for other products containing highly homologous proteomes.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Keratin, Biomarker, Proteomics, Fiber, Keratin-associated protein

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial Biotechnology, Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

### Submitter
Guo Yufeng

### Lab Head
Dr Shui Wenqing
Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial Biotechnology, Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


