### Accession
PXD030216

### Title
Virotrap-based interactome analysis of a NTR protein

### Description
Ribosome profiling has revealed translation outside of canonical coding sequences (CDSs) including translation of short upstream ORFs, long non-coding RNAs, overlapping ORFs, ORFs in UTRs or ORFs in alternative reading frames. Studies combining mass spectrometry, ribosome profiling and CRISPR-based screens showed that hundreds of ORFs derived from non-coding transcripts produce (micro)proteins and might be functional, while other studies failed to find evidence for such types of non-canonical translation events. In this study we tried to detect (and characterize) proteins originating from these non-translated regions (NTRs). We attempted to discover translation products from non-coding regions at large scale by reducing the overall sample complexity (by enriching cytosolic N-terminal peptides) and combined it with an extend search space (combining UniProt proteins, UniProt isoforms and publicly available Ribo-seq data). Reasoning that this strategy would increase the likelihood of identifying proteins from NTRs. Further, we introduced rigorous data analysis and results curation workflows. This stringent filtering approach was found essential to retain confident translational evidence at the peptide level for NTRs. We show that, theoretically, our strategy facilitates the detection of translation events of transcripts from NTRs, but experimentally we find that less than 1% of all identified peptides might originate from such translation events. However, one NTR protein was further characterized by Virotrap based interaction analysis. This resulted in several potential interaction partners associated with membranes and vesicle transport. Showing that the non-translated regions that do result in proteins might be functional.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were kept at low passage (<10) and cultured at 37 °C and 8% CO2 in DMEM , supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum , 25 units/ml penicillin and 25 μg/ml streptomycin. Each construct was done in triplicate and for every replicate, the day prior to transfection, a 75 cm2 falcon was seeded with 9× 106 cells. Cells were transfected using polyethylenemine (PEI), with a DNA mixture containing 6.43 μg of bait plasmid (pMET7-GAG-bait), 0.71 μg of pcDNA3-FLAG-VSV-G plasmid and 0.36 μg of pMD2.G plasmid. For the eDHFR control, cells were transfected with a DNA mixture containing 3.75 μg of eDHFR plasmid (pMET7-GAG-eDHFR), 2.68 µg of pSVsport plasmid, 0.71 μg of pcDNA3-FLAG-VSV-G plasmid and 0.36 μg of pMD2.G plasmid. The medium was refreshed after 6 h with 8 ml of supplemented DMEM.  The cellular supernatant was harvested after 46 h and centrifuged for 3 min at 1,250 g, to remove debris. The cleared supernatant was then filtered using 0.45 μm filters. For every sample, 20 μl MyOne Streptavidin T1 beads in suspension were first washed with 300 μl wash buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl and subsequently pre-loaded with 2 μl biotinylated anti-FLAG antibody. This was done in 500 μl wash buffer and the reaction was incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Beads were added to the samples and the protein tagged particles were allowed to bind for 2 h at room temperature by end-over-end rotation. Bead-particle complexes were washed once with 200 µl washing buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl) and subsequently eluted with FLAG peptide (30 min at 37 °C; 200 μg/ml in washing buffer) and lysed by addition of Amphipol A8–35 to a final concertation of 1 mg/ml. After 10 min, about the lysates where acidified (pH <3) by the addition of 2.5% formic acid (FA). Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at >20.000 g to pellet the protein/Amphipol A8–35 complexes. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 20 µl 50 mM fresh triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins were heated at 95 °C for 5 min, cooled on ice to room temperature for 5 min and digested overnight at 37 °C with 0.5 μg trypsin. Peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 3 with 1.5 µl 5% FA. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g. 7.5 µl of the supernatant was injected for LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter, kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 55% MS solvent B in 80 min, 97% MS solvent B in 90  minutes followed by a 5-minute wash at 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. The sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (release Jan 2021; complemented with GAG, VSV-G, eDHFR and the NTR (both FL and proteoform) sequences for Virotrap) were used as the search space. The enzyme specificity was set at trypsin/P, allowing for two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Standard settings were used. In the settings of advanced identification, match between runs was implemented (with standard settings). Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, leading to the identification of 1,569 proteins across all samples. Reverse proteins, proteins that are only identified by site and potential contaminants were removed. Differential analysis of the Virotrap data was conducted using the limma R package (version 3.48.0). Proteins quantified with iBAQ values in all replicates of at least one condition were retained. Samples were log2 transformed and normalized to a common median. Missing values were imputed using imputeLCMD R package (version 2.0) from a truncated distribution with parameters estimated using quantile regression. Pairwise contrasts of interest between differentially treated samples were retrieved at a significance level alpha 0.01, corresponding to Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) adjusted p-value (FDR) cutoff. Z-score transformed iBAQ values were compared, clustered and presented as a heatmap using the pheatmap package (version 1.0.12). Other visualizations were generated using ggplot2 (version 3.3.3), ggrepel (0.9.1) and RColorBrewer (1.1-2).

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome profiling has revealed translation outside canonical coding sequences, including translation of short upstream ORFs, long noncoding RNAs, overlapping ORFs, ORFs in UTRs, or ORFs in alternative reading frames. Studies combining mass spectrometry, ribosome profiling, and CRISPR-based screens showed that hundreds of ORFs derived from noncoding transcripts produce (micro)proteins, whereas other studies failed to find evidence for such types of noncanonical translation products. Here, we attempted to discover translation products from noncoding regions by strongly reducing the complexity of the sample prior to mass spectrometric analysis. We used an extended database as the search space and applied stringent filtering of the identified peptides to find evidence for novel translation events. We show that, theoretically our strategy facilitates the detection of translation events of transcripts from noncoding regions but experimentally only find 19 peptides that might originate from such translation events. Finally, Virotrap-based interactome analysis of two N-terminal proteoforms originating from noncoding regions showed the functional potential of these novel proteins.

### Keywords
Virotrap, Protein-protein interaction, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


