### Accession
PXD030301

### Title
Temporal resolution of gene derepression and proteome changes upon PROTAC-mediated degradation of BCL11A protein in erythroid cells

### Description
Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin expression by down-regulation of BCL11A is a promising treatment of -hemoglobinopathies. A detailed understanding of BCL11A-mediated repression of -globin gene (HBG1/2) transcription is lacking, as studies to date used perturbations by shRNA or CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. We leveraged the dTAG PROTAC platform to acutely deplete BCL11A protein in erythroid cells and examined consequences by PRO-seq, proteomics, chromatin accessibility, and histone profiling. Among ≤ 31 genes repressed by BCL11A, HBG1/2 and HBZ show the most abundant and progressive changes in transcription and chromatin accessibility upon BCL11A loss. Transcriptional changes at HBG1/2 were detected in < 2h.  Robust HBG1/2 reactivation upon acute BCL11A-depletion occurred without loss of promoter 5methylcytosine (5mC). Using targeted protein degradation, we establish a hierarchy of gene reactivation at BCL11A targets, in which nascent transcription is followed by increased chromatin accessibility, and both are uncoupled from promoter DNA methylation at the HBG1/2 loci

### Sample Protocol
Clonal HUDEP2 cells were treated with DMSO or 0.1µM dTAG47 in biological triplicate for 6 h and cells were harvested by centrifugation.  Cells were lysed by addition of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and manual homogenization by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long). Bradford assay was used to determine the final protein concentration in the clarified cell lysate. 100 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described (Donovan et al., 2018) and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 12 h at RT. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 followed by digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) for 6 h at 37 °C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30% v/v, and labeling was induced with the addition of TMT 11-plex reagent to each sample at a ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. The 11-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1.5 h at RT and the reaction quenched by the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% for 15 minutes at RT. Each of the sample channels were combined in a 1:1 ratio, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters) and analyzed by LC-MS for quality control checks and channel ratio comparison. Samples were combined using the adjusted volumes determined in the channel ratio analysis and dried down in a speed vacuum. The combined sample was resuspended in 1% formic acid and acidified (pH 2 - 3) before being subjected to desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). Sample was then offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 24 fractions and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 µm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~ 50 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 µM, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 350 nL/min.  Each analysis used a MS3-based TMT method as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8  104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2  105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (December 2019) with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labelling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5). Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework (R Development Core Team, 2014). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin expression by the downregulation of BCL11A is a promising treatment for &#x3b2;-hemoglobinopathies. A detailed understanding of BCL11A-mediated repression of &#x3b3;-globin gene (HBG1/2) transcription is lacking, as studies to date used perturbations by shRNA or CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. We leveraged the dTAG PROTAC degradation platform to acutely deplete BCL11A protein in erythroid cells and examined consequences by nascent transcriptomics, proteomics, chromatin accessibility, and histone profiling. Among 31 genes repressed by BCL11A, HBG1/2 and HBZ show the most abundant and progressive changes in transcription and chromatin accessibility upon BCL11A loss. Transcriptional changes at HBG1/2 were detected in &lt;2 h. Robust HBG1/2 reactivation upon acute BCL11A depletion occurred without the loss of promoter 5-methylcytosine (5mC). Using targeted protein degradation, we establish a hierarchy of gene reactivation at BCL11A targets, in which nascent transcription is followed by increased chromatin accessibility, and both are uncoupled from promoter DNA methylation at the HBG1/2 loci.

### Keywords
Degradation, Bcl11a, Dtag, Protac

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


