### Accession
PXD013667

### Title
Dynamic response in the larval geoduck clam proteome to elevated pCO2

### Description
Pacific geoduck (Panopea generosa) clams are found along the Northeast Pacific coast where they are significant components of coastal and estuarine ecosystems and the basis of a highly profitable aquaculture industry. The Pacific coastline, however, is also the sight of rapidly changing ocean habitat, including significant reductions in pH. To better understand the physiological impact of ocean acidification on geoduck clams, we characterized for the first time the proteomic profile of this bivalve during early larval development and compared it to that of larvae exposed to low pH.Geoduck larvae wer reared at pH 7.5 (ambient) or 7.1 in a commercial shellfish hatchery from day 6 to 19 post-fertilization , and sampled at six time points for an in-depth proteomics analysis using high-resolution data dependent analysis. We found that larvae reared at low pH were smaller than those reared at ambient pH, especially in the prodissoconch II phase of development, and displayed a delay in their competency for settlement. Proteomic profiles revealed that metabolic, cell cycle, and protein turnover pathways differed between the two pH, suggesting that differing phenotypic outcomes between pH 7.5 and 7.1 are likely due to environmental disruptions to the timing of molecular physiological events. In summary, ocean acidification likely caused an energetic stress on geoduck larvae, casuing a shift in physiological prioritization.

### Sample Protocol
Larval proteins (100 ug per sample of pooled larvae) were prepared for digestion by adding 6.6 ul of 1.5 M Tris pH 8.8 and 2.5 ul of 200 mM TCEP to each sample, then incubated for 1 hour at 37C. Iodoacetamide (20 ul of 200 mM) was added, followed by an incubation for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. Diothiothreitol was added (20 ul at 200 mM), then a 1 hour incubation at room temperature. Urea was diluted with 800 ul of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 200 ul of methanol before addition of 5 ug of trypsin. Proteins were digested overnight then desalted with Nest Group C18 columns. Desalted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with a 4.5 cm (100 um) pre-column and a 26 cm (75 um) analytical column. A 90-minute gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile was used. Samples were analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched against a deduced geoduck larvae proteome (from transcriptomic sequencing) with the adition of common laboratory contaminant sequences using Comet 2016.01 rev. 3. Peptide and Protein Prophet were run consecutively followed by Abacus.

### Publication Abstract
Pacific geoducks (<i>Panopea generosa</i>) are clams found along the northeast Pacific coast where they are important components of coastal and estuarine ecosystems and a major aquaculture product. The Pacific coastline, however, is also experiencing rapidly changing ocean habitat, including significant reductions in pH. To better understand the physiological impact of ocean acidification on geoduck clams, we characterized for the first time the proteomic profile of this bivalve during larval development and compared it to that of larvae exposed to low pH conditions. Geoduck larvae were reared at pH 7.5 (ambient) or pH 7.1 in a commercial shellfish hatchery from day 6 to day 19 postfertilization and sampled at six time points for an in-depth proteomics analysis using high-resolution data-dependent analysis. Larvae reared at low pH were smaller than those reared at ambient pH, especially in the prodissoconch II phase of development, and displayed a delay in their competency for settlement. Proteomic profiles revealed that metabolic, cell cycle, and protein turnover pathways differed between the two pH and suggested that differing phenotypic outcomes between pH 7.5 and 7.1 are likely due to environmental disruptions to the timing of physiological events. In summary, ocean acidification results in elevated energetic demand on geoduck larvae, resulting in delayed development and disruptions to normal molecular developmental pathways, such as carbohydrate metabolism, cell growth, and protein synthesis.

### Keywords
Dda, Geoduck, Ph

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington, School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Roberts
University of Washington, School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences


