### Accession
PXD003342

### Title
C-terminomics E. coli -  C-terminal charge-reversal derivatization and parallel use of multiple proteases facilitates identification of protein C-termini by C-terminomics

### Description
The identification of protein C-termini in complex proteomes is challenging due to the poor ionization efficiency of the carboxyl group. Amidating the negatively charged C-termini with ethanolamine (EA) has been suggested to improve detection of C-terminal peptides and allows for a directed depletion of internal peptides after proteolysis using carboxyl reactive polymers. In the present study the derivatization with N,N-dimethylethylenediamine (DMEDA) and (4-aminobutyl)guanidine (AG) leading to a positively charged C-terminus was investigated. C-terminal charge-reversed peptides showed improved coverage of b- and y-ion series in the MS/MS spectra compared to their non-charged counterparts. DMEDA-derivatized peptides resulted in many peptides with charge states of 3+ which benefited from ETD-fragmentation. This makes the charge reversal strategy particularly useful for the analysis of protein C-termini which may also be posttranslationally modified. The labeling strategy and the indirect enrichment of C-termini worked with similar efficiency for both DMEDA and EA and their applicability was demonstrated on an E. coli proteome. Utilizing two proteases and different MS/MS activation mechanisms allowed for the identification of >400 C-termini, encompassing both canonical and truncated C-termini.

### Sample Protocol
Protein level derivatization (i) by reductive dimethylation (amino groups) and (ii) with EA or DMEDA (caboxyl groups), tryptic or chymotryptic digestion, polymer based depletion of internal peptides followed by nano-LC-MS using LTQ Orbitrap Velos (w ETD) or Q Exactive Plus

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 using the search algorithm SequestHT (both Thermo Fisher). Enzyme settings were semi-specific trypsin or chymotrypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine thiol groups and dimethylation of lysine-ε-amino groups were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionines, dimethylation of N-termini, amidation (with specific amine) of aspartates, glutamates and C-termini were set as variable modifications. For the E. coli dataset modifications on Asp and Glu were set as static. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerances were 0.02 Da (HCD in Orbitrap (LTQ Velos & Q Exactive)) and 0.5 Da (CID and ETD in Iontrap (LTQ Velos only)). Peptide spectrum match (PSM) validation was performed by Percolator (default values). Protein and Peptide lists were exported as text files using only high confident matches with a FDR ≤ 0.01, minimum one unique peptide per protein. Derivatization efficiencies were calculated as ratio of the peak area of fully derivatized peptides divided by the sum of peak areas of all corresponding partial and fully derivatized peptide species.  In order to differentiate C-terminal peptides from internal ones a GAMBAS3 script was developed in-house. As input data, Proteome Discoverer output files (in .txt format) are accepted (among others). To access the information about the C- and N-terminus of a protein, the .fasta and .xml of each identified protein is downloaded automatically from UniProt. These files are used to compare the peptide sequence of interest (identified by Proteome Discoverer) to the C- and N-terminus of the protein (information obtained from UniProt). Finally, the following output is appended to the original input file: (i) peptide start and end sequence within the protein, (ii) N-terminus with signal peptide sequence, (iii) N-terminus without signaling peptide, and (iv) C-terminus. Items (ii) - (iv) were exported as boolean operators.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of protein C-termini in complex proteomes is challenging due to the poor ionization efficiency of the carboxyl group. Amidating the negatively charged C-termini with ethanolamine (EA) has been suggested to improve the detection of C-terminal peptides and allows for a directed depletion of internal peptides after proteolysis using carboxyl reactive polymers. In the present study, the derivatization with N,N-dimethylethylenediamine (DMEDA) and (4-aminobutyl)guanidine (AG) leading to a positively charged C-terminus was investigated. C-terminal charge-reversed peptides showed improved coverage of b- and y-ion series in the MS/MS spectra compared to their noncharged counterparts. DMEDA-derivatized peptides resulted in many peptides with charge states of 3+, which benefited from ETD fragmentation. This makes the charge-reversal strategy particularly useful for the analysis of protein C-termini, which may also be post-translationally modified. The labeling strategy and the indirect enrichment of C-termini worked with similar efficiency for both DMEDA and EA, and their applicability was demonstrated on an E. coli proteome. Utilizing two proteases and different MS/MS activation mechanisms allowed for the identification of &gt;400 C-termini, encompassing both canonical and truncated C-termini.

### Keywords
Etd, Hcd, Derivatization, C-terminus, Cid

### Affiliations
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik, Institut für Experimentelle Medizin, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Niemannsweg 11, 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik, Institut für Experimentelle Medizin, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Niemannsweg 11, 24105 Kiel, Germany


