### Accession
PXD013230

### Title
Differential proteomic analysis of cardiac tissue in atrial fibrillation

### Description
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common sustained arrhythmia characterized by rapid and multiple irregular excitations within the atria. AF is associated with serious morbidity and increased mortality, and its prevalence is prospected to increase as society ages. The limited therapeutic efficacy of AF treatment as well as its high socioeconomic burden makes AF a major clinical challenge. Despite our expanding knowledge of individual proteins and pathways involved in the complex pathophysiology of atrial fibrillation (AF), an unbiased overview of proteins and functionally enriched biological processes as well as their crosstalk is lacking. Here, we performed an explorative proteomics analysis to reveal the global abundance of proteins in cardiac tissue of patients, and deciphered functionally grouped gene ontologies (GO) to uncover a perspective of the disease biology driving or driven by AF. A total of 2703 proteins were identified by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. Among them, 150 proteins (accounting for 5.6% of 2703)  had a significantly altered abundance (100 proteins increased and 50 decreased) in AF. A significant biological connection was found between those (protein-protein interaction enrichment p-value=1.0e-16). GO enrichment analysis showed that these 150 proteins were mainly located in extracellular/cytoplasmic vesicles, mitochondrion, and cytoskeletal compartments. Correspondingly, the 100 proteins increased in AF were significantly enriched in the GO terms related to immune system, metabolic process, iron process, ECM disassembly, mitochondrial translation and apoptotic signaling. Partially clustered proteins with dense functional link were found in immune system and metabolic process, and were respectively annotated in neutrophil degranulation, and oxoacid metabolic process coupled to the subunits of mitochondrial dehydrogenase NADH. Those processes enriched in AF had crosstalk via the proteins involved in neutrophil degranulation. Selected proteins such as LCN2 (neutrophil degranulation), CA3 (immune system), NDUFS2 (complex I) and MYH10 (actin motor protein) were validated by western blot or qPCR in an independent cohort. The 50 proteins decreased in AF were collectively enriched in vesicle-mediated transport and actin filament-based movement. We demonstrate that important biological processes underlying persistent AF as well as their crosstalk via the components of neutrophil degranulation. Our study provides a novel insight for a more efficient targeting strategy for AF treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples of left atrial appendages from patients were snap frozen (control patients: n=3, persistent AF patients: n=3). All procedures including the use of left atrial tissue in this study were approved by the institutional ethics committee and conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The respective studies were registered at ClinicalTrails.gov (NCT03130985 ). All the patients enrolled in this study submitted the written informed consent. frozen left atrial tissues were cryo-milled and solubilized in lithium dodecyl sulfate sample buffer 4X with DTT (100mM) at a concentration of 5mg/mL. Proteins  were denatured by heating at 99°C for 10 minutes, and separated by electrophoresis using a 4-12% Bis-Tris PAGE gel (Invitrogen, Cat#. NP0335). The gel was fixed in a solution of 50% ethanol, 3% phosphoric acid and 15% ammonium sulfate and stained by Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 dye (Thermo scientific, Cat#. 20278) overnight. Proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 54 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma, Missouri, USA), respectively. Sample lanes were cut in five fractions, and each fraction was cut to 1 mm3 cubes. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (6.25 ng/ml) (Promega, WI, USA) overnight and extracted from the gel with 1%  formic acid and 2x with 5% formic acid in 50% ACN. Peptide extracts were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 50µl 0.5% TFA + 4% ACN and filtered through 0.22 µm membrane filters (Millipore, Burlington, MA). Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 70 min (100 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot FASTA file (release march 2017, 42161 entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.5.8.0. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample and differential protein analysis between groups was performed using a two-group beta-binominal test for 1: Non-AF cardiac tissue vs. AF cardiac tissue and 2: Non-AF EAT vs. AF EAT comparisons (AF: Atrial fibrillation cardiac tissue, EAT: Epicardial adipose tissue).

### Publication Abstract
Despite our expanding knowledge about the mechanism underlying atrial fibrillation (AF), the interplay between the biological events underlying AF remains incompletely understood. This study aimed to identify the functionally enriched gene-sets in AF and capture their interconnection via pivotal factors, that may drive or be driven by AF. Global abundance of the proteins in the left atrium of AF patients compared to control patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3/group), and the functionally enriched biological processes in AF were determined by mass-spectrometry and gene set enrichment analysis, respectively. The data were validated in an independent cohort (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;19-20/group). In AF, the gene-sets of innate immune system, metabolic process, cellular component disassembly and ion homeostasis were up-regulated, while the gene-set of ciliogenesis was down-regulated. The innate immune system was over-represented by neutrophil degranulation, the components of which were extensively shared by other gene-sets altered in AF. In the independent cohort, an activated form of neutrophils was more present in the left atrium of AF patients with the increased gene expression of neutrophil granules. MYH10, required for ciliogenesis, was decreased in the atrial fibroblasts of AF patients. We report the increased neutrophil degranulation appears to play a pivotal role, and affects multiple biological processes altered in AF.

### Keywords
Human, Cardiac, Atrial fibrillation, Label-free

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


