### Accession
PXD027135

### Title
Nanoparticle-aided nanoreactor for large-scale proteomics of few mammalian cells

### Description
Large-scale bottom-up proteomics of few even single cells is crucial for a better understanding of the roles played by cell-to-cell heterogeneity in disease and development. Novel proteomic methodologies with extremely high sensitivity are required for few even single-cell proteomics. Sample processing with high recovery and no contaminants is one key step. Here we developed a nanoparticle-aided nanoreactor for nanoproteomics (Nano3) technique for processing low-nanograms of mammalian cell proteins for large-scale proteome profiling. The Nano3 technique employed nanoparticles packed in a capillary channel to form a nanoreactor (≤30 nL) for concentrating, cleaning, and digesting proteins originally in a lysis buffer containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), followed by nanoRPLC-MS/MS analysis. The Nano3 method identified a 40-times higher number of proteins based on MS/MS from 2-ng mouse brain protein samples compared to the SP3 (Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation) method, which performed the sample processing using the nanoparticles in a 10-µL solution in an Eppendorf tube. The data indicates a drastically higher sample recovery of the Nano3 compared to the SP3 method for processing mass-limited proteome samples. In this pilot study, the Nano3 method was further applied in processing 10-1000 HeLa cells for bottom-up proteomics, producing 444 ± 263 (n=4) (MS/MS) and 987 ± 292 (n=4) [match between runs (MBR)+MS/MS] protein identifications from only 10 HeLa cells using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The preliminary results render the Nano3 method a useful approach for processing few mammalian cells for large-scale proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing of few HeLa cells with the Nano3 method The HeLa cell processing with the Nano3 method was similar to the mouse brain protein processing with some modifications, Figure 1. A detailed workflow is shown in Figure S6. The nanoreactor capillary was first filled with a buffer containing 2% SDS and 80% ACN. The syringe used for cell loading onto the nanoreactor was also filled with the same buffer. The cell solution was first transferred into the 1-µL transfer capillary to control the number of cells for processing. For the cell solutions with concentrations of 1000 cells/µL, 100 cells/µL, and 10 cells/µL, the number of cells in the transfer capillary was approximately 1000 cells, 100 cells, and 10 cells. The transfer capillary was connected to the nanoreactor capillary at one end and to the syringe filled with a buffer containing 2% SDS and 80% ACN at the other end. The 1-µL cell solution surrounded by the buffer containing SDS and ACN was pushed into the nanoreactor capillary. After that, both ends of the nanoreactor capillary was sealed with a rubber and the capillary was sonicated for 10 min, followed by incubation in a 95 °C water bath for 10 min for cell lysis and protein denaturation. Then the protein solution was pushed onto the nanoreactor for protein capturing, and the nanoreactor was flushed with at least 10-µL 70% ACN to remove SDS. The rest of the sample processing steps were the same as the mouse brain protein processing. Trypsin amount for digestion was 10 ng, 5 ng, and 2 ng for 1000 cells, 100 cells, and 10 cells, respectively. The experiment was performed three times for the 1000 and 100 cells, and twice for the 10 cells. We repeated the whole experiment one more time (batch 2), starting from cell culture, with duplicate preparation of 10, 100, and 1000 cell samples. In total, 1000 and 100-cell samples had five replicates, and the 10-cell sample had 4 replicates. The sample insert tube for nanoRPLC-MS/MS analysis was pretreated with the BSA solution as described in our previous work.32  We also examined the number of HeLa cells in 1 µL of 10 cells/µL cell solution under a microscope by depositing 1 µL of the cell solution onto a glass slide. The cell count varied from 3 cells to 20 cells in 1 µL of the solution across 6 different examinations with a median of 10 cells.  We also performed a blank experiment to confirm that the protein IDs from HeLa cells were not from contaminates in the cell culture medium. After cultured HeLa cells were washed with PBS, they were suspended in the PBS buffer for further analysis. After gentle centrifugation, the cells were pelleted, and a small aliquot of the supernatant was collected for processing with the Nano3 method. The steps for processing the blank sample are the same as the 10-1000 cell samples.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.5.1.1 Mouse Brain sample was searched against the database of UniPort Mus Musculus proteome (UP000000589) and human sample was searched against database of UniPort Homo Sapiens proteome (UP000005640). All the parameters were set default except for HeLa cell samples, the fixed modification carbamidomethyl on cysteine residues was turned off because we didn’t perform reduction and alkylation for the HeLa cell samples. The match between runs (MBR) function was used.2 The false discovery rates (FDRs) were controlled to be lower than 1% at the peptide and protein group levels.  Keratin protein IDs were removed from the protein identification result.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale bottom-up proteomics of few even single cells is crucial for a better understanding of the roles played by cell-to-cell heterogeneity in disease and development. Novel proteomic methodologies with extremely high sensitivity are required for few even single-cell proteomics. Sample processing with high recovery and no contaminants is one key step. Here we developed a nanoparticle-aided nanoreactor for nanoproteomics (Nano3) technique for processing low-nanograms of mammalian cell proteins for proteome profiling. The Nano3 technique employed nanoparticles packed in a capillary channel to form a nanoreactor (&#x2264;30 nL) for concentrating, cleaning, and digesting proteins originally in a lysis buffer containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), followed by nanoRPLC-MS/MS analysis. The Nano3 method identified a 40-times higher number of proteins based on MS/MS from 2-ng mouse brain protein samples compared to the SP3 (single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation) method, which performed the sample processing using the nanoparticles in a 10 &#x3bc;L solution in an Eppendorf tube. The data indicates a drastically higher sample recovery of the Nano3 compared to the SP3 method for processing mass-limited proteome samples. In this pilot study, the Nano3 method was further applied in processing 10-1000 HeLa cells for bottom-up proteomics, producing 441 &#xb1; 263 (<i>n</i> = 4) (MS/MS) and 983 &#xb1; 292 (<i>n</i> = 4) [match between runs (MBR)+MS/MS] protein identifications from only 10 HeLa cells using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The preliminary results render the Nano3 method a useful approach for processing few mammalian cells for proteome profiling.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Mass-limited sample, Nanoproteomics, Nanoparticle, Few-cell proteomics, Bottom-up proteomics, Nanoreactor

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


