### Accession
PXD037909

### Title
Energy metabolism in skeletal muscle cells from donors with different body mass index

### Description
Obesity and physical inactivity have a profound impact on skeletal muscle metabolism. In the present work, we have investigated differences in protein expression and energy metabolism in primary human skeletal muscle cells established from lean donors (BMI<25 kg/m2) and individuals with obesity (BMI>30 kg/m2). Furthermore, we have studied the effect of fatty acid pretreatment on energy metabolism in myotubes from these donor groups. Alterations in protein expression were investigated using proteomic analysis, and energy metabolism was studied using radiolabeled substrates. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that glycolytic, apoptotic, and hypoxia pathways were upregulated, whereas the pentose phosphate pathway was downregulated in myotubes from donors with obesity compared to myotubes from lean donors. Moreover, fatty acid, glucose, and amino acid uptake were increased in myotubes from individuals with obesity. However, fatty acid oxidation was reduced, glucose oxidation was increased in myotubes from subjects with obesity compared to cells from lean. Pretreatment of myotubes with palmitic acid (PA) or eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) for 24 h increased glucose oxidation and oleic acid uptake. EPA pretreatment increased the glucose and fatty acid uptake and reduced leucine fractional oxidation in myotubes from donors with obesity. In conclusion, these results suggest that myotubes from individuals with obesity showed increased fatty acid, glucose, and amino acid uptake compared to cells from lean donors. Furthermore, myotubes from individuals with obesity had reduced fatty acid oxidative capacity, increased glucose oxidation, and a higher glycolytic reserve capacity compared to cells from lean donors. Fatty acid pretreatment enhances glucose metabolism, and EPA reduces oleic acid and leucine fractional oxidation in myotubes from donor with obesity, suggesting increased metabolic flexibility after EPA treatment

### Sample Protocol
Human skeletal muscle cells were cultured and differentiated in 25 cm2 flasks.  On day 7 of the differentiation period, the cells were washed with DPBS containing Mg2+ and Ca2+ before harvested, washed in DPBS, and spun down at 1000 rpm at 4oC for 5 min. The cells were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC. The cells were lysed using 150 μl of RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor followed by protein aggregation, and protein reduction, alkylation, and digestion into peptides with trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a 3M Empore™ C18 resin disc. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nanoElute nanoflow ultrahigh pressure LC system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to the timsTOF fleX mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics), using a CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). 200 ng of peptide digest was loaded on a capillary C18 column (25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.6 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size; IonOpticks, Fitzroy, VIC, AUS). Peptides were separated at 55 °C using a 90 minute gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min (mobile phase A (MPA): 0.1% formic acid,  mobile phase B (MPB): 0.1% FA in acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.7.0 for protein identification and label-free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term), and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error of 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique þ razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. UniProt database with ‘human’ entries (September 2021) was used for the database searches. Known contaminants as provided by MaxQuant and identified in samples were excluded from further analysis. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for biological processes was performed using STRING software (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity and physical inactivity have a profound impact on skeletal muscle metabolism. In the present work, we have investigated differences in protein expression and energy metabolism in primary human skeletal muscle cells established from lean donors (BMI&lt;25&#xa0;kg/m<sup>2</sup>) and individuals with obesity (BMI&gt;30&#xa0;kg/m<sup>2</sup>). Furthermore, we have studied the effect of fatty acid pretreatment on energy metabolism in myotubes from these donor groups. Alterations in protein expression were investigated using proteomic analysis, and energy metabolism was studied using radiolabeled substrates. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that glycolytic, apoptotic, and hypoxia pathways were upregulated, whereas the pentose phosphate pathway was downregulated in myotubes from donors with obesity compared to myotubes from lean donors. Moreover, fatty acid, glucose, and amino acid uptake were increased in myotubes from individuals with obesity. However, fatty acid oxidation was reduced, glucose oxidation was increased in myotubes from subjects with obesity compared to cells from lean. Pretreatment of myotubes with palmitic acid (PA) or eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) for 24&#xa0;h increased glucose oxidation and oleic acid uptake. EPA pretreatment increased the glucose and fatty acid uptake and reduced leucine fractional oxidation in myotubes from donors with obesity. In conclusion, these results suggest that myotubes from individuals with obesity showed increased fatty acid, glucose, and amino acid uptake compared to cells from lean donors. Furthermore, myotubes from individuals with obesity had reduced fatty acid oxidative capacity, increased glucose oxidation, and a higher glycolytic reserve capacity compared to cells from lean donors. Fatty acid pretreatment enhances glucose metabolism, and EPA reduces oleic acid and leucine fractional oxidation in myotubes from donor with obesity, suggesting increased metabolic flexibility after EPA treatment.

### Keywords
Obesity, Mitochondria, Skeletal muscle cells, Metabolism, Eicosapentaenoic acid

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway
Section for Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Department of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Parmeshwar B. Katare
Section for Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Department of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Norway


