### Accession
PXD005488

### Title
Serine/threonine phosphatases and aquaporin-2 regulation in renal collecting duct

### Description
Phosphorylation of the aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channel at four COOH-terminal serines plays a central role in the regulation of water permeability of the renal collecting duct. The level of phosphorylation at these sites is determined by a balance between phosphorylation by protein kinases and dephosphorylation by phosphatases.  The phosphatases that dephosphorylate AQP2 have not been identified.  Here, we use large-scale data integration techniques to identify serine-threonine phosphatases likely to interact with AQP2 in renal collecting duct principal cells.   As a first step, we have created a comprehensive list of 38 S/T phosphatase catalytic subunits present in the mammalian genome.   Then we used Bayes’ theorem to integrate available information from large-scale data sets from proteomic and transcriptomic studies in order to rank the known S/T phosphatases with regard to the likelihood that they interact with AQP2 in renal collecting duct cells.  To broaden the analysis, we have generated new proteomic data (LC-MS/MS) identifying 4538 distinct proteins including 22 S/T phosphatases in cytoplasmic fractions from native inner medullary collecting duct cells from rats.  The official gene symbols corresponding to the top-ranked phosphatases (common names in parentheses) were: Ppp1cb (PP1-beta), Ppm1g (PP2C), Ppp1ca (PP1-alpha), Ppp3ca (PP2-B or calcineurin), Ppp2ca (PP2A-alpha), Ppp1cc (PP1-gamma), Ppp2cb (PP2A-beta), Ppp6c (PP6C) and Ppp5c (PP5).    This ranking correlates well with results of prior reductionist studies of ion and water channels in renal collecting duct cells.

### Sample Protocol
We used LC-MS/MS to analyze the cytoplasmic fraction of IMCD cells isolated from rat kidneys as described by Pickering et al  and summarized as follows.  Thirty male Sprague-Dawley rats were euthanized according to an approved National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Animal Care and Use Committee protocol (H-0110R3). IMCD suspensions were prepared as previously described.  The kidney inner medullas were dissected, minced, and digested into suspensions by incubation at 37°C for 70–90 min in digestion solution (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM triethanolamine, pH 7.6) containing collagenase B (3 mg/ml; Roche, Indianapolis, IN) and hyaluronidase (3 mg/mL; Worthington, Lakewood, NJ). The resulting inner medullary suspension (whole IM) was subjected to three low-speed centrifugations (at 70 g, 20 s) to separate the IMCD-enriched fraction in the pellet from the non-IMCD fraction in the supernatant.    The supernatants containing non-IMCD elements were discarded. The final pellet was resuspended in tubule suspension solution containing (in mM) 118 NaCl, 5 KCl, 4 Na2HPO4, 25 NaHC03, 2 CaCl2, 1.2 MgS04, 5.5 glucose, and 5 sodium acetate (300 mOsm) split in half and exposed to either the vasopressin analog dDAVP (1nM) or its vehicle for 30 min. This method has been previously shown to successfully isolate IMCD cells that are viable, vasopressin-responsive and largely free of non-IMCD cells.  From this point, subcellular fractionation procedures followed Tchapyjnikov et al.  using the NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents kit (Life Technologies, #78835) to obtain fractions three fractions, the NE (nuclear extract), the NP (nuclear pellet) and the cytoplasm.  Total protein concentrations were measured (BCA assay, Life Technologies, #23227).   Mass spectrometric analyses of the NE and NP fractions were previously reported by Pickering et al..  For this paper, we carried out protein mass spectrometry of the cytoplasmic fraction only.   Based on this procedure, we use the term ‘cytoplasm’ in this paper to refer to all non-nuclear elements of the cells including membrane components, cytosol and organelles.  The cytoplasmic fraction was concentrated using Amicon Centrifugal Filters, Ultracel 3K (Millipore) to about 400 μg in 110 μL of solution. A 5X concentrate of Laemmli solution (7.5% SDS, 30% glycerol, 50 mM Tris, pH 6.8) with bromophenol blue (1 part 5X concentrate: 4 parts protein sample) was added to the samples.  One-dimensional SDS-PAGE was performed using 12% polyacrylamide SDS-Tris-Glycine gels (Bio-Rad).   Molecular weight markers (Precision Plus, Bio-Rad) were run in separate lanes. The gels were run for 45 minutes at 3.00A and 200V and were then stained with ImperialTM protein stain (Thermo Scientific). The gels were destained for 30 minutes in MS-grade water (JT Baker #JTB-9831-02) and then sliced into 39 equal-sized pieces.  Each gel piece was diced into 1.5 mm3 blocks using a razor blade.  These samples underwent reduction with DTT, alkylation, and in gel trypsinization as described except for the use of 12.5 ng/μL Trypsin Gold (Promega). After digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using four successive washes in 50% ACN/0.5% formic acid. Samples were dried and peptides were then suspended in 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water. Samples were desalted using C-18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific, # 89870) according to the protocol provided with the kit.  The resulting samples were dried (Speed-Vac) for storage. Immediately prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water.   LC-MS/MS.   The samples were analyzed on a nanoflow LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos ProTM Hybrid, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The sample loading onto a peptide trap cartridge (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) occurred at a flow rate of 6 μl/min. The trapped peptides were then fractionated with a reversed-phase PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a linear gradient of 5%–35% ACN in 0.1% FA. The gradient time was 45 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min. Precursor mass spectra (MS1) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution and product mass spectra (MS2) were acquired with the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
In order to maximize the number of peptide identifications, three algorithms were used to match spectra to peptides, viz. those coded by Mascot, SEQUEST and InsPecT. The post-translational modifications allowed were a fixed carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine, variable deamination modifications on asparagine and glutamine, and a variable oxidation modification on methionine.  False discovery rate at a peptide level was set to 0.01 based on target-decoy analysis (8).  To identify ambiguous identifications, we used an in-house program (coded in Java) called ProMatch.  Peptides that only matched to one gene symbol were extracted as a “unique” identification. The peptides that matched to more than one gene symbol were separated as “multiple” identifications. To reconcile the multiple identifications, transcriptomic data from Affymetrix array profiling of rat renal IMCD transcripts was used (31).  (Database available at: http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lkem/imcdtr/).  If a given gene was not expressed, based on the transcriptomic data (median normalized value<0.4), its protein product was dropped from consideration.    The SEQUEST and Mascot searches were executed within Proteome Discoverer, and peptides with FDR < 0.01 and peptide rank =1 were retained for further analyses. The InsPecT search was carried on the Biowulf Linux Cluster at the National Institutes of Health (http://biowulf.nih.gov).   Spectral Counting.   The number of peptide matches for a given gene symbol were counted and designated as the “spectral count” for that gene symbol. This was the sum of all spectra matching to the gene symbol in all gel slices.  The spectral counts in the control samples and the dDAVP samples were compared using the Fisher Exact Test with the contingency table consisting of the control count, dDAVP count, total count of all peptides in control, and total count of all peptides in dDAVP.  For this analysis, peptides that matched to more than one gene symbol were assigned to the gene symbol with the most abundant transcript in the IMCD based on prior data.  Spectral counting data were used in this paper for the Bayes’ theorem-based analysis by extracting data for all S/T phosphatases and mapping the spectral counting values to likelihood values.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation of the aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channel at four COOH-terminal serines plays a central role in the regulation of water permeability of the renal collecting duct. The level of phosphorylation at these sites is determined by a balance between phosphorylation by protein kinases and dephosphorylation by phosphatases. The phosphatases that dephosphorylate AQP2 have not been identified. Here, we use large-scale data integration techniques to identify serine-threonine phosphatases likely to interact with AQP2 in renal collecting duct principal cells. As a first step, we have created a comprehensive list of 38 S/T phosphatase catalytic subunits present in the mammalian genome. Then we used Bayes' theorem to integrate available information from large-scale data sets from proteomic and transcriptomic studies to rank the known S/T phosphatases with regard to the likelihood that they interact with AQP2 in renal collecting duct cells. To broaden the analysis, we have generated new proteomic data (LC-MS/MS) identifying 4538 distinct proteins including 22 S/T phosphatases in cytoplasmic fractions from native inner medullary collecting duct cells from rats. The official gene symbols corresponding to the top-ranked phosphatases (common names in parentheses) were: Ppp1cb (PP1-&#x3b2;), Ppm1g (PP2C), Ppp1ca (PP1-&#x3b1;), Ppp3ca (PP2-B or calcineurin), Ppp2ca (PP2A-&#x3b1;), Ppp1cc (PP1-&#x3b3;), Ppp2cb (PP2A-&#x3b2;), Ppp6c (PP6C), and Ppp5c (PP5). This ranking correlates well with results of prior reductionist studies of ion and water channels in renal collecting duct cells.

### Keywords
Systems biology; collecting duct; kidney; vasopressin; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Chung-Lin  Chou

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health


