### Accession
PXD007259

### Title
A Chemical Disruptor of the ClpX Chaperone Complex Attenuates Multiresistant Staphylococcus aureus Virulence

### Description
The Staphylococcus aureus ClpXP protease is an important regulator of cell homeostasis and virulence. Here we utilize a high-throughput screen against the ClpXP complex and identify a specific inhibitor of the ClpX chaperone that disrupts its oligomeric state. Synthesis of 34 derivatives revealed that the molecular scaffold is restrictive for diversification with only minor changes tolerated. Subsequent analysis of the most active compound revealed strong attenuation of S. aureus toxin production which was quantified via a novel MS-based assay platform. Transcriptome and whole proteome studies further confirmed the global reduction of virulence and unraveled characteristic signatures of protein expression in compound treated cells. Although these partially matched the pattern of ClpX knockout cells, further depletion of toxins was observed leading to the intriguing perspective that additional virulence pathways may be directly or indirectly addressed by the small molecule.

### Sample Protocol
5 mL of B-Medium was inoculated 1:100 from an overnight culture of S. aureus NCTC 8325, S. aureus USA300, S. aureus NCTC 8325-4 or S. aureus NCTC 8325-4 ΔclpX and incubated (37 °C, 200 rpm) until OD600 = 0.3-0.5. The culture was then diluted to 3×104 CFU/mL with fresh B-Medium and split into 1.5 mL (for 8325-4: 3 mL) aliquots in 14 mL PP plastic tubes (17×100 mm, VWR). 15 µL (for 8325-4: 30 µL) of DMSO or compound stocks were added to the aliquots following incubation for 19-20 h at 37 °C and 200 rpm. On the next day the cultures were transferred to 2 mL tubes (for 8325-4: 15 mL tubes) and centrifuged (10 min, 6000 g). Secretome analysis: The supernatant was removed and sterile filtered (0.22 µm) into a 50 mL Falcon tube and 12 mL cold acetone (-80 °C) were added. Proteins were allowed to precipitate overnight at -80 °C. The precipitate was centrifuged (15 min, 18,000 g) and washed twice with 1 mL cold methanol (-80 °C) with resuspension (5 s ultrasonic bath) and centrifugation steps (10 min, 18,000 g) in between. The washed pellet was dissolved in 200 µL X-buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea) and transferred in low-bind Eppendorf tubes for further analysis. Intracellular proteome analysis: Cell pellets were washed twice with cold PBS (10 min, 6000 g), resuspended in 400 µL PBS and transferred into 0.5 mL ball mill tubes (VK05S, Precellys). Lysis was performed using two runs (5500 rpm, 1×20 s; 5800 rpm, 6×15 s) with a Precellys 24 Dual ball mill system and a 2 min break (cooling on ice) in between. The tubes were centrifuged (5 min, 6000 g) and the supernatant transferred in a low-bind Eppendorf tube. The protein concentration was adjusted using BCA assay and 200 µL (for 8325-4: 350 µL) were subjected to new low-bind tubes for further analysis. Proteins were reduced by addition of 0.2 µL dithiothreitol (DTT, 1 M) and incubation for 45 min at r.t. and 450 rpm). Alkylation was performed by adding 2 µL iodoacetamide (IAA, 550 mM) and incubation for 30 min at r.t. in the dark with subsequent quenching of the reaction with 0.5 µL DTT (1 M) for 30 min. The samples were pre-digested by addition of 1 µL LysC (0.5 mg/mL) and incubation at r.t. for 4 h. After diluting with 600 µL triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 50 mM) 1.5 µL trypsin (0.5 mg/mL in 50 mM acetic acid) was added followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by addition of 8 µL formic acid (FA). Desalting of the samples was conducted on 50 mg SepPak C18 columns (Waters). The columns were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN), 1 mL elution buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% FA) and 3 mL aqueous 0.5% FA solution. The acidified samples were loaded by gravity flow, washed five times with 1 mL 0.5% FA and then labeled with five times 1 mL of the respective dimethyl labeling agents (light (L): 30 mM NaBH3CN, 0.2 % CH2O, 45 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5; medium (M): 30 mM NaBH3CN, 0.2 % CD2O, 45 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5; heavy (H): 30 mM NaBD3CN, 0.2 % 13CD2O, 45 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5). Labels were switched throughout the replicates. Column bound peptides were washed two more times with 1 mL 0.5% FA and then eluted with two times 250 µL elution buffer. 900 µL of each sample were combined in a 15 mL tube, frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. Prior to LC-MS/MS measurement the samples were dissolved in 40 µL 1% FA (for 8325-4: 30 µL) and filtered with 0.22 µm ultrafree centrifugal filters (Merck) equilibrated with 300 µL 1% FA. Measurement was either done on LTQ Orbitrap XL, Orbitrap Fusion or Q Exactive Plus (Q Exactive Plus below, for other instruments see SI).  Measurement on Q Exactive Plus: Samples were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 μm ID x 2 cm trap and Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18 (75 μm ID x 50 cm)  separation columns in an EASY-spray setting coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher). Samples were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% FA, flow 300 nL/min, gradient 5 to 22% buffer B in 115 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, then to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min). Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP12 data dependent mode. Full scan acquisition was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70000 and an AGC target of 3e6 in a scan range of 300−1500 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states of >1 and intensities greater than 1e5 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were collected to an AGC target of 5e4 for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation and detected in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (1.5.3.8) using largely default settings. Peptide searches were performed against the Uniprot databases for S. aureus NCTC 8325 (taxon identifier: 93061) or USA300 (taxon identifier: 367830). For dimethyl labeling quantification, the corresponding labels (“DimethLysX” and “DimethNterX”; “Max. labeled AAs” 4) were set appropriately and the requantify option was enabled. For label-free quantification the “LFQ” option was enabled (LFQ min. ration count 1) as well as the “Match between runs” option. Statistical analyses were performed with Perseus software. Rows were filtered (potential contaminant, reverse, only identified by site) and normalized ratios (DML) or LFQ intensities (LFQ) were log2 transformed. DML ratios were z-score normalized and an one-sample t-test was performed. Missing LFQ intensities were replaced by imputation and a two-sample t-test was performed (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The Staphylococcus aureus ClpXP protease is an important regulator of cell homeostasis and virulence. We utilized a high-throughput screen against the ClpXP complex and identified a specific inhibitor of the ClpX chaperone that disrupts its oligomeric state. Synthesis of 34 derivatives revealed that the molecular scaffold is restrictive for diversification, with only minor changes tolerated. Subsequent analysis of the most active compound revealed strong attenuation of S. aureus toxin production, which was quantified with a customized MS-based assay platform. Transcriptome and whole-proteome studies further confirmed the global reduction of virulence and revealed characteristic signatures of protein expression in the compound-treated cells. Although these partially matched the pattern of ClpX knockout cells, further depletion of toxins was observed, leading to the intriguing perspective that additional virulence pathways may be directly or indirectly addressed by the small molecule.

### Keywords
Antivirulence, Proteolysis, Proteomics, High-throughput screening, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Technische Universität München
Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching b. München

### Submitter
Christian Fetzer

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A Sieber
Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching b. München


