### Accession
PXD019335

### Title
A new Knock-in mouse model of SCA14 with increased PKCγ activity induces a SCA-like phenotype with perturbed Purkinje cell maturation and ataxic motor behavior

### Description
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of cerebellar diseases characterized by loss and dysfunction of Purkinje cells and Spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) is caused by missense mutations or deletions in the Protein kinase C γ (PKCγ) gene. Until now, more than 40 different mutations or deletions in the PKCγ gene have been found in SCA14 patients. Many of these mutations have been shown to have an increased enzymatic activity in cell-based assays, but there is also evidence that the mutations may result in inefficient activation of downstream signalling pathways compatible with a loss of function. Therefore, it is still unclear how mutant PKCγ may cause the disease. We have previously generated a transgenic SCA14 mouse model with a human SCA14 mutation in the kinase domain. This transgenic mouse shows mild ataxia and abnormal Purkinje cell dendritic development with a morphology indistinguishable from that of PKC activator treated Purkinje cells, indicating that the PKCγ with this kinase domain mutation has indeed increased biological activity. In order to confirm that increased PKC activity in vivo perturbs Purkinje cell maturation and induces ataxia we have now created a new knock-in mouse model with  a missense mutation in the PKCγ pseudosubstrate domain keeping the PKCγ protein in the open active conformation. This knock-in mouse shows indeed abnormal Purkinje cell maturation and ataxia, even in a heterozygous state corresponding to the human disease situation. Our findings confirm that constitutive activation of PKCγ is one way to induce a phenotype corresponding to human spinocerebellar ataxia.

### Sample Protocol
Xxx ug of mouse tissue were lysed in 80 ul of 8M Urea, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma P5726&P0044) by sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium) and proteins were digested as described previously (PMID:27345528). Shortly, proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. After diluting samples with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final urea concentration of 1.6M, proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) for 12 h at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, peptides were desalted using C18 reverse-phase spin columns (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C until further use. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform as recently described (PMID: 28107008). Phospho-enriched peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μL/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 8% B over 5 min to 20% B over 45 min to 25% B over 15 min to 30% B over 10 min to 35% B over 7 min to 42% B over 5 min to 50% B over 3min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 250% and “Standard”, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 2.5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 30%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a murine database (consisting of 34026 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 2019/03/07) and 392 commonly observed contaminants using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2. (PMID:27345528, https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html) were used. The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are diseases characterized by cerebellar atrophy and loss of Purkinje neurons caused by mutations in diverse genes. In SCA14, the disease is caused by point mutations or small deletions in protein kinase C &#x3b3; (PKC&#x3b3;), a crucial signaling protein in Purkinje cells. It is still unclear whether increased or decreased PKC&#x3b3; activity may be involved in the SCA14 pathogenesis. In this study, we present a new knock-in mouse model related to SCA14 with a point mutation in the pseudosubstrate domain, PKC&#x3b3;-A24E, known to induce a constitutive PKC&#x3b3; activation. In this protein conformation, the kinase domain of PKC&#x3b3; is activated, but at the same time the protein is subject to dephosphorylation and protein degradation. As a result, we find a dramatic reduction of PKC&#x3b3; protein expression in <i>PKC</i>&#x3b3;<i>-A24E</i> mice of either sex. Despite this reduction, there is clear evidence for an increased PKC activity in Purkinje cells from <i>PKC</i>&#x3b3;<i>-A24E</i> mice. Purkinje cells derived from PKC&#x3b3;-A24E have short thickened dendrites typical for PKC activation. These mice also develop a marked ataxia and signs of Purkinje cell dysfunction making them an interesting new mouse model related to SCA. Recently, a similar mutation in a human patient was discovered and found to be associated with overt SCA14. RNA profiling of <i>PKC</i>&#x3b3;<i>-A24E</i> mice showed a dysregulation of related signaling pathways, such as mGluR1 or mTOR. Our results show that the induction of PKC&#x3b3; activation in Purkinje cells results in the SCA-like phenotype indicating PKC activation as one pathogenetic avenue leading to a SCA.<b>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</b> Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are hereditary diseases affecting cerebellar Purkinje cells and are a one of neurodegenerative diseases. While mutation in several genes have been identified as causing SCAs, it is unclear how these mutations cause the disease phenotype. Mutations in PKC&#x3b3; cause one subtype of SCAs, SCA14. In this study, we have generated a knock-in mouse with a mutation in the pseudosubstrate domain of PKC&#x3b3;, which keeps PKC&#x3b3; in the constitutive active open conformation. We show that this mutation leading to a constant activation of PKC&#x3b3; results in a SCA-like phenotype in these mice. Our findings establish the constant activation of PKC signaling as one pathogenetic avenue leading to an SCA phenotype and a mechanism causing a neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Sca, Pkc gamma, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


