### Accession
PXD026118

### Title
Integrative analysis of multi-omics datasets for Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 identifies novel elements in the salt acclimation process of cyanobacteria

### Description
The salt acclimation process of the euryhaline model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 was analyzed by combining transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic methods. The comparison of salt-induced proteome and transcriptome changes revealed that most stably up-regulated proteins also showed elevated mRNA levels. The Pearson correlation coefficient for salt-induced abundance changes of 1749 transcript/protein pairs was r = 0.58. In addition to the rapid and stable upregulation of compatible solute biochemistry, a dynamic reorganization of the transcriptome occurred during the first hours after salt shock, which probably involves the action of small regulatory RNAs. Based on these data, an extended salt stimulon can be defined comprising many proteins directly or indirectly related to compatible solute metabolism, ion and water movements as well as a defined set of small regulatory RNAs. Our comprehensive data set provides the basis for future attempts to engineer cyanobacterial salt tolerance and to search for processes regulating this important environmental acclimation process.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from four replicate cultures of salt-acclimated and control cultures, respectively, were broken with glass beads using Precellys 24 homogenizer (peqLab Biotechnologie GmbH, Erlangen, Germany) in non-denaturing buffer containing 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.4, 138 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2. An aliquot of each cell extract was saved as total protein immediately after cell disruption. The cell debris was separated from the remaining cell extracts by low speed centrifugation at 750 g (5 min, 4 °C). Debris from the biological replicates was pooled, washed once with non-denaturing buffer and stored as debris fraction. After removing debris, the cell extracts were centrifuged at 22000 g, 4 °C for 90 min to obtain the soluble and membrane-enriched fractions. The membrane-enriched fractions were 2times washed with high salt (1 M KCl) and high pH (0.1 M Na2CO3) buffers to deplete loosely bound proteins. Protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad Munich, Germany). Aliquots of the protein fractions were supplemented with stock solutions of ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and dithiothreitol (DTT) to obtain samples containing between 40 and 75 µg protein in 100 µl extraction buffer (50 mM ABC, 1.5% SDC, 10 mM DTT). The protein samples were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min and subsequently sonicated for 10 min using a bath sonicator. Alkylation was performed with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Thereafter 50 mM ABC and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) were added to obtain an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 in a final volume of 320 µl. Digestion was performed at 37 °C for about 16 h. SDC was removed from the digest solutions by adding 320 μl of ethylacetate and 6.5 µl of 25% trifluoroacetic acid, rigorous mixing for 3 min and subsequent centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. 200 µl of the aqueous phase was collected using a gel loading tip. Finally, the peptide solutions were desalted with OASIS HLB 1cc Vac Cartridges (Waters, Manchester, UK), concentrated using a centrifugal evaporator and dissolved with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptide concentrations were measured using the Invitrogen Qubit protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-HDMSE analyses were carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Waters Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer via a NanoLockSpray ion source. Mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptide samples supplemented with 40 fmol of Hi3 Phos B standard for protein absolute quantification (Waters) were trapped and desalted using a precolumn (ACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min for 4 min with 99.9% A. Peptides were separated on an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient from 3% to 32% B over 150 min. The column temperature was maintained at 35 °C. The Synapt G2-S instrument was operated in data-independent mode with ion-mobility separation as an additional dimension of separation (referred to as HDMSE). By executing alternate scans at low and elevated collision energy (CE) of each 0.6 sec, information on precursor and fragment ions, respectively, was acquired. In low-energy MS mode acquisitions were performed at constant CE of 4 eV whereas drift time-dependent CE settings  were applied in elevated-energy MS mode. Single measurements of the four biological replicates of the total extract, the soluble fraction and the membrane-enriched fraction were carried out, while the pooled samples of the debris fraction were measured in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics version 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used for raw data processing, protein identification and label free quantification. The raw data from the measurements of the total extracts and each of the three protein fractions were analyzed separately. Normalization and matching of features (accurate mass retention time tags) between runs was performed to compensate for between-run variation in the LC separation and to avoid missing values in quantification. For the protein identification a database containing 3507 protein sequences from Synechocystis 6803 (UniProt release 2016_07) appended with the sequences of rabbit phosphorylase B (P00489) and porcine trypsin was compiled. Two missing cleavage sites were allowed, oxidation of methionine residues was considered as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. The false discovery rate was set to 1%. Peptides were required to be identified by at least three fragment ions and proteins by at least two peptides and six fragment ions. Subsequently peptide ion data were filtered to retain only peptide ions that met the following criteria: (i) identified at least in two samples within the dataset, (ii) minimum ion score of 5.7 (total extract and the soluble fraction) or 5.9 (membrane-enriched and debris fraction), (iii) mass error below 12.0 ppm, and (iiii) at least 6 amino acid residues in length. Identifications based on charge state deconvolution were removed. Proteins were quantified by the absolute quantification Hi3 method using Hi3 Phos B Standard (Waters) as reference (Silva et al., 2006). Results were given as fmol on column. The peptide expression profiles of selected proteins were reviewed manually in order to remove outlier peptides whose expression differed significantly from the other peptides of the same protein. Only proteins identified in one fraction by at least two unique peptides were included in the quantitative analysis. Protein abundance changes between salt-acclimated and control cells by a factor of at least 1.5, accompanied by ANOVA p-values < 0.05 were regarded as significant. To determine a combined fold change value for the total extract and the three subcellular fractions, first a weighted fold change value for the three subcellular fractions was calculated by summing up the corresponding protein amounts (measured as fmol on column) and dividing the value from salt-acclimated cells by the value from controls. Since the debris fraction contained only a minor part of about 10% of the total protein, the protein amounts of the debris fraction were divided by ten. The calculation of this weighted fold change is shown in the following formula, where the abbreviation MA denotes the average protein abundance from the replicate samples: Weighted fold changefractions = (MA 4%membrane + MA 4%soluble +1/10 MA 4%debris)/(MA 0%membrane + MA 0%soluble +1/10 MA 0%debris). In a second step, the final combined fold change value was calculated as the average of the weighted fold change from the subcellular fractions and the fold change of the total extract. If a fold change for one of the individual fractions had a value > 1.5, but was accompanied by a p-value > 0.05, these data were excluded from the calculations.

### Publication Abstract
Microorganisms evolved specific acclimation strategies to thrive in environments of high or fluctuating salinities. Here, salt acclimation in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 was analyzed by integrating transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data. A dynamic reorganization of the transcriptome occurred during the first hours after salt shock, e.g. involving the upregulation of genes to activate compatible solute biochemistry balancing osmotic pressure. The massive accumulation of glucosylglycerol then had a measurable impact on the overall carbon and nitrogen metabolism. In addition, we observed the coordinated induction of putative regulatory RNAs and of several proteins known for their involvement in other stress responses. Overall, salt-induced changes in the proteome and transcriptome showed good correlations, especially among the stably up-regulated proteins and their transcripts. We define an extended salt stimulon comprising proteins directly or indirectly related to compatible solute metabolism, ion and water movements, and a distinct set of regulatory RNAs involved in post-transcriptional regulation. Our comprehensive data set provides the basis for engineering cyanobacterial salt tolerance and to further understand its regulation.

### Keywords
Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Transcriptome-proteome correlation, Hdmse, Salt acclimation, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Core Facility Proteome Analysis, University Medicine Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18057 Rostock
Department of Plant Physiology, University of Rostock, Einsteinstr. 3, D-18059 Rostock, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Mikkat

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hagemann
Department of Plant Physiology, University of Rostock, Einsteinstr. 3, D-18059 Rostock, Germany


