### Accession
PXD020890

### Title
HDX-MS of TRAPPII reveals a conserved Rab binding interface

### Description
We used hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to define the interface of TRAPPII with three Rab GTPases (Rab1, Rab11, Rab43). These experiments were performed in the presence of EDTA to generate a nucleotide free stabilised Rab-GEF complex. Significant decreases in deuterium incorporation (defined as >4%, >0.4Da, two tailed T-test p value <0.01) were identified in the TRAPPC2L, TRAPPC4, and TRAPPC5 in the presence of Rab GTPases with no other changes in other TRAPP subunits. Here we show that all three Rab GTPases bind at a conserved interface of TRAPPII.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions were conducted in 20µl reaction volumes with a final concentration of 1μM Rab1, Rab11, or Rab43 and 350nM TRAPPII per sample. Exchange was carried out in triplicate for four time points (3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at room temperature). Prior to the addition of D2O, proteins were incubated on ice in the presence of 20mM EDTA for 30 minutes to facilitate release of nucleotide. Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 17µl of D2O buffer solution (10mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50mM NaCl, 97% D2O) to 3µl of the protein solutions, to give a final concentration of 85% D2O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80°C.Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system kept in a cold box at 2ºC. The protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Porosyme 2-3131-00) and the peptides were collected onto a VanGuard Precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7um particle, 100 x 1mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 5%-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 min. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Impact QTOF (Bruker), and peptide identification was done by running tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) experiments run in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), Peptides were identified using a target decoy database search in the software program PEAKS 7. The database was composed of common affinity purification protein contaminants, other proteins purified in the lab, pepsin, and TRAPP subunits. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, a false discovery rate of 0.9%, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 24.3. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Differences in exchange were in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: >4% change in exchange, >0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.  Samples were only compared within a single experiment and were never compared to experiments completed at a different time with a different final D2O level.

### Publication Abstract
The TRAnsport Protein Particle (TRAPP) complexes act as Guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for Rab GTPases, which are master regulators of membrane trafficking in eukaryotic cells. In metazoans, there are two large multi-protein TRAPP complexes: TRAPPII and TRAPPIII, with the TRAPPII complex able to activate both Rab1 and Rab11. Here we present detailed biochemical characterisation of Rab-GEF specificity of the human TRAPPII complex, and molecular insight into Rab binding. GEF assays of the TRAPPII complex against a panel of 20 different Rab GTPases revealed GEF activity on Rab43 and Rab19. Electron microscopy and chemical cross-linking revealed the architecture of mammalian TRAPPII. Hydrogen deuterium exchange MS showed that Rab1, Rab11 and Rab43 share a conserved binding interface. Clinical mutations in Rab11, and phosphomimics of Rab43, showed decreased TRAPPII GEF mediated exchange. Finally, we designed a Rab11 mutation that maintained TRAPPII-mediated GEF activity while decreasing activity of the Rab11-GEF SH3BP5, providing a tool to dissect Rab11 signalling. Overall, our results provide insight into the GTPase specificity of TRAPPII, and how clinical mutations disrupt this regulation.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Rab, Gef, Trappii

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John E Burke
University of Victoria


