### Accession
PXD025284

### Title
Mass spectrometry based-proteomic analysis comparing the abundance of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) between TE03 (I3) human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs)

### Description
Here, we used high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify differentially expressed RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) between TE03 (I3) human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs). 2102Ep embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells were used as a reference for pluripotent cells. This data accompanies the manuscript: "Uncovering the RNA-binding protein landscape in the pluripotency network of human embryonic stem cells". Abstract: "Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell-fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that directly bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during exit from pluripotency and early lineage specification. Moreover, we show that nearly 200 RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly bound by this factor. Intriguingly, over 20 percent of the proteins detected in our study are putative DNA- and RNA-binding proteins (DRBPs), among them key transcription factors (TFs). Using fluorescently labeled RNA and seCLIP (single-end enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation) experiments, we discover that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 TFs interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the direct binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Taken together, our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated, reinforcing the importance of post-transcriptional regulation in stem cell biology".

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell extracts from hESCs, HFFs and EC cells were profiled by mass spectrometry, each with three biological replicates. Sample preparation: samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using a modified Filter-Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP). Briefly, 3.3 × 105 cells from each sample were dissolved in 100 μl sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer, lysed for 3 min at 95°C, and spun down at 16,000 RCF for 10 min. The lysate (30 μL) was mixed with 200 μL of 8 M urea buffer, loaded onto 30 kDa cutoff filter and spun down. Samples were trypsinized at 37°C (overnight). Digested proteins were then spun down, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid, and stored at -80°C. Liquid chromatography: samples were loaded using split-less nano-ultra-performance liquid chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity, Waters). The mobile phase A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Desalting was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (Waters). The peptides were separated with a T3 HSS nano-column (Waters) at a flow rate of 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer with a gradient of 4% to 35% B in 150 min, 35% to 90% B in 5 min, maintained at 95% for 5 min, and back to initial conditions. Mass spectrometry: the nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nano-electrospray ionization (nanoESI) emitter to a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus), using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 60,000 (at 400 m/z) and a maximum injection time of 20 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500 and a maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.5.1. MS/MS spectra were searched with the build-in Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human reference proteome (accessed 14 May 2016; www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). Reversed sequences of all human proteins and a list of 245 laboratory contaminants were added to the sequence database. Trypsin/P was used as the digestive enzyme, allowing no more than two missed cleavages and a peptide length of at least six amino acids. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications to oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term), and deamidation (Q or N). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by using a target-decoy strategy, with a maximum FDR of 1% at both the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and cell fate decisions are driven by a broad array of molecular signals. While transcriptional regulators have been extensively studied in human ESCs (hESCs), the extent to which RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) contribute to human pluripotency remains unclear. Here, we carry out a proteome-wide screen and identify 810 proteins that bind RNA in hESCs. We reveal that RBPs are preferentially expressed in hESCs and dynamically regulated during early stem cell differentiation. Notably, many RBPs are affected by knockdown of OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, several dozen of which are directly targeted by this factor. Using cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP-seq), we find that the pluripotency-associated STAT3 and OCT4 transcription factors interact with RNA in hESCs and confirm the binding of STAT3 to the conserved NORAD long-noncoding RNA. Our findings indicate that RBPs have a more widespread role in human pluripotency than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
Hescs, Human embryonic stem cells, Rna-binding proteins, Rbps, Hffs, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Human foreskin fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel

### Submitter
Shlomi Dvir

### Lab Head
Dr Yael Mandel-Gutfreund
1. Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel 2. Computer Science Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 320003, Israel


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: Whole-cell
- cell type: human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) 
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument:  Q Exactive Plus

