### Accession
PXD009949

### Title
DIA-SIFT: A precursor and product ion filter for accurate stable isotope data-independent acquisition proteomics

### Description
Human 293T cells grown in SILAC media, mixed at known ratios (1/5, 1/3, 1/2, 1, 2, 3, 5). Data acquired using the UDMSE method on a Synapt G2-S. Accompanies the DIA-SIFT project (github.com/martin-lab/DIA-SIFT).

### Sample Protocol
Human 293T cells grown in SILAC (K+8, R+10) media, mixed at known ratios (1/5, 1/3, 1/2, 1, 2, 3, 5) following protein quantification

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER version 3.0.2 (PLGS, Waters Corporation), searching against a database of the human proteome (downloaded from UniProt on February 11, 2016). The following criteria were applied in the search: (i) trypsin as digestion enzyme, (ii) one missed cleavage allowed, (iii) carbamidomethyl cysteine, Heavy (13C6, 15N2 +8.014 Da) lysine, and Heavy (13C6, 15N4 +10.021 Da) arginine as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation as a variable modification, (iv) a minimum of two identified fragment ions per peptide and a minimum of five fragments per protein, and (v) at least two identified peptides per protein. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identification was set at 1% using a decoy database of reversed protein sequences. Any identified peptides with a calculated mass error greater than 10 ppm were not considered

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative mass spectrometry-based protein profiling is widely used to measure protein levels across different treatments or disease states, yet current mass spectrometry acquisition methods present distinct limitations. While data-independent acquisition (DIA) bypasses the stochastic nature of data-dependent acquisition (DDA), fragment spectra derived from DIA are often complex and challenging to deconvolve. In-line ion mobility separation (IMS) adds an additional dimension to increase peak capacity for more efficient product ion assignment. As a similar strategy to sequential window acquisition methods (SWATH), IMS-enabled DIA methods rival DDA methods for protein annotation. Here we evaluate IMS-DIA quantitative accuracy using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Since SILAC analysis doubles the sample complexity, we find that IMS-DIA analysis is not sufficiently accurate for sensitive quantitation. However, SILAC precursor pairs share common retention and drift times, and both species cofragment to yield multiple quantifiable isotopic y-ion peak pairs. Since y-ion SILAC ratios are intrinsic for each quantified precursor, combined MS1 and y-ion ratio analysis significantly increases the total number of measurements. With increased sampling, we present DIA-SIFT ( SILAC Intrinsic Filtering Tool), a simple statistical algorithm to identify and eliminate poorly quantified MS1 and/or MS2 events. DIA-SIFT combines both MS1 and y-ion ratios, removes outliers, and provides more accurate and precise quantitation (&lt;15% CV) without removing any proteins from the final analysis. Overall, pooled MS1 and MS2 quantitation increases sampling in IMS-DIA SILAC analyses for accurate and precise quantitation.

### Keywords
Human, Synapt, Silac, Mse, 293t

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Chemistry Department, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Sarah Haynes

### Lab Head
Dr Brent Martin
Chemistry Department, University of Michigan


