### Accession
PXD026197

### Title
Proteomic analysis of serum EVs derived from PSC, CCA and PSC-CCA patients

### Description
Cholangiocarcinomas (CCAs) are heterogeneous biliary cancers with dismal prognosis. Their etiologies remain mostly unclear, although primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a well-known risk factor. There is an urgent need of accurate non-invasive biomarkers for early CCA diagnosis and to predict patient´s prognosis, which may improve their clinical management and outcome. Here, by high-throughput proteomic analysis of serum extracellular vesicles (EVs), we identified diagnostic and/or prognostic biomarkers specific for CCAs in patients with PSC, and others common to all CCA subtypes. Bulk RNA tissue transcriptomic data revealed that these biomarkers are predominantly expressed in hepatobiliary tissues, being expressed in different liver cell types. Furthermore, single-cell RNAseq (scRNA-seq) analysis revealed that the expression of these biomarkers was preferentially found in malignant cholangiocytes within CCA tumors. In summary, these results highlight the potential of serum EVs to reflect cancer presence, especially for difficult-to-diagnose malignancies, including CCA."

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion was carried out following FASP protocol with minor variations [Wisniewski 2009]. This protocol relies in the use of standard filtration devices, allowing buffer exchange and acting as a reactor for the digestion. 20 min centrifugations at 13000 rpm are carried out between each digestion step in order to remove buffer from the filter. Samples were loaded onto Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml 30K centrifugal units (Millipore), washed twice in UA solution (8M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and alkylated by a 20 min incubation in 50mM Iodoacetamide prepared in UA solution. 3 more washes in UA were carried out, followed by additional 3 washes in 50 mM AMBIC. Protein was quantified using Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad), and trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10. The mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC. Peptides were recovered from the filter units and subjected to ethyl acetate extraction following the protocol described by Yeung and Stanley [Yeung & Stanley 2010]. Briefly, 1ml of water-saturated ethyl acetate was added to the peptide solution and vortexed for 1 min. Then, tubes were centrifuged 15 s at 13000 rpm and the upper ethyl acetate layer was depleted. These steps were repeated 5 times. After the careful removal of the last upper ethyl acetate layer, samples were speed-vacuumed in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ). Samples were further desalted using stage-tip C18 microcolumns (Zip-tip, Millipore) and peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). An aliquot of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column (180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm (Waters). The precolumn was connected to a BEH130 C18 column, 75 μm x 200 mm, 1.7 μm (Waters), and equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted directly into the nanoelectrospray capillary (Proxeon Biosystems) at 300 nl/min, using a 120 min linear gradient of 3–50% acetonitrile.    The LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition in DDA mode. Full MS scan survey spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with mass resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. After each survey scan, the six most intense ions above 1000 counts were sequentially subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors with charge states of 2 and 3 were specifically selected for CID. Peptides were excluded from further analysis during 60 s using the dynamic exclusion feature.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cca, Psc, Evs, Liver

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
CIC bioGUNE Proteomics Platform, Bizkaia Tech. Park. Build 800

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
CIC bioGUNE Proteomics Platform, Bizkaia Tech. Park. Build 800


