### Accession
PXD037340

### Title
Deep plasma proteome profiling by enrichment of extracellular vesicles

### Description
This work show that enrichment of extracellular vesicles by ultracentrifugation increases the plasma proteome depth by an order of magnitude. Following the enrichment protocol, more than two thousand proteins can routinely be quantified reproducibly by label-free quantification and data independent acquisition (DIA) in single-shot LC-MSMS runs of less than one hour. The project also present an optimized workflow for plasma proteomics that enables high-throughput with very short chromatographic gradients analyzing hundred samples per day with deep proteome coverage, especially when including study-specific spectral libraries generated by repeated injection and gas-phase fractionation of pooled samples

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were enriched from 250 uL, 500 uL or 1000 uL platelet poor plasma (PPP) supplemented with PBS (Gibco, cat #20012-019) until equal volumes of 1000 uL. The samples were centrifuged (20,000g, 4 °C, 30 min) followed by removal of the supernatant leaving approximately 20 uL together with the EV pellet. PBS was supplemented until 1000 uL followed by a second centrifugation at 20,000g for 30 min. The pellet and a small volume (~20 uL) of remaining supernatant were then subject to tryptic protein digestion. For PAC digestion the samples were reduced and alkylated 30 min at RT with 5 mM TCEP, 10 mM CAA in 1% SDS. Magnetic beads (MagReSyn hydroxyl beads, cat# MR-HYX2L, ReSyn Biosciences, Ltd, South Africa), were added at protein:bead ratios of 1:6 to the 20k EV fraction and 1:2 to the unfractionated plasma and left to incubate for 20 min in 70% ACN at RT. The beads was washed once with 100% ACN and once with 70% ethanol before endoproteinase Lys-C  (Cat# 129-02541, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Richmond, VA) was added 1:250 (enzyme to protein ratio) for 1.5 h incubation on a thermoshaker at 37 °C in 50 mM HEPES buffer at pH 7.5. Trypsin (Cat# V5111, Promega) was added 1:100 (enzyme to protein ratio) for overnight incubation on a thermoshaker at 37 °C. The beads were removed and the supernatant acidified with TFA (1 % final concentration) and frozen at -20 °C until analysis For Urea-based digestion the samples were incubated 30 min at RT in 4 M Urea, 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA (final concentrations). Then endoproteinase Lys-C (1:250, enzyme to protein ration) were added and the samples were incubated 1 h on a thermoshaker at RT. The samples were then diluted 4X with Milli-Q water before addition of trypsin 1:100 (enzyme to protein ratio) and overnight digestion on a thermoshaker at RT. The samples were acidified with TFA (1 % final concentration) and frozen at -20 °C until analysis. For Direct digestion, all samples were reduced and alkylated in 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA for 30 min at RT. Then trypsin was added 1:100 (enzyme to protein ratio) and the samples were left to incubate overnight at 37 °C on a thermoshaker. The samples were acidified with TFA (1 % final concentration) and frozen at -20 °C until analysis.  500 ng peptides (NanoDrop, A280) were loaded on Evotips and eluted over 11, 22 or 44 min gradients (Solvent A: 5 % ACN, 0.1 % Formic Acid, solvent B  99.9% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid) using an EvoSep One system connected to a 150 mm analytical column packed with C18 beads (1.9 um, cat# r119.aq.0003, Dr. Maisch) maintained at 60 °C using a column oven. Eluting peptides were sprayed into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer applying 2 kV spray voltage, RF funnel at 40%, and ion transfer tube temperature set to 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using either data-dependent-acquisition (DDA) or data-independent-acquisition (DIA) modes.  In DDA mode, full-scan precursor spectra (350-1400 Da) were recorded in profile mode using a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a normalized AGC target of 300% and a maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms. Fragment spectra were recorded in profile mode with a precursor intensity threshold of 2e5 and a resolution of 15,000. In each scan cycle the 12 most intense precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 30 % normalized collision energy, a normalized AGC target of 200 % and a max IT of 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion (30s) was applied to avoid repeated fragmentation of the same peptides. In DIA mode, full scan spectra precursor spectra (350-1400 Da) were recorded in profile mode using a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a normalized AGC target of 300% and a max IT of 45 ms. Fragment spectra were then recorded in profile mode fragmenting 49 consecutive 14.7 Da windows (1 m/z overlap) covering the mass range 361-1033 Da and using a resolution of 30,000. Isolated precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 27% normalized collision energy, a normalized AGC target of 1000% and a max IT of 54 ms.  A project specific spectral library were generated by injecting the same sample multiple times and applying gas phase fractionation in combination with DIA acquisition in a series of staggered narrow windows to fractionate precursors in a near DDA like mode. In brief, the sample were injected 7 times covering the precursor intervals 350-450 Da, 449-549 Da, 548-648 Da, 647-747 Da, 746-846 Da, 845-945 Da and 944-1044 Da recorded in profile mode using a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a normalized AGC target of 300% and a max IT of 45 ms. Fragment spectra were then recorded in profile mode fragmenting 50 consecutive 2 Da windows (0.5 m/z overlap) each covering a mass range of 100 Da and using a resolution of 15,000. Isolated precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 27 % normalized collision energy, a normalized AGC target of 1000 % and a max IT of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Collected RAW-files were analyzed using Spectronaut v16.0 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for DIA data and Spectromine v3.1 (Biognosys AG) for DDA data using standard settings searching against a FASTA file containing the human proteome (SwissProt, 20,431 sequences, signal peptides removed) and supplemented with the sequences of the two proteolytic enzymes used for digestion. For library-free DIA analyses, directDIA was used with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of Methionine as variable modifications. A Q-value of 1 % against mutated decoys was applied to filter identifications. A positive protein identification was counted if quantified in three technical replicates. Sum of peptides (area, MS2 level) was applied for quantification.  Spectral libraries used for Spectronaut searches with spectral libraries were generated using DIANN v 1.8 searching against the same two FASTA files as mentioned above using DIANN’s default settings, except for ticking-on “Generate spectral library”, Enabling “Ox(M)”, Setting precursor charges to “2-5 Da”, Neural network classifier to “Double pass mode” and Library generation to “Smart profiling”.

### Publication Abstract
Human plasma is a rich source of biomedical information and biomarkers. However, the enormous dynamic range of plasma proteins limits its accessibility to mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. Here, we show that enrichment of extracellular vesicles (EVs) by ultracentrifugation increases plasma proteome depth by an order of magnitude. With this approach, more than two thousand proteins are routinely and reproducibly quantified by label-free quantification and data independent acquisition (DIA) in single-shot liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry runs of less than one hour. We present an optimized plasma proteomics workflow that enables high-throughput with very short chromatographic gradients analyzing hundred samples per day with deep proteome coverage, especially when including a study-specific spectral library generated by repeated injection and gas-phase fractionation of pooled samples. Finally, we test the workflow on clinical biobank samples from malignant melanoma patients in immunotherapy to demonstrate the improved proteome coverage supporting the potential for future biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Plasma proteomics, Data independent acquisition, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, Ultracentrifugation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark

Novo Nordisk Foundation, Center for Protein Research Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Ole Østergaard

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation, Center for Protein Research Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


