### Accession
PXD031626

### Title
Proteome and physiological characterization of halotolerant nodule endophytes: the case of Rahnella aquatilis and Serratia plymuthica

### Description
Bacterial endophytes were isolated from nodules of pea and faba bean. The strains were identified and characterized for plant beneficial activities (phosphate solubilisation, synthesis of indole acetic acid and siderophores) and salt tolerance. Based on these data, four strains of Rahnella aquatilis and three strains of Serratia plymuthica were considered as potential Plant Growth-Promoting Bacteria, able to support plant development in saline soils. In order to shed light on the mechanisms underlying salt tolerance, the proteome of the two most performant strains (Ra4 and Sp2) grown in presence or not of salt was characterized. The amount of protein expressed by the endophytes was higher in presence of salt. The modulated proteome was composed by 302 (100 up-regulated, 202 down-regulated) and by 323 (206 up-regulated, 117 down-regulated) in Ra4 and Sp2, respectively. Overall, proteins involved in abiotic stress responses were up-regulated, while those involved in metabolism and flagellum structure were down-regulated. The main up-regulated proteins in Sp2 was thiol:disulfide interchange protein DsbA, required for the sulphur binding formation in periplasmic proteins, while in Ra4 corresponded to the soluble fraction of ABC transporters, having a role in compatible solute uptake. Our results demonstrated a conserved response to salt stress in two taxonomically correlated species.

### Sample Protocol
Salt response in term of secreted proteins was investigated in Ra4 and Sp2 strains comparing the protein profile produced by treated cells (4.4 % NaCl) versus untreated ones. The experiment was conducted in triplicate, in TSB. In particular, for each strain, both the controls (TSB) and treated (4.4% NaCl) were inoculated with an optical density of 108 CFU ml-1 diluted 1: 1000 reaching a final bacterial concentration of 105 CFU ml-1. The cultures were incubated at 28 °C, under shaking for 24 hours. At the end of incubation, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 1500 g, RT. In order to recover secreted proteins, 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol were added to 10 ml of supernatant and incubated overnight at -20 °C. The precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 50 minutes at 4 ° C, 1500 g. The resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 400 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and quantified by the Bradford method [32]. In order to quantify the protein concentration, Bovine Serum Albumin was used as standard (from 2 to 0.031 µg µl-1).Proteins were Trypsin digested as fully reported in Bona et al. The mass spectrometry analyses were performed using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, USA) system with a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 × 100 mm, 2.7 μm) as a stationary phase. The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40◦C. The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow rate of 15.0 μL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with a DuoSpray Ion Source. The samples were subjected to the traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA): mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da, followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da with the abundance threshold set at 30 count per second (cps) (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). For label-free quantification, samples were then subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window. A 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed, followed by MS/MS experiments on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB Sciex)

### Data Protocol
Mass data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA) against the NCBI databases of Rahnella aquatilis (71,017 sequences, 16 September 2019) and Serratia plymuthica (130,272 sequences, 16th September 2019). The search was performed on Mascot v. 2.3.0; the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with three maximum missed cleavages; a search tolerance of 120 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.6 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2+, 3+ and 4+, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The following modifications were used: oxidized methionine and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. Proteins with at least one peptide with ion score higher than the homology or identity ion score value, were considered as significant.  Moreover, the quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.2 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada).  Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial endophytes were isolated from nodules of pea and fava bean. The strains were identified and characterized for plant beneficial activities (phosphate solubilization, synthesis of indole acetic acid and siderophores) and salt tolerance. Based on these data, four strains of <i>Rahnella aquatilis</i> and three strains of <i>Serratia plymuthica</i> were selected. To shed light on the mechanisms underlying salt tolerance, the proteome of the two most performant strains (Ra4 and Sp2) grown in the presence or not of salt was characterized. The number of proteins expressed by the endophytes was higher in the presence of salt. The modulated proteome consisted of 302 (100 up-regulated, 202 down-regulated) and 323 (206 up-regulated, 117 down-regulated) proteins in Ra4 and Sp2, respectively. Overall, proteins involved in abiotic stress responses were up-regulated, while those involved in metabolism and flagellum structure were down-regulated. The main up-regulated proteins in Sp2 were thiol: disulfide interchange protein DsbA, required for the sulfur binding formation in periplasmic proteins, while in Ra4 corresponded to the soluble fraction of ABC transporters, having a role in compatible solute uptake. Our results demonstrated a conserved response to salt stress in the two taxonomically related species.

### Keywords
Rahnella aquatilis, Halotolerance, Proteomics, Nodule endophytes, Serratia plymuthica

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy


