### Accession
PXD036032

### Title
Targeted Quantitative Profiling of Epitranscriptomic Reader, Writer and Eraser Proteins Revealed Potential Crosstalk between N6-Methyladenosine and Other RNA Modifications

### Description
N⁶-methyladenosine (m6A) and its reader, writer, and eraser (RWE) proteins assume crucial roles in regulating the splicing, stability, and translation of mRNA. To our knowledge, no systematic investigations have been conducted about the crosstalk between m6A and other modified nucleosides in RNA. Herein, we modified our recently established liquid chromatography-parallel-reaction monitoring (LC-PRM) method by incorporating stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides as internal or surrogate standards for profiling epitranscriptomic RWE proteins. We were able to detect reproducibly a total of 114 RWE proteins in HEK293T cells with the genes encoding m6A eraser proteins (i.e., ALKBH5, FTO) and the catalytic subunit of the major m6A writer complex (i.e., METTL3) being individually ablated. Notably, eight proteins were altered by more than 1.5-fold in the opposite directions in HEK293T cells depleted of METTL3 and ALKBH5. Analysis of published m6A mapping results revealed the presence of m6A in the corresponding mRNAs of four of these proteins. Together, we integrated SIL peptides into our LC-PRM method for quantifying epitranscriptomic RWE proteins, and our work revealed potential crosstalks between m6A and other epitranscriptomic modifications. Our modified LC-PRM method with the use of SIL peptides should be applicable for high-throughput profiling of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in other cell types and in tissues.

### Sample Protocol
ALKBH5-/-, FTO-/-, and METTL3-/- and the isogenic parental HEK293T cells were harvested, and proteomic samples were prepared using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method2 with minor modifications as described elsewhere. After desalting using Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher), the resulting tryptic peptides were spiked-in with a mixture of SIL peptides at a final concentration at 2 fmol/μL. Peptides (500 ng – 1 μg) and SIL peptide mixture (4 fmol) were subjected to LC-PRM analysis. Two LC-PRM runs were carried out for profiling epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in the PRM library. Three replicate samples were initially prepared; however, one replicate of METTL3-/- was removed from the analysis due to a contamination concern observed from the abnormal total-ion chromatogram. Therefore, only two replicates of METTL3-/- cell samples were analyzed. The setting of the isotope modifications of the PRM library provided in ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD030387 was adjusted in Skyline to reflect [13C6,15N2]-Lys- and [13C6,15N4]-Arg-labeled SIL peptides, which differed from the isotope modifications in stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC).

### Data Protocol
A PRM spectral library of RWE proteins was established based on previously acquired shotgun proteomic data deposited in the folder named "library" in PeptideAtlas with the identifier number of PASS01177. After raw data were imported to Skyline, PRM traces were manually curated to remove potential interfering fragment ions, which were not overlaid with other fragment ions and had poor mass accuracy (>20 ppm). A dotp value of > 0.7 and 4-6 fragment ions with the same retention time were employed as the criteria for positive peptide identification. Quantification results, including protein name, peptide name, replicate number, isotope, total peak area, retention time, and library dotp, were exported from Skyline to Excel. Additional data processing was conducted in Excel, shown in Table S1d-g. In summary, the ratio of each peptide representing a specific RWE protein was calculated using a two-step normalization procedure: (1) the peak area of an endogenous peptide is normalized to that of its corresponding SIL peptide or a surrogate standard; (2) the ratio from the first-step normalization is further normalized against the ratio of the sum of peak areas for all light peptides over that for all heavy peptides in each LC-PRM run. The peptide ratio in each sample, averaged from the quantification results of 2-3 biological replicates, was represented by mean ± S.D. The relative ratio of the peptide in knockout cells vs. HEK293T cells was further represented by ratio ± propagation error. The ratio of a specific RWE protein in knockout cells relative to HEK293T cells was represented by the mean ratio from relative peptide ratios ± the new propagation error. It is worth noting that if multiple peptides were detected from one RWE protein, only the relative peptide ratio with the propagation error was used to calculate the mean protein ratio and the new propagation error.

### Publication Abstract
<i>N</i><sup>6</sup>-Methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) and its reader, writer, and eraser (RWE) proteins assume crucial roles in regulating the splicing, stability, and translation of mRNA. Aside from m<sup>6</sup>A, RNA is known to carry many other types of chemical modifications; no systematic investigations, however, have been conducted about the crosstalk between m<sup>6</sup>A and other modified nucleosides in RNA. Here, we modified our recently established liquid chromatography-parallel-reaction monitoring (LC-PRM) method by incorporating stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides as internal or surrogate standards for profiling epitranscriptomic RWE proteins. We were able to detect reproducibly a total of 114 RWE proteins in HEK293T cells with the genes encoding m<sup>6</sup>A eraser proteins (i.e., <i>ALKBH5</i>, <i>FTO</i>) and the catalytic subunit of the major m<sup>6</sup>A writer complex (i.e., <i>METTL3</i>) being individually ablated. Notably, eight proteins, including writer proteins for 5-methylcytidine and pseudouridine, were altered by more than 1.5-fold in the opposite directions in HEK293T cells depleted of <i>METTL3</i> and <i>ALKBH5</i>. Analysis of previously published m<sup>6</sup>A mapping results revealed the presence of m<sup>6</sup>A in the corresponding mRNAs for four of these proteins. Together, we integrated SIL peptides into our LC-PRM method for quantifying epitranscriptomic RWE proteins, and our work revealed potential crosstalks between m<sup>6</sup>A and other epitranscriptomic modifications. Our modified LC-PRM method with the use of SIL peptides should be applicable for high-throughput profiling of epitranscriptomic RWE proteins in other cell types and in tissues.

### Keywords
Epitranscriptomic reader, N6-methyladenosine, Writer and eraser proteins, Lc-prm

### Affiliations
UC RIVERSIDE
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, United States

### Submitter
Tianyu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, United States


