### Accession
PXD020946

### Title
EC-exosomes and BM fluid-Exosomes

### Description
We isolated the exosomes from mouse bone marrow fluid, mouse primary bone marrow endothelial cells (BMEC) culture supernatants of WT-BMEC and Vps33b knockdown BMECs by ultracentrifugation. After characterization of isolated exosomes, A global comparison of the protein cargo carried by the different exosomes. In brief，protein were extracted and labeled with TMT, the peptide were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system, and the resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and TMT proteomics analysis was supported by HangZhou Jingjie PTM BioLabs. Exosome samples were sonicated three times on ice using an ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After centrifugation at 18,000 xg, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. After diluting the urea below 2M with TMT label buffer, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein (m/m) ratio for the first digestion overnight and at a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein (m/m) ratio for the second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted on a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The peptides were then TMT labeled according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system. The gradient comprised an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 47 min, 22% to 32% in 20 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. The peptides were then selected for MS/MS with a NCE setting of 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 30 MS/MS scans with 30.0s dynamic exclusion was used. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for the precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and as 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for the fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-term were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to <1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set as >40. The minimum peptide length was set at 7. For the quantification method, the TMT 6-plex was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to the default values.

### Publication Abstract
Small extracellular vesicles (SEVs) are functional messengers of certain cellular niches that permit noncontact cell communications. Whether niche-specific SEVs fulfill this role in cancer is unclear. Here, we used 7 cell type-specific mouse Cre lines to conditionally knock out Vps33b in Cdh5+ or Tie2+ endothelial cells (ECs), Lepr+ BM perivascular cells, Osx+ osteoprogenitor cells, Pf4+ megakaryocytes, and Tcf21+ spleen stromal cells. We then examined the effects of reduced SEV secretion on progression of MLL-AF9-induced acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as well as normal hematopoiesis. Blocking SEV secretion from ECs, but not perivascular cells, megakaryocytes, or spleen stromal cells, markedly delayed the leukemia progression. Notably, reducing SEV production from ECs had no effect on normal hematopoiesis. Protein analysis showed that EC-derived SEVs contained a high level of ANGPTL2, which accelerated leukemia progression via binding to the LILRB2 receptor. Moreover, ANGPTL2-SEVs released from ECs were governed by VPS33B. Importantly, ANGPTL2-SEVs were also required for primary human AML cell maintenance. These findings demonstrate a role of niche-specific SEVs in cancer development and suggest targeting of ANGPTL2-SEVs from ECs as a potential strategy to interfere with certain types of AML.

### Keywords
Ec-exosomes; bm fluid-exosomes

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research Center for Blood Diseases, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Guohuan Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Guohuan Sun
State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, National Clinical Research Center for Blood Diseases, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College


