### Accession
PXD028676

### Title
Five Wheat Species Flour Proteomics by LC-MS/MS

### Description
LC-MS/MS-based LFQ proteomics of 150 wheat full-kernel flours from five different wheat species (common wheat, spelt, durum wheat, emmer, einkorn) grown at three different locations.

### Sample Protocol
- Protein extraction using buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 5 mM DTT. - Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) including reduction (DTT), alkylation (IAA) and tryptic digestion. - C18 peptide desalting. - LC-MS/MS (UMDSE).

### Data Protocol
- Raw data processing and DB search: ProteinLynx Global Server. - Post-processing and LFQ: ISOQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat is an important staple food and its processing quality is largely driven by proteins. However, there is a sizable number of people with inflammatory reactions to wheat proteins, namely celiac disease, wheat allergy and the syndrome of non-celiac wheat sensitivity. Thus, proteome profiles should be of high importance for stakeholders along the wheat supply chain. We applied liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomics to establish the flour reference proteome for five wheat species, ancient to modern, each based on 10 cultivars grown in three diverse environments. We identified at least 2540 proteins in each species and a cluster analyses clearly separated the species based on their proteome profiles. Even more, &gt;50% of proteins significantly differed between species - many of them implicated in products' quality, grain-starch synthesis, plant stress regulation and proven or potential allergic reactions in humans. Notably, the expression of several important wheat proteins was found to be mainly driven by genetics vs. environmental factors, which enables selection and refinement of improved cultivars for the wheat supply chain as long as rapid test methods will be developed. Especially einkorn expressed 5.4 and 7.2-fold lower quantities of potential allergens and immunogenic amylase trypsin inhibitors, respectively, than common wheat, whereas potential allergen content was intermediate in tetraploid wheat species. This urgently warrants well-targeted clinical studies, where the developed reference proteomes will help to design representative test diets.

### Keywords
Einkorn, Durum wheat, Spelt, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Common wheat, Udmse, Wheat, Emmer, Triticum aestivum

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz 55131 Mainz, Germany
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz 55131 Mainz, Germany


