### Accession
PXD043033

### Title
Infected erythrocytes and plasma proteomics reveal a specific protein signature of severe malaria 

### Description
Cerebral malaria (CM), the most lethal complication of Plasmodium falciparum severe malaria (SM), claims the life of 15 to 25% of admitted children despite treatment. P. falciparum infects and multiplies in human erythrocytes, contributing to anemia, parasite sequestration, and inflammation in the host. In this study, an unbiased proteomic assessment of infected erythrocytes and plasma samples from 24 Beninese children was performed to decipher the complex mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of CM and the corresponding host-parasite interactions. A significant down-regulation of proteins from the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and an up-regulation of the erythroid precursor marker transferrin receptor protein 1 (TFRC) was associated with infected erythrocytes from CM patients. Further functional analysis showed dysregulated iron metabolism and ferroptosis pathways associated with CM. At the plasma level, the samples clustered according to clinical presentation. Importantly, increased levels of the 20S proteasome components were associated with SM. Targeted quantification assays confirmed these findings on a larger confirmation cohort (n=274). These findings suggest that parasites causing CM preferentially infect reticulocytes or erythroid precursors and alter their maturation. Importantly, the host plasma proteome serves as a specific signature of SM and presents a remarkable opportunity for developing innovative diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Five milliliters of peripheral whole blood were collected from the patients using EDTA vacutainer tubes at the time of inclusion and prior to treatment initiation. The plasma was separated from iE by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 2000 x g, and immediately stored at −80 °C. Plasma samples were depleted of the 14 major plasma proteins using a targeted antibody-based depletion kit (Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Top 14 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns), following the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 10µL of plasma was loaded onto each column containing an antibody-coated resin and incubated at room temperature on a rotator disk at low speed for one hour. After centrifugation at 1000 x g for 2 minutes, the eluates of depleted plasma were collected and then centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 45 minutes through an Amicon 10kDa filter concentrator. The resulting proteins were denatured, reduced, and alkylated using a denaturing buffer (6M Urea, 100mM Tris/HCl pH8.5, 10mM TCEP, and 50mM CAA). The urea was diluted in 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 to bring the concentration back to 2M, to permit trypsin activity (V5111; Promega) at 37°C overnight (1µg trypsin for 50µg of protein). The following day, peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 500µL of Buffer A (10mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in mQ H2O) and sonicated for 5 minutes before being loaded onto an AKTA chromatography system equipped with a Zorbax Extend-C18 column (Agilent) for Reverse-Phase High pH (RP-HpH) peptide fractionation. Buffer B was composed of 10mM ammonium formate, pH 10, in 80% ACN to elute peptides bound to the hydrophobic C18 phase. Next, 250µL fractions were collected at a flow rate of 0.250 mL/min during 1h24min (total vol. = 21mL) on three different gradients (Buffer A and B mixed) with an initial (from 0 to 2mL) flow rate at 6.25% of buffer B (93.75% of Buffer A): (1) 6.25 - 44% of Buffer B (from 2mL to 14.5mL), (2) 44 - 75% of Buffer B (from 14.5mL to 17mL), and (3) 75 - 100% of Buffer B (from 17mL to 21mL). The 84 harvested fractions were pooled into nine final fractions based on a concatenation plan to equalize the amount of peptides in each fraction.The nine fractions were subsequently dried using a SpeedVac. Peptides from each RP-HpH fraction were solubilized in 25µL of 10% ACN and 0.1% TFA, and 5µL were injected. A data-dependent analysis (DDA) with PASEF enable method was set up by using Data Analysis and timsControl software (Bruker, Billerica, USA) and peptides from each fraction were separated into a C18 reverse phase column (1.6µm particles size Aurora, 75µm inner diameter and 25cm length from IonOptics) on a Dionex U3000 nLC system during a 2-hour gradient program and electrosprayed into a timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were analyzed using MaxQuant 2.0.3, which queried the Uniprot/Swissprot sequence database for human proteins and PlasmoDB (v56) for P. falciparum 3D7 strain. Protein identification false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, with a match between runs enabled, and identification was based on unique + razor peptides with at least one peptide. For quantification, a minimum of two ratios of unique + razor peptides were required. Protein quantification analysis was performed using LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) intensities data calculated by the MaxQuant algorithm. The MaxQuant files were further analyzed using Perseus software. Data cleanup was performed by eliminating the (i) reverse protein sequence, (ii) proteins identified only by one modification site and (iii) potential contaminants based on the contaminant list from MaxQuant. The resulting filtered protein’s LFQ values were log2(x) transformed and proteins with lesser cross-replicates values were filtered out (65% of quantitative values in at least one group).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Plasmodium falciparum, Severe malaria, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Université Paris Cité, IRD, UMR261, MERIT, F-75006 Paris, France
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Gwladys I.
Université Paris Cité, IRD, UMR261, MERIT, F-75006 Paris, France


