### Accession
PXD003397

### Title
Gel-Free/Label-Free Proteomic Analysis Uncovers the Roles of Endoplasmic Reticulum of Soybean Root Tip under Flooding and Drought Stresses

### Description
As a stresses sensitive crop, this study will give some clues to enhance soybean tolerance of flooding and drought stresses. To uncover the response mechanisms occurring in the ER triggered by flooding and drought, ER proteomics was performed using gel-free/label-free proteomic approach. Besides, glycoproteomics was also producted to investigate the ER funtion in glycoprotein synthesis under stresses

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were treated without or with flooding or drought stress for 2 days, and root tips were collected. The rER was enriched from root tips, and proteins were extracted, purified, digested, and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS. The glycoproteins were enriched from soybean root tips under development, flooding, and drought conditions. The resulting peptides were also analyzed using nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and a soybean peptide database (55,787 sequences). Mascot generic files using Proteome Discoverer software. The parameters used in the Mascot searches were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed.Using SIEVE, the relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared between the control and treated groups. Besides, the mol% of glycoproteins was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Soybean is a widely cultivated crop; however, it is sensitive to flooding and drought stresses. The adverse environmental cues cause the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress due to accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins. To investigate the mechanisms in response to flooding and drought stresses, ER proteomics was performed in soybean root tips. The enzyme activity of NADH cytochrome c reductase was two-fold higher in the ER than other fractions, indicating that the ER was isolated with high purity. Protein abundance of ribosomal proteins was decreased under both stresses compared to control condition; however, the percentage of increased ribosomes was two-fold higher in flooding compared to drought. The ER proteins related to protein glycosylation and signaling were in response to both stresses. Compared to control condition, calnexin was decreased under both stresses; however, protein disulfide isomerase-like proteins and heat shock proteins were markedly decreased under flooding and drought conditions, respectively. Furthermore, fewer glycoproteins and higher levels of cytosolic calcium were identified under both stresses compared to control condition. These results suggest that reduced accumulation of glycoproteins in response to both stresses might be due to dysfunction of protein folding through calnexin/calreticulin cycle. Additionally, the increased cytosolic calcium levels induced by flooding and drought stresses might disturb the ER environment for proper protein folding in soybean root tips.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Soybean, Drought, Flooding, Endoplasmic reticulum, Root tip

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Taukuba, Japan

### Submitter
Wang Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko KOMATSU
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Taukuba, Japan


