### Accession
PXD025265

### Title
Drivers genes in severe forms of COVID-19

### Description
The etiology of severe forms of COVID19, especially in young patients, remains a salient unanswered question. Here we build on a 3-tier cohort where all individuals/patients were strictly below 50 years of age and where a number of comorbidities were excluded at study onset. Besides healthy controls (N=22), these include patients in the intensive care unit with Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) (“critical group”; N=47), and those in a non-critical care ward under supplemental oxygen (“non-critical group”, N=25). This highly curated cohort allowed us to perform a deep multi-omics approach which included whole genome sequencing, whole blood RNA-sequencing, plasma and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells proteomics, multiplex cytokine profiling, mass-cytometry-based immune cell profiling in conjunction with viral parameters i.e. anti-SARS-Cov-2 neutralizing antibodies and multi-target antiviral serology. Critical patients were characterized by an exacerbated inflammatory state, perturbed lymphoid and myeloid cell compartments, signatures of dysregulated blood coagulation and active regulation of viral entry into the cells. A unique gene signature that differentiates critical from non-critical patients was identified by an ensemble machine learning, deep learning and quantum computing approach. Within this gene network, Structural Causal Modeling identified several ARDS driver genes, among which the up-regulated metalloprotease ADAM9 seems to be a key driver. Inhibition of ADAM9 ex vivo interfered with SARS-Cov-2 uptake and replication in human epithelial cells. Hence we apply a machine learning approach to identify driver genes for severe forms of COVID-19 in a small, uncluttered cohort of patients.

### Sample Protocol
For shotgun proteomics, samples were prepared using the PreOmics iST Kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus or HF-X mass spectrometer Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
For plasma samples, raw data obtained were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with trypsin/P specificity. A database containing all human entries was extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt database (11 may 2020, 20410 entries). The minimal peptide length required was seven amino acids and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein’s N-termini were set as variable modifications and acetylated and modified methionine-containing peptides, as well as their unmodified counterparts, were excluded from protein quantification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. For protein quantification, the “match between runs” option was enabled. The maximum false discovery rate was set to 1% at peptide and protein levels with the use of a decoy strategy. LFQ intensities were extracted from the ProteinGroups.txt file after removal of non-human and keratin contaminants, as well as reverse and proteins only identified by site. For PBMC samples, nanoLC-MS/MS data was interpreted to do label-free extracted ion chromatogram-based differential analysis using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with trypsin/P specificity. A combined human and bovine database was extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt (8 September 2020, 26,413 entries). The minimal peptide length required was seven amino acids and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein’s N-termini were set as variable modifications and acetylated and modified methionine-containing peptides, as well as their unmodified counterparts, were excluded from protein quantification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. For protein quantification, the “match between runs” option was enabled. The maximum false discovery rate was set to 1% at peptide and protein levels with the use of a decoy strategy. Only peptides unique to human entries were kept and their intensities were summed to derive protein intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Acute respiratory distress syndrome, Covid-19, Machine learning, Disease severity signatures, Adam9, Mechanical ventilation, Artificial intelligence, Multi-omics, Therapeutic targets

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France
LSMBO, IPHC

### Submitter
Aurélie Hirschler

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France


