### Accession
PXD029614

### Title
Total membrane proteome analysis of Candida glabrata wild-type and eleven CgYapsins-deficient strain Cgyps1-11∆.

### Description
The project is aimed at characterizing the effect of loss of a family of eleven aspartyl proteases (Cg Yapsins) on the global membrane proteome of Candida glabrata.

### Sample Protocol
C. glabrata wild-type and Cgyps1-11Δ strains, used for the proteome analysis, were grown in YPD medium till logarithmic-phase. Next, cells were harvested and washed twice using ice-cold water. The cells were normalized to 20 OD600 and suspended in buffer 1 [0.1 M Tris (pH 10.7), 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail solution]. The 0.5 mm acid-washed glass beads were added to cells, and the cells were lysed using mechanical force. The cell homogenates were diluted using the buffer 2 [0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.33 M sucrose, 5 mM EDTA and 2 mM DTT], and centrifuged at 1000g for 3 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into a new centrifuge tube, followed by centrifugation at 3000g for 5 min at 4°C to remove unbroken cells and cell debris, if any. Next, the supernatant was centrifuged at 19000g for 45 min at 4°C to obtain total membrane fraction pellets. The membrane pellets were washed with the buffer 2 [0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.33 M sucrose, 5 mM EDTA and 2 mM DTT] and suspended in buffer 3 [membrane suspension buffer; 20% glycerol (v/v), 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM DTT and 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)]. Protein quantification was performed using the BCA protein assay kit. 200 µg TMFs were resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel till bromophenol blue dye in the sample buffer entered about 1 cm into the gel. After staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, protein bands were excised using a scalpel and sent to the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA (https://taplin.med.harvard.edu) for global protein identification. All samples were prepared and sent from two independent biological replicates. At Taplin facility, gel pieces were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion at 37ºC followed by microcapillary LC-MS/MS (Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) using the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer. Sample with search name 50050 refers to C. glabrata wild-type replicate 1, 50051 refers to C. glabrata wild-type replicate 2, 50052 refers to Cgyps1-11Δ replicate-1, and 50053 refers to Cgyps1-11Δ replicate-2.

### Data Protocol
The acquired peptide fragmentation data were analysed using the Sequest software, run against the UniProt C.glabrata reference database, and identified peptides were filtered to 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Invasive candidiasis poses a major healthcare threat. The human opportunistic fungal pathogen Candida glabrata, which causes mucosal and deep-seated infections, is armed with distinct virulence attributes, including a family of 11 glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked aspartyl proteases, CgYapsins. Here, we have profiled total membrane proteomes of the C.&#xa0;glabrata wildtype and 11 proteases-deficient strain, Cgyps1-11&#x394;, by mass spectrometry analysis and uncovered a novel role for fungal yapsins in glucose sensing and homeostasis. Furthermore, through label-free quantitative membrane proteome analysis, we showed differential abundance of 42% of identified membrane proteins, with electron transport chain and glycolysis proteins displaying lower and higher abundance in Cgyps1-11&#x394; cells, compared with wildtype cells, respectively. We also demonstrated elevated glucose uptake and upregulation of genes that code for the low-glucose sensor CgSnf3, transcriptional regulators CgMig1 and CgRgt1, and hexose transporter CgHxt2/10 in the Cgyps1-11&#x394; mutant. We further elucidated a potential underlying mechanism through genetic and transcript measurement analysis under low- and high-glucose conditions and found CgSNF3 deletion to rescue high glucose uptake and attenuated growth of the Cgyps1-11&#x394; mutant in YPD medium, thereby linking CgYapsins with regulation of the CgSnf3-dependent low-glucose sensing pathway. Last, high ethanol production, diminished mitochondrial membrane potential, and elevated susceptibility to oxidative phosphorylation inhibitors point toward increased fermentative and decreased respiratory metabolism in the Cgyps1-11&#x394; mutant. Altogether, our findings revealed new possible glucose metabolism-regulatory roles for putative cell surface-associated CgYapsins and advanced our understanding of fungal carbohydrate homeostasis mechanisms.

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Total membrane fractions (tmfs), Lc-ms/ms, Candida glabrata

### Affiliations
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad
Laboratory of Fungal Pathogenesis, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Rupinder Kaur

### Lab Head
Dr Rupinder Kaur
Laboratory of Fungal Pathogenesis, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, India


