### Accession
PXD004681

### Title
Probing the global kinome and phosphoproteome in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii via sequential enrichment and quantitative proteomics

### Description
Identifying dynamic protein phosphorylation events is critical for understanding kinase/phosphatase regulated signaling pathways. To date, protein phosphorylation and kinase expression have been examined independently in photosynthetic organisms. Presented here is a method to study the global kinome and phosphoproteome in tandem for the first time in a photosynthetic organism, the model alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Chlamydomonas), using mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. A dual enrichment strategy first targets intact protein kinases via capture on immobilized multiplexed inhibitor beads (MIBs) with subsequent proteolytic digestion of unbound proteins and peptide-based phosphorylation enrichment. To increase depth of coverage, both data-dependent and data-independent (via SWATH) mass spectrometric acquisitions were performed to obtain a >50% increase in coverage of the enriched Chlamydomonas kinome over coverage found with no enrichment. The quantitative phosphoproteomic dataset yielded 2,304 phosphopeptides and 1,765 localized phosphosites with excellent reproducibility across biological replicates (90% of quantified sites with coefficient of variation below 11%). This approach enables simultaneous investigation of kinases and phosphorylation events at the global level to facilitate understanding of kinase networks and their influence in cell signaling events.

### Sample Protocol
For all samples, peptides were resuspended in 95% water/5% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid before separation via a 100 min linear gradient from 95% water/5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (FA) to 65% water/35% acetonitrile/0.1% FA via a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). A TripleTOF 5600 (AB Sciex) mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization and high sensitivity mode for data acquisition with the first 20 features above 150 counts threshold having a charge state of +2 to +5 selected for fragmentation during every 2 s cycle for DDA runs. SWATH samples were acquired using a variable acquisition window SWATH approach generated from previous MIBs-enriched or whole cell lysate DDA runs with the 20 m/z windows used for both kinome enriched and no enrichment datasets.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra (*.wiff) files were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics). A reference spectra was automatically assigned and total ion chromatograms were then aligned to minimize run-to-run differences in peak retention time. Alignment was validated (≥ 80% score) and a combined peak list (*.mgf) for all runs was exported for peptide sequence determination and protein inference by Mascot (v2.5.1, Matrix Science). Database searching was performed using the C. reinhardtii Phytozome v11 database (http://www.phytozome.net/; accessed May, 2015) appended with the NCBI chloroplast and mitochondria databases (19,603 entries). Sequences for common laboratory contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/; 116 entries) were appended to the database. Searches of MS/MS data used a trypsin protease specificity with the possibility of two missed cleavages, peptide/fragment mass tolerances of 10ppm/0.08 Da, and variable modifications of acetylation at the protein N-terminus, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, oxidation at methionine, and deamidation at asparagine or glutamine. Variable modifications of phosphorylation at serine or threonine and phosphorylation at tyrosine were appended to this list when working with phosphorylation enriched datasets. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted to < 1% peptide FDR using the Mascot Percolator algorithm and resulting matches were exported (*.xml) for further analysis. Peptide identifications in the result file were uploaded to Progenesis QI for proteomics and matched to peaks from the raw spectra. Peptide measurements were then exported (*.csv) and custom scripts written in the Python programming language were implemented to parse results. Briefly, only peptides with Mascot ion score ≥ 13 and abundance > 0 across all samples were considered. Homologous proteins with shared peptides were then grouped together to satisfy the principle of parsimony. After grouping, the script performed site localization of variable modifications using an implementation of the Mascot Delta Score. Confident site localization was considered if the difference between the best and second best Mascot ion score was ≥ 10 for alternative modification sites on an otherwise identical peptide-spectrum match. For ion library generation, raw (*.wiff) files from 8 MIBs-enriched DDA runs in addition to 15 SCX fraction DDA runs were combined and processed using ProteinPilot (v5.0, AB Sciex). Trypsin and iodoacetamide were specified for digestion and cysteine alkylation, respectively. A thorough ID search effort with a biological modification ID focus were specified and searched against the C. reinhardtii Phytozome v11 database concatenated with NCBI chloroplast andmitochondria entries mentioned above. Following database searching, the resulting file (*.group) was imported into PeakView (v.2.1, AB Sciex) for SWATH data analysis. Raw (*.swath) files were imported into PeakView for quantitative review of MS/MS spectra and alignment to ion library allowing for 6 peptides per protein and 6 transitions per peptide. Peptide confidence threshold was set to 95 with an FDR threshold of < 1%. XIC extraction window was opened to 10 minutes with 20 ppm mass tolerance. Following retention time calibration in the PeakView software and processing, an Excel workbook file was exported and filteredfor a confidence cutoff score > 1.3 (95% confidence). Logarithm base 2 transformation and data normalization by the central tendency approach was performed using the R package Inferno and data analysis was performed with the Python and R programming languages.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of dynamic protein phosphorylation events is critical for understanding kinase/phosphatase-regulated signaling pathways. To date, protein phosphorylation and kinase expression have been examined independently in photosynthetic organisms. Here we present a method to study the global kinome and phosphoproteome in tandem in a model photosynthetic organism, the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Chlamydomonas), using mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. A dual enrichment strategy targets intact protein kinases via capture on immobilized multiplexed inhibitor beads with subsequent proteolytic digestion of unbound proteins and peptide-based phosphorylation enrichment. To increase depth of coverage, both data-dependent and data-independent (via SWATH, Sequential Windowed Acquisition of All Theoretical Fragment Ion Mass Spectra) mass spectrometric acquisitions were performed to obtain a more than 50% increase in coverage of the enriched Chlamydomonas kinome over coverage found with no enrichment. The quantitative phosphoproteomic dataset yielded 2250 phosphopeptides and 1314 localized phosphosites with excellent reproducibility across biological replicates (90% of quantified sites with coefficient of variation below 11%). This approach enables simultaneous investigation of kinases and phosphorylation events at the global level to facilitate understanding of kinase networks and their influence in cell signaling events.

### Keywords
Kinome, Phosphoproteomics, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Quantitative label-free proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
Graduate Research Assistant

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


