### Accession
PXD026461

### Title
Transcriptomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic underpinnings of daily exercise performance and Zeitgeber activity of endurance training in mouse skeletal muscle

### Description
Timed physical activity might potentiate the health benefits of training. The underlying signaling events triggered by exercise at different times of the day are, however, poorly understood. Here, we found that time-dependent variations in maximal treadmill exercise capacity of naïve mice were associated with energy stores, mostly hepatic glycogen levels. Importantly, running at different times of the day resulted in a vastly different activation of signaling pathways, e.g., related to stress response, vesicular trafficking, repair, and regeneration. Second, voluntary wheel running at the opposite phase of the dark, feeding period surprisingly revealed minimal Zeitgeber (i.e., synchronizing) activity of training. This integrated study provides important insights into the circadian regulation of endurance performance and the control of the circadian clock by exercise. In future studies, these results could contribute to better understand circadian aspects of training design in athletes and the application of chrono-exercise-based interventions in patients.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteome analysis Tissue was lysed in 8M Urea, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, phosphatase inhibitors by sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off) and proteins were subjected to tryptic digest. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform as recently described [89]. Unmodified peptides were subsequently used for TMT analysis. Phospho-enriched peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 or an EASY-nLC 1200, respectively and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm or 75μm × 36cm, respectively) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in DDA mode with a total cycle time of approximately 1 s. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 45 seconds. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, maximum accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 1e6 and 5e4, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 2.5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD with collision energy set to 30%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.  TMT analysis Tryptic peptides were labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT10plex or TMTpro 16plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For TMTpro 16plex analysis, 4 peptide samples were prepared from C2C12 cells, TMT labelled and included in the analysis to boost protein coverage.  TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 or an EASY-nLC 1200, respectively and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm or 75μm × 36cm, respectively) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The Q Exactive HF was operated in DDA mode with a total cycle time of approximately 1 s. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, maximum accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 30%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.1 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 1e6 and 1e5, respectively. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD with collision energy set to 38%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteome analysis The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a murine database (consisting of 34026 forward and reverse protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot on 20190129) and 392 commonly observed contaminants using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Exported peptide intensities were normalized based on the protein regulations observed in the corresponding TMT experiments in order to account for changes in protein abundance. Only peptides corresponding to proteins, which were regulated significantly with a p value ≤ 5% in the TMT analysis were normalized. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2 [88], https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html).  TMT analysis The acquired raw-files were analyzed using the SpectroMine software (Biognosis AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). Spectra were searched against a murine database consisting of 17013 protein sequences (downloaded from Uniprot on 20190307) and 392 commonly observed contaminants. Standard Pulsar search settings for TMT10plex (“TMT10plex Quantification”) and TMTpro 16plex (“TMTpro Quantification”) were used and resulting identifications and corresponding quantitative values were exported on the PSM level using the “Export Report” function. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statistical analysis using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script v2.3.2 [88]. This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exercise; skeletal muscle; transcriptomics; proteomics; metabolism; energy homeostasis; circadian clock; zeitgeber

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility 
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Klingelbergstrasse 50/70
CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland
Dr. Alexander Schmidt Proteomics Core Facility  Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland

### Submitter
Danilo Ritz

### Lab Head
Dr alexander schmidt
Dr. Alexander Schmidt Proteomics Core Facility  Biozentrum, University of Basel Klingelbergstrasse 50/70 CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland


