### Accession
PXD005364

### Title
Improved MS-based proteomics by the reduction of isotopic composition in vivo

### Description
Reducing the isotopic composition of proteins in vivo improves in-depth, high resolution MS-based quantitative proteomics. We used U-[12C]-glucose as the metabolic precursor of all amino acids in yeast. This substantially increased the peptide monoisotopic ion intensity in bottom-up analyses, greatly improving identification scores and protein sequence coverage, and making it possible to address the dynamics of protein turnover at the proteome scale.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and growth conditions The C. albicans strain SC5314 1 was grown on a defined synthetic medium (Yeast Nitrogen Base) with glucose (0.5% w/v) as the sole carbon source. We cultured the cells using either regular glucose (N-G), or glucose containing only 12C carbon atoms (U-[12C]-glucose, Euriso-Top, Saint-Aubin, France; filter sterilized), (12C-G). The carbon isotopic composition of N-G is 98.93% 12C, 1.07% 13C. Cell cultures (100 ml) were inoculated at an initial OD600 of 0.1 with liquid pre-cultures (10 ml of the same medium inoculated with freshly grown colonies on YPD agar plates) and incubated in an orbital shaker at 30°C. For the labeling experiments, the cells grown in YNG-N-G medium were collected in the mid-exponential phase of growth (OD600 of 2) by centrifugation (3 min at 3000 x g) and transferred to fresh YNB medium containing 0.5% 12C-G. When a chemical treatment was applied to the cells, the cultures were exposed to the drug for 3 min before the centrifugation step, and then suspended in fresh medium containing the same final concentration of the drug (1 mM PMSF, 10 µM MG132, both from 1000x stock solutions in DMSO), in an equal volume of DMSO (0.1% v/v final concentration). For time-course experiments, the cells were collected by centrifugation (3 min at 3000 x g) at 15, 30, 60, 120, and 240 min from cultures with a characteristic doubling time of 2.85 (control), 2.75 (MG132), and 4.33 h, (PMSF) (n = 3). The cell pellets were immediately frozen and stored at -80°C until processed for protein extraction using the Yeast Protein Extraction Kit (Expedeon) and further proteomic analysis. C. albicans grew as a budding-yeast under the conditions tested. Crude lysates were digested by trypsin according to the FASP protocol (Expedeon).  LC-MS/MS acquisition. We analyzed 2 µg of protein digests from crude samples from the various cell culture conditions in triplicate using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography using the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 127 min, followed by column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2.5 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 2x105. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the ion trap in top-speed mode, with a total cycle of 3 s, an AGC target of 5x104, a dynamic exclusion of 50 s, and an exclusion duration of 60 s. Precursor priority was given to the most intense peptides. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 250 ms for MS acquisition and 30 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS data for protein samples were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) and the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The following variable modifications (2 maximum per peptide) were allowed: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (ST), Gly-Gly (K), Leu-Arg-Gly-Gly (K), and carbamidomethylation (C). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two. MS/MS data were used to search an extraction of the diploid C. albicans ORF database (C_albicans_SC5314_A22_current_orf_trans_all.fasta, 12,277 entries, 03-27-2016) retrieved from the Candida Genome Database website 2 (http://www.candidagenome.org/). Our database contained all the protein sequences from one allele (arbitrary chosen as allele A; 6,209 entries), those encoded by mitochondrial DNA (17 entries), and pseudo-sequences of proteins obtained for all polymorphic alleles by aggregating the tryptic peptides computed to be specific for the second allele (allele B, 3,236 entries). We deposited the resulting database (9,462 entries) in the Pride repository. Quantitative analysis of proteins and peptides from the different datasets in label-free experiments. Peptide abundances obtained for the 240 min time point were normalized using Progenesis software. The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. Normalized abundances of proteins with similar normalized abundance variations (ANOVA p-value < 0.05) were classified together by the AutoClass Bayesian clustering system (webserver Autoclass@IJM, http://ytat2.ijm.univ-paris-diderot.priv/) 3 and visualized using Javatreeview (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net/). Between-subject analyses were carried out on the various datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Many quantitative proteomics strategies rely on <i>in vivo</i> metabolic incorporation of amino acids with modified stable isotope profiles into proteins. These methods give rise to multiple ions for each peptide, with possible distortion of the isotopolog distribution, making the overall analytical process complex. We validated an alternative strategy, simple light isotope metabolic labeling (SLIM-labeling), which alleviates many of these problems. SLIM-labeling is based on the <i>in vivo</i> reduction of the isotopic composition of proteins using metabolic precursors with a unique light isotope composition to label all amino acids. This brings a new dimension to in-depth, high resolution MS-based quantitative proteomics. Here, we describe a <sup>12</sup>C-based SLIM-labeling strategy using U-[<sup>12</sup>C]-glucose as the metabolic precursor of all amino acids in the pathogenic yeast <i>Candida albicans</i> Monoisotopic ion intensity increased exponentially following <sup>12</sup>C enrichment, substantially improving peptide identification scores and protein sequence coverage in bottom-up analyses. Multiplexing samples of <sup>12</sup>C composition varying from natural abundance (98.93%) to 100% makes it possible to address relative quantification issues, keeping all the critical information for each peptide within a single isotopolog cluster. We applied this method to measure, for the first time, protein turnover at the proteome scale in <i>Candida albicans</i> and its modulation by inhibitors of the proteasome and vacuolar protein degradation systems.

### Keywords
Protein half-life, Candida albicans, Bottom-up ms-based proteomics, [u-12c]-carbon source

### Affiliations
"Mitochondria, Metals and Oxidative Stress" group leader Head "Mass Spectrometry Lab and Proteomics core Facility" Jacques Monod Institute UMR7592 CNRS - Paris Diderot University 15 rue Hélène Brion 75205 Paris Cedex 13, FRANCE tel : 33(1)57278029
Institut Jacques Monod

### Submitter
Thibaut Léger

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
"Mitochondria, Metals and Oxidative Stress" group leader Head "Mass Spectrometry Lab and Proteomics core Facility" Jacques Monod Institute UMR7592 CNRS - Paris Diderot University 15 rue Hélène Brion 75205 Paris Cedex 13, FRANCE tel : 33(1)57278029


