### Accession
PXD024343

### Title
Coiled-Coil Domain-Containing 68 Downregulation Promotes Colorectal Cancer Cell Growth by Inhibiting ITCH-Mediated CDK4 Degradation

### Description
Coiled-coil domain-containing 68 (CCDC68) plays different roles in cancer and is predicted as a tumor suppressor in human colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the specific role of CCDC68 in CRC and the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we showed that CCDC68 expression was lower in CRC than in corresponding normal tissues, and CCDC68 level was positively correlated with disease-free survival. Ectopic expression of CCDC68 decreased CRC cell proliferation in vitro and suppressed the growth of CRC xenograft tumors in vivo. CCDC68 caused G0/G1 cell cycle arrest, downregulated CDK4, and upregulated ITCH, the E3 ubiquitin ligase responsible for CDK4 protein degradation. This increased CDK4 degradation, which decreased CDK4 protein levels and inhibited CRC tumor growth. Collectively, the present results identify a novel CDK4 regulatory axis consisting of CCDC68 and ITCH, which suggest that CCDC68 is a promising target for the treatment of CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Open the Constant temperature water bath pot in advance, set the temperature to 42 ℃, and take out the complete medium stored at 4 ℃ based on rewarming at room temperature. The frozen HCT116 (Vector) and HCT116 (HA-CCDC68) stable cell lines were quickly removed from the refrigerator at-80 ℃ and rapidly shaken and melted in a water bath at 42 ℃. Add 1mL complete medium, 1400rpm, centrifuge 5min to the cryopreservation tube in the super clean worktable. Discard the supernatant, add 1mL PBS resuspension cells, 1400rpm, centrifuge for 5 minutes; discard the supernatant, add 1mL medium resuspension cells, spread them into the culture plate, gently cross the culture plate to make the cells distribute evenly, put the culture plate into 5% CO2 incubator at 37 ℃ for culture.  After 6-8 hours, the cells were observed under microscope. After the cells adhered to the wall, the fresh medium was changed and cultured in the 5% CO2 incubator at 37 ℃.3-5 generations were cultured, and the follow-up experiments were carried out when the cells were in the best state. When the cell density reaches 80% to 90% and in good condition, the cell passage is carried out: remove the old culture medium, wash the cells with PBS, and remove the residual culture medium. The cells were digested by 0.25% trypsin in the culture plate, and the cell digestion was observed under light microscope. When most of the cells became small and round and separated into single cells, the medium was added to stop digestion, and the cells were collected into the EP tube, 1400rpm, centrifuged for 5min; the supernatant was discarded, 1ml PBS resuspension cells were added, 1400rpm, centrifuged for 5min; the supernatant was discarded, and proper amount of culture medium was added to resuscitate cells for cell count. According to the experimental arrangement, the same amount of cell suspension of the control group and the experimental group was inoculated in a petri dish and cultured in a 5%CO2 incubator at 37 ℃.After adherence, the cells were synchronized for 12 h by exposure to 0.1% FBS medium and then cultured in complete medium for 12 h . The cells were collected when the cell density reached 80-90% after being cultured in complete medium for 12 hours. After washing the cells with PBS for 3 times, scrape the cells into the centrifuge tube, centrifuge at 4 degrees 1000g for 5 minutes, and remove the supernatant (clean as far as possible, no residual liquid); seal the tube with sealing film and send it on dry ice.

### Data Protocol
Analysis by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The peptides were separated by an ultra-high performance liquid phase system and they were injected into an NSI ion source for ionization and analysed by Orbitrap Lumos™ 480mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set to 2.3 kV, the FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) was set to -45 V, -65 V, and the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of the primary mass spectrum is set to 400-1200 m/z, and the scanning resolution is set to 60000; the fixed starting point of the scanning range of the secondary mass spectrum is 110 m/z, the secondary scanning resolution is set to 15000, and the TurboTMT is set to None. The data acquisition mode uses the data-dependent scanning (DDA) program, that is, after the first scan, the first 25 peptide precursor ions with the highest signal intensity are selected to enter the HCD collision cell and use 27 fragmentation energy for fragmentation. Mass Spectrometry. In order to improve the effective utilization of mass spectrometry, the automatic gain control (AGC) is set to 100%, the signal threshold is set to 5E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time is set to 50 ms, and the dynamic rejection time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan is set to 20 s to avoid precursor ions Repeated scans. Database retrieval The secondary mass spectrometry data were retrieved using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15). Search parameter setting: the database is Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta (20366 sequences), an anti-library is added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR), caused by random matching, and a common contamination library is added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results; the method of enzyme digestion is set to Trypsin (Full)； the number of missing sites is set to 2, and the minimum length of peptide segment is set to 6 amino acid residues；the maximum modification number of the peptide was set to 3； the mass error tolerance of the primary parent ion was set to 10 ppm, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ion was 0.02 Da. Set Carbamidomethyl (C) to fixed modifier, Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), Acetyl (N-terminus), and Met-loss (M), Met-loss+acetyl (M) to variable modifier. The FDR of protein, peptide and PSM were all set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell proliferation, Itch, Cdk4 degradation, Ccdc68, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Wenzhou Medical University
Wenzhou Medical University (Zhejiang, China)

### Submitter
wangcong wangcong

### Lab Head
Dr Cong Wang
Wenzhou Medical University (Zhejiang, China)


