### Accession
PXD027121

### Title
In vivo structure-function analysis and redox interactomes of Leishmania tarentolae Erv

### Description
Import and oxidative folding of proteins in the mitochondrial intermembrane space differ among eukaryotic lineages. While opisthokonts such as yeast rely on the receptor and oxidoreductase Mia40 in combination with the Mia40:cytochrome c oxidoreductase Erv, kinetoplastid parasites and other excavates lack Mia40 but have a functional Erv homologue. Whether excavate Erv homologues rely on a Mia40 replacement or directly interact with imported protein substrates remains controversial. Here we used the CRISPR-Cas9 system to generate a set of homozygous tagged and untagged point and deletion mutants of LTERV from the kinetoplastid model parasite Leishmania tarentolae. Modifications of the shuttle cysteine motif of LtErv were lethal, whereas replacement of clamp residue Cys17 or removal of the kinetoplastida-specific second (KISS) domain had no impact on parasite viability under standard growth conditions. However, removal of the KISS domain rendered parasites sensitive to heat stress and led to the accumulation of homodimeric and mixed LtErv disulfides. We therefore determined and compared the redox interactomes of tagged wild-type LtErv and LtErvΔKISS using SILAC and quantitative mass spectrometry. While the Mia40-replacement candidate Mic20 and all but one typical substrates with twin Cx3C- or twin Cx9C-motifs were absent in both redox interactomes, we identified a small set of alternative interaction candidates with potential redox-active cysteine residues. In summary, our study reveals parasite-specific intracellular structure-function relationships and redox interactomes of LtErv with implications for current hypotheses on mitochondrial protein import in non-opisthokonts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on SDS-PAGE gels and allowed to migrate approximately 8 mm into the separating gel. Protein bands were cut out, followed by tryptic in-gel protein digestion and peptide desalting as described in Veyel et al.. Peptides were resuspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid just before the LC-MS/MS run. The LC-MS/MS system (Eksigent nanoLC 425 coupled to a TripleTOF 6600, ABSciex) was operated as described in Hammel et al.. Quantitative analysis of mass spectrometry measurements was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1. Peptide spectrum matching was performed by constructing a spectral library based on release 42 of the TriTrypDB L. tarentolae Parrot Tar II proteome. The peptide library was generated considering methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-termini and cysteine alkylation as variable modifications. To identify proteins of cells that were grown in heavy media, the search space was augmented by sequences containing [13C]6-L-arginine and [13C]6-L-lysine. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were set to 0.01. Besides quantification based on labelled peptides, proteins were also quantified using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm .

### Data Protocol
A protein was not considered a putative interaction partner of LtErv, if it contained peptides that mapped to a putative contaminant, a decoy protein or, if it was quantified in less than 3 replicates. After log-transforming the L/H ratios of the remaining set of proteins, we computed the mean  and the 95% confidence interval using all replicates. Subsequently, we fitted a gaussian with mean Gm and standard deviation Gs to the distribution of the means. As most of the proteins are not interacting specifically, the distribution was observed to center around Gm~0. A protein was considered an interaction partner  if the computed 95% confidence interval exceeded Tukey’s outlier criterion given by Gm +/- (1,96 * Gs). The LtEr-His8 vs. LtErvKISS-His8¬ ratio was computed based on a set of peptides shared by both isoforms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania tarentolae, Proteomics, Ip, Silac

### Affiliations
Biochemistry, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
TU KL - CSB

### Submitter
David Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Deponte
Biochemistry, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany


