### Accession
PXD022028

### Title
Host cholesterol modulates the generation and enrichment of persister population during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

### Description
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) confer diversity to regulatory mechanisms that control various cellular pathways. Two of the most extensively studied PTMs are phosphorylation and acetylation. Together, they are known to regulate the stability and activity of proteins in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Lysine acetylation is known to regulate various cellular pathways conserved across species including mycobacteria. In order to confirm the cholesterol mediated deacetylation of anti-toxin in Mycobacteria, we did mass spectrometry of BCG strain overexpressing the toxin (vapC12)–antitoxin (vapB12)-His(6X) locus grown in glycerol and cholesterol media.

### Sample Protocol
BCG strain overexpressing the toxin (vapC12)–antitoxin (vapB12)-His(6X) locus was used for sample preparation. Log phase culture of the overexpressed strain was washed with PBS and inoculated in minimal media with 0.1% glycerol and minimal media with 0.01% cholesterol. The cultures were allowed to grow for 48 hrs and cell lysate was prepared. Immunoprecipitation was performed using an anti-His antibody (BTL1010, Biospecs). In-solution digestion was carried out for 10 µg of proteins from each condition. The samples were subjected to reduction and alkylation using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (60°C for 45 minutes) and alkylation using 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA). Trypsin (Gold mass- spectrometry trypsin; Promega, Madison, WI) digestion was carried out at 37°C for 10-12 hrs. The peptides were vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files were searched in Protein Pilot software v. 5.0.1 (SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm for relative protein quantification and identification. For Paragon searches, the following settings were used: Sample type: iTRAQ 4 plex (peptide labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Amit Pandey
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute


