### Accession
PXD025926

### Title
Non-Refoldability is Pervasive Across the E. coli Proteome

### Description
Decades of protein folding research have focused on a small, privileged subset of proteins that can reversibly refold upon denaturation. However, these proteins are not necessarily representative of the complexity of natural proteomes, which consist of many proteins with more sophisticated architectures. Here, we introduce an experimental approach to probe the refolding of whole proteomes. To accomplish this, we first unfold and refold E. coli lysates, and then interrogate the resulting protein structures usin a permissive enzyme that preferentially cleaves at more flexible regions. Using mass spectrometry, we analyze the digestion patterns to globally assess structural differences between native and “refolded” proteins. These studies reveal that many soluble proteins are incapable of navigating back to their native structures upon chemical denaturation, highlighting the role of exogenous factors and processes such as molecular chaperones or co-translational folding for efficient protein folding.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli cells, strain K12 were grown in MOPs EZ Rich Defined Media to exponential phase before harvesting by centrifugation. Pelleted cells were then resuspended in native buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.2, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2), flash frozen, cryogenically pulverized with a freezer miller (SPEX Sample Prep), thawed at room temperature, and clarified. To deplete ribosomal proteins, clarified lysates were ultracentrifuged without any sucrose cushion.   Bicinchoninic acid assay (Rapid Gold BCA Assay, Pierce) was used to determine protein concentration and the clarified cellular lysates were normalized to a protein concentration of 3.3 mg mL-1.  The native samples (N) were prepared by diluting lysates with native dilution buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.2, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 130 mM GdmCl, and 1.08 mM DTT) to a final protein concentration of 0.23 mg mL-1 and incubated for 1 hr before being subjected to limited proteolysis. The unfolded sample was prepared by adding protein lysate, solid GdmCl and DTT to a fresh 1.5 mL microfuge tube and then removing the solvent using a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf) such that the final concentrations of all components were: 11.6 mg mL-1 protein, 6M GdmCl, 10 mM DTT. Denatured samples were left to unfold at room temperature O/N prior to refolding. To refold unfolded lysates, the unfolded lysates were rapidly diluted 50× with refolding dilution buffer (19 mM Tris pH 8.2, 95 mM NaCl, 1.9 mM MgCl2, 0.82 mM DTT) to a final protein concentration of 0.23 mg mL-1. Refolded samples were incubated at room temperature for different durations (1 m, 5 m, 120 m, or overnight) to allow for proteins to refold before limited proteolysis.   Limited proteolysis was performed by incubating native or refolded lysates with PK (enzyme : substrate ratio is 1:100 on a weight basis) for exactly 1 minute at 25 ˚C  before transferring to a mineral oil bath preequilibrated at 100˚C to quench PK activity. Samples were then prepared for mass spectrometry by incubating with DTT and IAA before digesting overnight with trypsin (enzyme : substrate ratio 1:50).  Peptides were then desalted with Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridges (Waters) over a vacuum manifold and dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Vacufuge). Dried peptides were stored at -80°C until analysis. For analysis, samples were vigorously resuspended in 0.1% FA / 2% ACN in Optima water (ThermoFisher) to a final concentration of 1 mg mL-1. Chromatographic separation of digests were carried out on a Thermo UltiMate3000 UHPLC system with an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, C18, 75 μm Å~ 25 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å column. The column was then cleaned with a saw-tooth gradient to purge residual peptides between runs in a sequence. A Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used to analyze protein digests.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer Software Suite (v2.4, Thermo Fisher) and the Minora Algorithm were used to analyze mass spectra and perform Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of detected peptides. The data were searched against Escherichia coli (UP000000625, Uniprot) reference proteome database. For peptide identification, the Proteome Discoverer Sequest HT node was using a semi-tryptic search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein refolding, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry Department, Fried Lab, USA

### Submitter
Stephen Fried

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Fried
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry Department, Fried Lab, USA


