### Accession
PXD036224

### Title
AP-PROTAC-2: a Photoswitchable multi-kinase PROTAC

### Description
Light-activable spatiotemporal control of PROTAC-induced protein degradation was achieved with novel arylazopyrazole photoswitchable PROTACs (AP-PROTACs). The use of a promiscuous kinase inhibitor in the design enables this unique photoswitchable PROTAC to selectively degrade four protein kinases together with on/off optical control using different wavelengths of light.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatment MDA-MB-231 cells were obtained from the Francis Crick Institute cell banking. Cells were cultured in low-glucose Dulbecco's Modified Medium (DMEM, Sigma, D6046) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and grown in a humidified incubator at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were plated at 3 × 105 cells per well in a 6-well plate, allowed to adhere for 24 h before being treated with the indicated compounds and time, with 1 min irradiation of the cell flask at either 365 nm or 457 nm using LED light every 2 to 3 hours. Cell Lysis After cell treatment, cells were washed twice with PBS and collected into eppendorf. Cells were lysed by the addition of the respective cold lysis buffer and then left on ice for 30 min. The collected suspensions were centrifuged for 10 min at 17,000 g, 4 °C, and then the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration of each sample was determined using the DCTM Protein assay kit (BIO-RAD) with a bovine serum albumin standard curve in lysis buffer and normalized. The lysates were used in the subsequent immunoblotting, and proteomics sample preparation steps, or stored at −80 °C. MDA-MD-231 cells were lysed with PBS lysis buffer (1% Triton-X, 0.1% SDS, 1xPBS in Milli-Q purified water, pH 7.4) with protease inhibitor (cOmplete, EDTA-free) added fresh.  Proteomics Sample Preparation The lysates of treated cells (100 μg, 100 μL) were reduced and alkylated by the addition of TCEP (5 mM final concentration) and CAA (15 mM final concentration) for 45 min at RT under vigorous shaking. Proteins were precipitated by adding 2 sample volumes of methanol, 0.5 volume of chloroform and 1 volume of purified water. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged at 6,000 rpm for 2 min resulting in pellets of precipitated proteins. The pellets were washed with 3 sample volumes of methanol by vortexing and sonicating and then centrifuged at 8,000 rpm for 4 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the washing procedure was repeated an additional four times. The protein precipitate was airdried for 5 min and redissolved in 100 μL of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 using sonication and vortexing. The protein solution was digested with trypsin protease (0.4 μg, 1:250 to protein, Pierce™ 90057) and incubated overnight in a thermoshaker with 800 rpm shaking at 37 °C. Trypsin digestion was quenched with the addition of 0.5% TFA. Peptide quantification assay (Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay) was performed. The same volume of peptide digest from each condition was aliquoted and dried with a SpeedVac Vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide samples were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex ref 90110, Thermo Scientific) for 2 h at rt. The TMT labelling reaction was quenched with the addition of 5% hydroxylamine and the samples were vortexed for 5 min and centrifuged at 8,000 rpm for 4 min at rt. An equal volume of supernatant from each condition was combined into a single Eppendorf. The combined peptides were fractionated (Pierce high pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit) into 8 fractions and dried with a SpeedVac Vacuum concentrator. The dried fractions were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid in water to about 1 μg/μL.

### Data Protocol
Prepared peptide sample fractions were run using a Thermofisher Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS equipped with a Thermo EASY-SPRAY column as described previously. The data obtained were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0, where peptides from the MS/MS spectra were searched in the human proteome database (UniProt accessed January 2021) and identified. The data were further analysed with Perseus 1.6.15.0, Microsoft Office Excel 365, and GraphPad Prism 9. A minimum of 2 unique peptides were selected for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Light-activable spatiotemporal control of PROTAC-induced protein degradation was achieved with novel arylazopyrazole photoswitchable PROTACs (AP-PROTACs). The use of a promiscuous kinase inhibitor in the design enables this unique photoswitchable PROTAC to selectively degrade four protein kinases together with on/off optical control using different wavelengths of light.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Protac

### Affiliations
Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Qisi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London W12 0BZ, United Kingdom


