### Accession
PXD015607

### Title
Pericardial fluid proteome profile in aortic stenosis patients with complete or incomplete reverse remodeling

### Description
Patients with aortic stenosis are often indicated to aortic valve replacement to relief pressure overload. After surgery, patients experience a myocardial response commonly known as reverse remodeling, where structural and functional recovery are expected. Notwithstanding, some patients exhibit an incomplete response, whose biological mechanisms remain poorly understood. The pericardial fluid can be safely collected during valve replacement and its proteome composition reflects heart’s pathophysiological status. Taking this into account, we characterized pericardial fluid proteome of patients with complete and incomplete reverse remodeling following a shotgun LC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Q Exactive HF MS) approach. We aimed to improve the current understanding of the mechanisms underlying an incomplete reverse remodeling and to pinpoint surrogate prognostic markers for this condition. In the future, this data can be important to develop tools for early prognosis of incomplete reverse remodeling and to adjust medical/pharmacological therapies to maximize recovery.

### Sample Protocol
40 samples were collected from patients during heart surgery. PF was centrifuged at 5000 rpm, 4°C for 15 min and the supernatant stored at -80°C until further processing. Protein quantification was estimated with BioRad’s DC kit. Samples were fractionated using NPs@EDTA, as previously described (PXD008620; PMID: 28951296; protein/NPs ratio 3:1 m/m). 6 samples from coronary artery disease patients (controls) and 13 samples from aortic stenosis patients (complete reverse remodeling, n=5; incomplete reverse remodeling, n=8) were analyzed individually and a pool of the 40 samples was processed in parallel. The beads-bound fraction of each sample and the pool was loaded onto 12% gels and separated under reducing and denaturant conditions. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue G250 and distained. In-gel digestion and peptide clean-up: Gel were cut in pieces and washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile (ACN). Proteins were reduced by incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, 60 °C), alkylated in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, RT) and washed again. Digestion was carried out overnight with trypsin (37°C, 4 µg trypsin/sample). Peptides were extracted with 10% formic acid (FA), followed by a 1:1 mixture with ACN and ACN 90% and vacuum-dried. For sample clean-up, peptides mixture was resuspended in 2% ACN and 1% formic acid and purified using C18 OMIX tips Spin Columns (Agilent).  Protein identification: The peptide mixtures were re-suspended in 20 µL loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile, 2/98 (v/v)). 10 µL of the peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC−MS/MS system on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and after flushing from the trapping column, peptides were loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) using a non-linear 150 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). Column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 2.8 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target  3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms) acquired at a resolution of  60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 80 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under fill ratio 1%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, singly charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 28% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of March 2018, www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fix modification. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides), acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine.  We allowed for matching between runs using a 0.7 min match time window and a 20 min alignment time window. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common arrhythmia with adverse clinical outcomes. Pericardial fluid (PF) mirrors the heart's pathophysiological status due to its proximity. This study aimed to characterise the PF proteome to identify new biomarkers of disease. Eighty-three patients submitted to aortic valve replacement surgery with severe aortic stenosis were selected, and their baseline echocardiographic and clinical variables were documented. Thirteen samples were selected blindly for proteome characterisation following a shotgun (GeLC-MS/MS) and a label-free quantification approach (LFQ). According to previous AF history, a partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was conducted, and the top 15 variables important in projection were identified. To inquire potential biomarkers, ROC curves were designed using LFQ data. Target proteins were further validated by ELISA, in both pericardial fluid and serum. Proteome analysis uncovered nine proteins up- and downregulated &#x2265;2-fold. Annexin A1, annexin A2, and vimentin were among the top 15 most important variables for group discrimination in PLS-DA. Protein-protein interaction and gene ontology enrichment analysis presented functional interaction among identified proteins, which were all part of focal adhesion sites. Annexin A1 was increased in the pericardial fluid of AF patients but not in serum when quantified by ELISA. Annexin A1 is a novel pericardial fluid biomarker of AF in patients with severe aortic stenosis.

### Keywords
Human, Aortic stenosis, Pericardial fluid, Coronary artery disease, Reverse remodeling

### Affiliations
iBiMED, University of Aveiro; UnIC, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto
iBiMED – Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; UnIC – Unidade de Investigação Cardiovascular, Departamento de Cirurgia e Fisiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Fábio Trindade

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Vitorino
iBiMED – Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal; UnIC – Unidade de Investigação Cardiovascular, Departamento de Cirurgia e Fisiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal


