### Accession
PXD005541

### Title
Draft of the mitochondrial landscape

### Description
The mitochondrial subcompartment proteomes revealed by quantitative MS.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast were grown on SILAC media (heavy Arg10, Lys8 / light. Mitochondria were purified according to Sickmann et al, PNAS 2003. Highly purified mitochondria (heavy and light) were aliquoted and subjected to both (a) Sonication and (b) carbonate extraction. After both procedures supernatants (SN) and pellets obtained after centrifugation SILAC samples were pooled for quantitative proteomics, comparing (i) SN_sonication vs. Pellet_sonication, and (ii) SN_carbonate vs. Pellet_carbonate. Therefore, pooled samples (8 H/L pools in total) were fractionated using SCX, and fractions analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite, using iontrap CID. In addition proteomes of yeast and purified yeast mitochondria were fractionated using high pH RP, and fractions analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
SILAC samples were individually analyzed using MaxQuant and the SGD database, generating 8 quantitative datasets. Data were merged and only for proteins quantified with at least 2 unique peptides, average SILAC ratios for Sonication SN/pellet and Carbonate SN/Pellet were determined. These ratios allowed distinguishing whether proteins are (a) soluble, (b) peripheral or (c) integral membrane proteins, as a first step of the mitochondrial landscape. In addition, yeast and mitochondria raw data were searched using SearchGUI and PeptideShaker to calculate NSAF values per protein and sample. These NSAF values were used to distinguish whether potentially new mitochondrial proteins identified in the SILAC experiments are more likely to be contaminations, in case that NSAF values showed a relative enrichment of the proteins in yeast as compared to purified mitochondria.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial proteome comprises ~1000 (yeast)-1500 (human) different proteins, which are distributed into four different subcompartments. The sublocalization of these proteins within the organelle in most cases remains poorly defined. Here we describe an integrated approach combining stable isotope labeling, various protein enrichment and extraction strategies and quantitative mass spectrometry to produce a quantitative map of submitochondrial protein distribution in S. cerevisiae. This quantitative landscape enables a proteome-wide classification of 986 proteins into soluble, peripheral, and integral mitochondrial membrane proteins, and the assignment of 818 proteins into the four subcompartments: outer membrane, inner membrane, intermembrane space, or matrix. We also identified 206 proteins that were not previously annotated as localized to mitochondria. Furthermore, the protease Prd1, misannotated as intermembrane space protein, could be re-assigned and characterized as a presequence peptide degrading enzyme in the matrix.Protein localization plays an important role in the regulation of cellular physiology. Here the authors use an integrated proteomics approach to localize proteins to the mitochondria and provide a detailed map of their specific localization within the organelle.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Subcompartments

### Affiliations
Protein Dynamics ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr René Zahedi
Protein Dynamics ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany


