### Accession
PXD017081

### Title
Large-scale discovery of non-canonical peptides in monocot and dicot plants through an integrated peptidogenomic pipelineLarge-scale discovery of non-canonical peptides in monocot and dicot plants through an integrated peptidogenomic pipeline

### Description
Non-canonical peptides (NCPs) have been shown to play critical roles in fundamental biological processes. Despite their importance, NCPs have been rarely identified and characterized in plants. Here we developed an integrated peptidogenomic pipeline using high-throughput mass spectra to probe customized six-frame translation database and for the first time applied this pipeline to large-scale identification of NCPs in both monocot and dicot plants. Altogether, 1,993 and 1,860 NCPs were unambiguously identified in maize and Arabidopsis, respectively. The NCPs showed distinct characteristics compared to canonical peptides and can be derived from introns, 3’UTRs, 5’UTRs, junctions and intergenic regions. These results revealed that non-canonical translation or cryptic translation events occur more universally than previously thought. In addition, maize NCPs were found enriched within the regions associated with phenotypic variation or regions under domestication selection, indicating their potential function in plant genetic regulations of complex traits and evolution. Summarily, this study provides the first unbiased and global view of plant NCPs. The identification of large-scale NCPs in both monocot and dicot plants reveals that a much larger portion of the plant genome can be translated biologically functional molecules, which has important implications in functional genomic studies. The present study also provides a useful resource for the characterization of more hidden NCPs in other plants.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction Maize and Arabidopsis leaves as described above were quickly grounded in liquid nitrogen, respectively. The powder was firstly heated in the water at 95 °C for 5 min. The samples were then precipitated in 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid/acetone solution at -20 °C for 1 h and the precipitate washed with cold acetone until the supernatant was colorless. The supernatant was discarded, the vacuum-dried precipitate transferred to 1% TFA solution containing plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, America), and incubated for an hour at 4 °C. The fractions were ultrasonicated on ice (40 W, 6 s ultrasonic at a time, every 8 s, and 5 times 6 × 8 s) and then centrifuged at 10,000 ×g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were filtered through 10-kDa molecular weight cut-off centrifuge filters (Millipore, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 Cartridges (Empore, SPE Cartridges C18, 7 mm inner diameter, 3 mL volumes, Sigma). The peptide fractions were vacuum-evaporated using a vacuum centrifugation concentrator, reconstituted in 40 μl of 0.1% TFA solution for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis For endogenous peptide profiling, MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer as described previously (Wang et al., 2019). Five μg of peptide mixture was loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 120 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method by dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The determination of the target value was based on predictive Automatic Gain Control. The dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17, 500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide database construction The complete genome of maize and Arabidopsis were downloaded from the Ensembl Plants (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-41/fasta/zea_mays/dna/; and ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-45/fasta/arabidopsis_thaliana/dna/) in FASTA format. A putative peptide database was derived from the six-frame translation of genomic sequences using EMBOSS:6.6.0. Peptides were terminated whenever a stop codon was encountered. Then the next peptide was started at the next nucleotide following the previous stop codon. Instances of ambiguous nucleotides (represented by 'N' in the genome sequence) were replaced with random nucleotides; other ambiguous characters were also replaced with random nucleotides depending upon their symbol. The genomic coordinates and orientation were recorded for every novel peptide. Resulting amino acid sequences for each chromosome were recorded in a FASTA formatted sequence file. Peptide identification by Mascot The Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) was used to search against both the Ensembl protein for maize (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-41/fasta/zea_mays), and Arabidopsis (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-45/fasta/arabidopsis_thaliana/pep/) and the customized peptidogenomic databases to identify peptides. Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were set to 5 p.p.m and 0.02 Da, respectively. The Mascot score (≥ 25) and false discovery rate (FDR<0.05) were applied to achieve a final peptide for Ensembl protein database. The same Mascot score (≥ 25) was then applied to the peptide list identified with the customized peptidogenomic database as described previously (Laumont et al., 2016). Raw data files were converted to peptide maps comprising m/z values, charge state, retention time and intensity for all detected ions above a threshold of 8,000 counts.

### Publication Abstract
Non-conventional peptides (NCPs), which include small open reading frame-encoded peptides, play critical roles in fundamental biological processes. In this study, we developed an integrated peptidogenomic pipeline using high-throughput mass spectra to probe a customized six-frame translation database and applied it to large-scale identification of NCPs in plants.A total of 1993 and 1860 NCPs were unambiguously identified in maize and Arabidopsis, respectively. These NCPs showed distinct characteristics compared with conventional peptides&#xa0;and were derived from introns, 3' UTRs, 5' UTRs, junctions, and intergenic regions. Furthermore, our results showed that translation events in unannotated transcripts occur&#xa0;more broadly than previously thought. In addition, we found that dozens of maize NCPs are enriched within regions associated with phenotypic variations and domestication selection, indicating that they potentially are involved in genetic regulation&#xa0;of complex traits and domestication in maize. Taken together, our study developed an integrated peptidogenomic pipeline for large-scale identification of NCPs in plants, which would facilitate global characterization of NCPs from other plants. The identification of large-scale NCPs in both monocot (maize) and dicot (Arabidopsis) plants indicates that a large&#xa0;portion of plant genome can be translated into biologically functional molecules, which has important implications for functional genomic studies.

### Keywords
Six-frame translation, Peptidogenomics, Plants, Mass spectrometry, Non-canonical peptides

### Affiliations
Henan agricultural university

### Submitter
Shunxi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Liuji Wu
Henan agricultural university


