### Accession
PXD002811

### Title
Peptide recovery from acid-precipitated sodium deoxycholate pellet

### Description
Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) is MS-compatible ionic detergent which is compatible with in-solution tryptic digestion. SDC is removed from tryptic digested mixtures easily by acid precipitation and it has been demonstrated its capacity to increase trypsin activity. Additionally, and on the contrary to urea, SDC does not generate carbamylation side-products. Here, we report an optimized SDC-based shotgun proteomics sample preparation methods for blood-based protein biomarker research applied to human plasma. We show that an important subset of peptides was co-precipitated with the SDC salts and was recovered by a sequencial extraction of the SDC pellet by re-solubilization and precipitation.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma was diluted 10-fold with 100 mM AA and denatured under reducing conditions using 1% w/v SDC and 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60 °C.  Samples were then alkylated with 20 mM IAA in the dark for 30 min. Prior to tryptic digestion, samples were diluted 2-fold with 100 mM AA, 10 mM DTT and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Proteins were digested enzymatically overnight at 37 °C using sequencing-grade modified trypsin at trypsin-to-substrate ratio 1:50 (w/w). The enzymatic reaction was quenched and, at the same time, SDC was precipitated by addition of FA to a final concentration of 0.5%. The SDC precipitant was pelleted by centrifugation at 12000 × g, for 10 min and the resultant supernatant (S) was collected into a new tube. The SDC pellet was redissolved in 0.5% ammonium hydroxide, precipitated by addition of 0.5% FA and pelleted by centrifugation at 12000 × g, for 10 min. The washing process was repeated twice resulting in two additional supernatants P1 and P2 (in reference to their pellets of origin).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted into mascot generic format files using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The concatenated target-decoy Uniprot human database (downloaded on 29th October 2013, 176946 sequences and 70141034 residues) was used for data search. Database searching and carbamylation analysis were performed using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) with precursor MS and MS/MS tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Deamidation (Asn) and Oxidation (Met) were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The ionic detergent sodium deoxycholate (SDC) is compatible with in-solution tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS-based shotgun proteomics by virtue of being easy to separate from the peptide products via precipitation in acidic buffers. However, it remains unclear whether unique human peptides co-precipitate with SDC during acid treatment of complex biological samples. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that a large quantity of unique peptides in human blood plasma can be co-precipitated with SDC using an optimized sample preparation method prior to shotgun proteomic analysis. We show that the plasma peptides co-precipitated with SDC can be successfully recovered using a sequential re-solubilization and precipitation procedure, and that this approach is particularly efficient at the extraction of long peptides. Recovery of peptides from the SDC pellet dramatically increased overall proteome coverage (&gt;60&#xa0;%), thereby improving the identification of low-abundance proteins and enhancing the identification of protein components of membrane-bound organelles. In addition, when we analyzed the physiochemical properties of the co-precipitated peptides, we observed that SDC-based sample preparation improved the identification of mildly hydrophilic/hydrophobic proteins that would otherwise be lost upon discarding the pellet. These data demonstrate that the optimized SDC protocol is superior to sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)/urea treatment for identifying plasma biomarkers by shotgun proteomics.

### Keywords
Human plasma / mass spectrometry / shotgun proteomics / sodium deoxycholate / trypsin digestion.

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.


