### Accession
PXD027516

### Title
Syntaxin 5 determines Weibel-Palade body size and Von Willebrand factor secretion by controlling Golgi architecture

### Description
Abstract Von Willebrand factor (VWF) is a multimeric hemostatic protein primarily synthesized in endothelial cells (ECs). VWF is stored in endothelial storage organelles, the Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs), whose biogenesis strongly depends on VWF anterograde trafficking and Golgi architecture. Elongated WPB morphology is correlated to longer VWF strings with better adhesive properties. We previously identified the SNARE SEC22B, which is involved in anterograde ER-to-Golgi transport, as a novel regulator of WPB elongation. To elucidate novel determinants of WPB morphology we explored endothelial SEC22B interaction partners in a mass spectrometry-based approach, identifying the Golgi SNARE Syntaxin 5 (STX5). We established STX5 knockdown in ECs using shRNA-dependent silencing and analyzed WPB and Golgi morphology, using confocal and electron microscopy. STX5-depleted ECs exhibited extensive Golgi fragmentation and decreased WPB length, which was associated with reduced intracellular VWF levels, and impaired stimulated VWF secretion. However, the secretion incompetent organelles in shSTX5 cells maintained WPB markers such as Angiopoietin 2, P-selectin, Rab27A, and CD63. Taken together, our study has identified SNARE protein STX5 as a novel regulator of WPB biogenesis

### Sample Protocol
SEC22B interactome HUVECs were seeded in 3 separate wells of 6-well culture plates and lentivirally transduced with mEGFP or mEGFP-SEC22B to enable sample preparation in triplicate for each pulldown condition. After 3 days of confluency, cells were rinsed 2x in PBS and subsequently lysed in mass spectrometry (MS) grade lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40 (v/v)) supplemented with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Lysates were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000g and supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. Cleared lysates were incubated with GFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads or control (CTRL) beads (ChromoTEK)  by rotation for 2 hours at room temperature (RT). For interactome analysis by MS, beads were collected on a magnetic stand and were washed 3 times with wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) supplemented with Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Breda, The Netherlands) and two times with 1 ml PBS. Immunoprecipitated proteins were reduced on-bead in 1 M urea (Life technologies), 10 mM DTT (Thermo Scientific) in 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5 (Life technologies) for 20 min at 20 °C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Life technologies) for 10 min at 20 °C. Proteins were detached from the GFP-nanobody beads by incubation with 250 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega) for 2 h at 20 °C. Beads were removed and proteins were further digested for 16 h at 20 °C with 350 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 5 μl. 3 μl of each sample was injected for MS analysis. Peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 min at 5% buffer B (17–22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5 to 28% (22–80 min) and 28–40% (80–85 min), followed by a 5 min wash to 95% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 240 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1e6 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3e4 and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 1 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software   shSEC22B and shSTX5 whole proteome HUVECs were seeded in 3 separate wells of 6-well plates and lentivirally transduced with shRNAs targeting SEC22B, STX5, or non-targeting control shRNA. Untransduced cells were also included. BOECs  were cultured  in  10  cm  culture  dishes  in  triplicate.  Upon  confluency,  cells were  lysed  and processed  into  tryptic  peptides  using  the  Filter  Aided  Sample  Preparation  method. Peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-27.5% (22-87 min) and 27.5-40% (87-132 min), followed by a 5 minute wash to 95% and a 6 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 240K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4e5 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3e4 and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 using the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2019).  MaxQuant output tables were analyzed using R/Bioconductor  (version 4.1.0/3.13), ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminants’ and ‘only identified by site’ peptides were filtered out and label free quantification values were log2 transformed. Proteins quantified in 2/3 of an experimental group were selected for further analysis. Missing values were imputed by a normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical analyses were performed using moderated t-tests in the LIMMA package .  A Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P value <0.05 and absolute log2 fold change >1 was considered statistically significant and relevant. SNARE-complex annotation were obtained from GO-term ‘SNARE complex’ (GO:0031201). Overrepresentation analyses were performed using clusterprofiler . Protein interactions with STRING-DB combined scores >0.9 were visualized in Cytoscape v3.8.2.

### Publication Abstract
Von Willebrand factor (VWF) is a multimeric hemostatic protein primarily synthesized in endothelial cells. VWF is stored in endothelial storage organelles, the Weibel-Palade bodies (WPB), whose biogenesis strongly depends on VWF anterograde trafficking and Golgi architecture. Elongated WPB morphology is correlated to longer VWF strings with better adhesive properties. We previously identified the SNARE SEC22B, which is involved in anterograde endoplasmic reticulum-to-Golgi transport, as a novel regulator of WPB elongation. To elucidate novel determinants of WPB morphology we explored endothelial SEC22B interaction partners in a mass spectrometry-based approach, identifying the Golgi SNARE Syntaxin 5 (STX5). We established STX5 knockdown in endothelial cells using shRNA-dependent silencing and analyzed WPB and Golgi morphology, using confocal and electron microscopy. STX5-depleted endothelial cells exhibited extensive Golgi fragmentation and decreased WPB length, which was associated with reduced intracellular VWF levels, and impaired stimulated VWF secretion. However, the secretion-incompetent organelles in shSTX5 cells maintained WPB markers such as Angiopoietin 2, P-selectin, Rab27A, and CD63. In brief, we identified SNARE protein STX5 as a novel regulator of WPB biogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Von willebrand factor, Weibel-palade bodies, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Arie Hoogendijk

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


