### Accession
PXD041465

### Title
Mice liver and urine LC-MS data

### Description
Mouse livers were analyzed by lipidomics and urine by metabolomics.An Agilent Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography/Electrospray Ion Quadrupole Time-of-Flight-Mass Spectrometer (UPLC-ESI-QTOFMS) (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) was utilized for lipid and other metabolites proofing in this work.

### Sample Protocol
Urine:Urinary samples were prepared by mixing 20 μl of urine with 180 μl 50% aqueous acetonitrile containing 5 μM chlorpropamide. The urine samples were separately centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min.  Liver:50 mg liver samples were minced in 750 μL chloroform/methanol/H2O (8:4:3) (containing 5 μmoL LPC (12:0) as internal standard) and shaken for 20 min at room temperature, centrifugated at 15000 rcf for 5 min. Then the lower organic phase was collected and dried with N2 gas in the room. Subsequently, the residue was dissolved in 25 μL chloroform/methanol (1:1) solution and 200 μL of isopropanol/acetonitrile/H2O (2:1:1). 3 µL of supernatant were injected into LC/MS after centrifugation at 15000 rcf for 20 min.

### Data Protocol
The acquired chromatographic and spectral data were processed by the Mass Profinder (MP) and Mass Profiler Professional (MPP) software (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), which generated a data matrix (containing peak areas, unique RT and m/z). Then all data were introduced to the SIMCA-P+13.0 software (Umetrics, Kinnelon, NJ) for PCA and OPLS-DA (R2>0.8, Q2>0.8, p [CV-ANOVA]<0.05). Different altered metabolites were displayed in the form of the score plot and loading plot.

### Publication Abstract
Incidence and mortality rates of alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is one of the highest in the world. In the present study, we found that the genetic knockout nuclear receptor the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor &#x3b1; (PPAR&#x3b1;) exacerbated ALD. Lipidomics of the liver revealed changed levels of lipid species encompassing phospholipids, ceramides (CM), and long-chain fatty acids in <i>Ppara</i>-null mice induced by ethanol. Moreover, 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid (4-HPA) was changed as induced by ethanol in the metabolome of urine. Moreover, the phylum level analysis showed a decrease in the level of Bacteroidetes and an increase in the level of Firmicutes after alcohol feeding in <i>Ppara</i>-null mice, while there was no change in wild-type mice. In <i>Ppara</i>-null mice, the level of <i>Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1</i> and <i>Romboutsia</i> were upregulated after alcohol feeding. These data revealed that PPAR&#x3b1; deficiency potentiated alcohol-induced liver injury through promotion of lipid accumulation, changing the metabolome of urine, and increasing the level of <i>Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1</i> and <i>Romboutsia</i>. 4-HPA could improve ALD in mice by regulating inflammation and lipid metabolism. Therefore, our findings suggest a novel approach to the treatment of ALD: focusing on the gut microbiota and its metabolites. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD 041465).

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Urine, Liver, Mice

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Metabolomics and Drug-induced Liver Injury, Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ting Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fei Li
Laboratory of Metabolomics and Drug-induced Liver Injury, Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu


