### Accession
PXD030015

### Title
Global regulation of cell development and aflatoxin biosynthesis in Aspergillus flavus by Afper1

### Description
Aspergillus flavus contaminates crops during preharvest and post-harvest periods and produce carcinogenic mycotoxin aflatoxins posing severe threat to food safety and human health. To identify potential targets to tackle aflatoxin contamination, we have characterized a novel Afper1, sharing sequence identity with the yeast protein per1, regulating cell development and secondary metabolism in A. flavus. Notably, proteomics analysis revealed that the enzymes involved in extracellular hydrolases, conidial development, ER homeostasis, and aflatoxin biosynthesis significantly varied. Unexpectedly, enzymes participated in scavenging ROS including catA, catB, cpeB, and sodM were significantly downregulated and the accumulated ROS and sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide were confirmed by experiments. Surprisingly, Afper1 deletion significantly unregulated heterochromatin protein (HepA) and downregulated GNAT family acetyltransferase involved in heterochromatin formation. Accompanying the accumulated ROS and chromatin remodelling, enzymes participating in aflatoxins, ustiloxin B, and gliotoxin were impaired. These results implied that Afper1 affected chromatin remodelling and disturbed ER homeostasis leading to the accumulation of ROS, and ultimately resulted in growth defect and impaired secondary metabolites biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to previous protocols. Spores were spread on PDA -cellophane plates and cultivated at 30˚C for 3 days, mycelia were collected, grounded in liquid nitrogen, and then sonicated three times on ice in lysis buffer. After centrifugation, proteins in the supernatant were precipitated using TCA and then washed by ice-pre-cold acetone. Then, protein concentration was quantified by BCA method (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) and digested with trypsin according to the procedure described previously.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was using Maxquant solfware (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database of A. flavus in Uniprot (20,105 sequence, April, 2020). Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for-fragment ions. Trypsin was selected for enzyme specificity and two missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation on Cys, TMT 6-plex tag on Lys and peptide N-terminal was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and TMT 6-plex tag on Tyr was specified as variable modification. Decoy (reverse) database was searched against to estimate false discovery rate (FDR). The calculating results were revalued by algorithm percolator, and PSMs (Peptide-Spectrum Match) with p-value<0.05 were accepted. Other settings were set to the default setting. The protein ratio type and the normalization method were both median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aflatoxins, Aspergillus flavus; afper1, Secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
Henan University of Technology
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Yangyong Lv
Henan University of Technology


