### Accession
PXD039053

### Title
SW480 N-terminal peptide analysis

### Description
N-terminal peptide analysis of SW480 cell line for Nt-formylation.

### Sample Protocol
N-terminal peptide enrichment which described in iNrich method paper [pmid:32267142] on SW480 cell line.

### Data Protocol
MS-GF+ search on variable modification in mods.txt. uniprot human reference database were used

### Publication Abstract
N-formyl methionine (fMet)-containing proteins are produced in bacteria, eukaryotic organelles mitochondria and plastids, and even in cytosol. However, N&#x3b1;-terminally formylated proteins have been poorly characterized because of the lack of appropriate tools to detect fMet independently of downstream proximal sequences. Using a fMet-Gly-Ser-Gly-Cys peptide as an antigen, we generated a pan-fMet-specific rabbit polyclonal antibody called anti-fMet. The raised anti-fMet recognized universally and sequence context-independently Nt-formylated proteins in bacterial, yeast, and human cells as determined by a peptide spot array, dot blotting, and immunoblotting. We anticipate that the anti-fMet antibody will be broadly used to enable an understanding of the poorly explored functions and mechanisms of Nt-formylated proteins in various organisms.

### Keywords
Sw480, Human, Inrich, N-terminome

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Chemical & Biological Convergence Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Korea

### Submitter
Shinyeong Ju

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Chemical & Biological Convergence Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Korea


