### Accession
PXD004466

### Title
Cellular Ig sequencing -  A systematic approach for peptide characterization of B-cell receptor in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells

### Description
The immune system produces a vast repertoire of immunoglobulins (Ig) in response to the wide number of different antigens to which we are exposed. Thanks to processes such as V(D)J recombination, somatic hypermutation, and antigen selection, the immune system is able of generating the high diversity of Ig sequences. Igs are present in the body as soluble or membrane-bound proteins attached to the B-cells (similar structure to IgM) for regulating the immune system and performing the function of B-cell receptors (BCR), respectively. Specifically, the disrupted activation of the BCR appears as the responsible of the chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). We have focused this study in the sequencing of cellular Ig from B cells purified from the peripheral blood of CLL patients in order to characterize their peptide profiles.

### Sample Protocol
B cells purified from the peripheral blood of CLL patients have been processed to extract their soluble and membrane proteins separately. Protein fractions were then IgG enriched by using protein G-beads. Three approaches were evaluated for the sequencing of Ig: i) Fab preparation kit (samples 0115 and 0125); ii) papain for the isolation of Fab and Fc fragments from bead-purified Ig (samples 0126 and 0130); and iii) DTT for the denaturation of Ig isolated after protein G-bead enrichment for the isolation of heavy and light chains (samples 0127 and 0132). Processed samples were run in a 12% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with silver nitrate. Then, samples were analyzed by nUPLC-MS/MS applying a 120' linear gradient and a LTQ-Orbitrap Q Velos.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was processed using Peptide Shaker search engine. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of all human-reviewed sequences downloaded from the neXtProt database (release of September 2015, 20066 protein entries) and common contaminant sequences (e.g., human keratins, trypsin). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were: fully-tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages; 10 ppm and 0.8 Da mass tolerances for precursor and product ions, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and n-terminus acetylation as variable modifications were considered. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 0.41.1.  Peptide-Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides, and proteins were validated at a 1% FDR estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
A wide variety of immunoglobulins (Ig) is produced by the immune system thanks to different mechanisms (V(D)J recombination, somatic hypermutation, and antigen selection). The profiling of Ig sequences (at both DNA and peptide levels) are of great relevance to developing targeted vaccines or treatments for specific diseases or infections. Thus, genomics and proteomics techniques (such as Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) and mass spectrometry (MS)) have notably increased the knowledge in Ig sequencing and serum Ig peptide profiling in a high-throughput manner. However, the peptide characterization of membrane-bound Ig (e.g., B-cell receptors, BCR) is still a challenge mainly due to the poor recovery of mentioned Ig.Herein, we have evaluated three different sample processing methods for peptide sequencing of BCR belonging to chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) B cells identifying up to 426 different peptide sequences (MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004466). Moreover, as a consequence of the results here obtained, recommended guidelines have been described for BCR-sequencing of B-CLL samples by MS approaches.For this purpose, an in-house algorithm has been designed and developed to compare the MS/MS results with those obtained by molecular biology in order to integrate both proteomics and genomics results and establish the steps to follow when sequencing membrane-bound Ig by MS/MS.

### Keywords
Bcr, Nuplc-ms/ms, Immunoglobulin

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Institute-USAL
Lab 11. Cancer Research Center (CIC). Department of Medicine. USAL. Salamanca. Spain.

### Submitter
Paula Díez

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Fuentes
Lab 11. Cancer Research Center (CIC). Department of Medicine. USAL. Salamanca. Spain.


