### Accession
PXD030831

### Title
Cortical pathology in Vanishing white matter

### Description
Vanishing white matter (VWM) is classified as a leukodystrophy with astrocytes as primary drivers in its pathogenesis. Magnetic resonance imaging has documented the progressive thinning of cortices in long-surviving patients. Routine histopathological analyses, however, have not yet pointed to cortical involvement in VWM. Here, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the VWM cortex. We employed high-resolution-mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and immunohistochemistry to gain insight into possible molecular disease mechanisms in the cortices of VWM patients. The proteome analysis revealed 268 differentially expressed proteins in the VWM cortices compared to the controls. A majority of these proteins formed a major protein interaction network. A subsequent gene ontology analysis identified enrichment for terms such as cellular metabolism, particularly mitochondrial activity. Importantly, some of the proteins with the most prominent changes in expression were found in astrocytes, indicating cortical astrocytic involvement. Indeed, we confirmed that VWM cortical astrocytes exhibit morphological changes and are less complex in structure than control cells. Our findings also suggest that these astrocytes are immature and not reactive. Taken together, we provide insights into cortical involvement in VWM, which has to be taken into account when developing therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Microdissected samples were lysed, reduced and alkylated in lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10mM chloroacetamide and 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0-8.5 for 10 min at 99°C with mixing at 750RPM. Samples were sonicated with 20mg protein extraction beads (Diagenode) using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 20 cycles with on/off pulses of 30 sec. Protein (20µg/sample) were then digested with Lys-C at an enzyme to substrate ratio of in 1:100 at 37 °C for 4 h. Samples were next diluted to a final concentration of 2M guanidine hydrochloride using 25mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and processed for overnight digestion with trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100 at 37°C. Peptide samples were then acidified using 10% formic acid to pH<2.0. Finally, peptides were extracted using C18 cartridges (Agilent Technologies) and an automated AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies) according to standard procedures. Eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 37°C and stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples (1.5µg/sample) were resuspended in 2% formic acid and analysed using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trap column (300µm id x 5mm, 5µm particle size, reversed phase C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10µL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Next, peptides were separated with an in house-made analytical column with solvent B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The following gradient was used: 0-2.5 min 92% solvent A; 2.5-157.5 min 8% solvent B; 157.5-161 min 35% solvent B; 161-165 min 100% solvent B; 165-175 min 92% solvent A. Total run per sample was 175 min. Spectra were collected using a data-dependent acquisition method in which the top 15 precursors were selected from a full MS1 scan (m/z range = 315-1,500, resolution = 60,000, target = 3×106 ions) for MS2 analysis with higher-collision dissociation (target ions =  1×105, max ion fill time = 50ms, isolation window =  1.4m/z, normalized collision energy = 27%, resolution = 30,000). Precursor ions were excluded from fragmentation if charge state was unassigned or equal to 1, 6, 7, 8 or higher than 8. A dynamic exclusion of 16 sec was included. RAW files were processed and searched against the Swiss-Prot human reference proteome database (version August 2019, 20,431 entries) using MaxQuant [13] (version 1.6.6.0). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed by MaxLFQ with “match between runs’ enabled, minimal ratio count set at 2. False discovery rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1%. The minimum and maximum peptide length ranged from 7 to 25 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and peptide N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavages was allowed. The maximum peptide and fragmentation mass tolerance was set at 20ppm and 0.5Da, respectively. Statistical data analysis was conducted using R statistical software (version 1.3.959). Proteins identified as contaminants, only by site modification or in decoy reverse database were removed prior to analysis. Data were then log2-transformed. Missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution in which the lowest detected LFQ-intensity was set as mean and the average standard deviation of all detected proteins was set as standard deviation. Only proteins in which expression was detected in all subjects in either control or disease state were imputed. Differential protein expression analysis was carried out using the limma R package [14]. Statistical significance was set as p < 0.05 with Benjamini-Hochberg’s (BH) test for multiple comparison adjustment. Data were then further filtered to only include proteins showing at least ±1.5 fold change. The transcriptome dataset from human cortical foetal astrocytes, mature astrocytes, neurons, oligodendrocytes, and microglia (GSE73721) [15] was used to identify potential cell-type specific protein expression changes. A Fisher’s exact test was performed to find significant cell-type enrichment (p < 0.05). Gene ontology overrepresentation analysis was conducted using g:Profiler [16]. Background dataset was set to all proteins detected in the proteome analysis. The following gene ontology databases (updated July 2021) were included: cellular component, molecular function, biological processes and KEGG pathways. Statistical significance was set as p < 0.05 with Benjamini-Hochberg’s test for multiple comparison adjustment.

### Publication Abstract
Vanishing white matter (VWM) is classified as a leukodystrophy with astrocytes as primary drivers in its pathogenesis. Magnetic resonance imaging has documented the progressive thinning of cortices in long-surviving patients. Routine histopathological analyses, however, have not yet pointed to cortical involvement in VWM. Here, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the VWM cortex. We employed high-resolution-mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and immunohistochemistry to gain insight into possible molecular disease mechanisms in the cortices of VWM patients. The proteome analysis revealed 268 differentially expressed proteins in the VWM cortices compared to the controls. A majority of these proteins formed a major protein interaction network. A subsequent gene ontology analysis identified enrichment for terms such as cellular metabolism, particularly mitochondrial activity. Importantly, some of the proteins with the most prominent changes in expression were found in astrocytes, indicating cortical astrocytic involvement. Indeed, we confirmed that VWM cortical astrocytes exhibit morphological changes and are less complex in structure than control cells. Our findings also suggest that these astrocytes are immature and not reactive. Taken together, we provide insights into cortical involvement in VWM, which has to be taken into account when developing therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Lc-msms, Astrocytes, Leukodystrophy, Vanishing white matter

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC - Location VUMc
Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jodie Man

### Lab Head
Dr Marianna Bugiani
Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


