### Accession
PXD031924

### Title
Equine muscle-derived mesenchymal stem cells protect cartilage explants in osteoarthritis model: secretome characterization

### Description
Background: Osteoarthritis is a highly prevalent joint degenerative disease for which therapeutic treatments are limited or invasive. Cell therapy based on mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) is therefore seen as a promising approach for this disease, in both human and horses.  Objective: As the regenerative potential of MSCs is mainly conferred by paracrine function, the goal of this study is to characterize the secretome of muscle-derived MSCs (mdMSCs) in an in vitro model of OA to evaluate the clinical interest of mdMSCs as cell therapy for joint diseases like osteoarthritis. Methods: An equine osteoarthritis model composed of cartilage explants exposed to pro-inflammatory cytokines was first developed. Then, the effects of mdMSC coculture on cartilage explant were studied by measuring the glycosaminoglycan release and the NO2- production. To identify the underlying molecular actors, SILAC-based secretome analyses were conducted, in the presence of serum. The relative abundance of highly sequenced proteins was finally confirmed by western blot. Results: Co-culture with muscle-derived MSCs decreases the cytokine-induced glycosaminoglycan release by cartilage explants, suggesting a protecting effect of mdMSCs. Among the 52 equine proteins sequenced in the co-culture medium, the abundance of decorin and matrix metalloproteinase 3 was modified, as confirmed by western blot analyses. Conclusions: These results suggest that muscle-derived MSCs could reduce the catabolic effect of TNF and IL-1 on cartilage explant by decreasing the secretion and activity of Matrix Metalloproteinase 3 and increasing the decorin secretion

### Sample Protocol
Secretome analysis Labelling: SILAC adaptation phase For SILAC adaption phase, cells were cultured with DMEM F12 for SILAC supplemented with 20% of dialyzed fetal bovine serum (FBS, HEPES (15 mM), 100 IU/mL of penicillin-streptomycin, 0.5 % of amphotericin B and stable isotopes. To prevent arginine to proline conversion, L-Proline (200 mg/L) was added to the medium 28. Incorporation of stable isotopes was assessed by detecting and quantifying the unmodified and the stable isotope-modified forms of peptides. Such analysis is performed by the so-called post-translational modifications (PTM) profile tool analysis of the PEAKS Studio X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON). Practically, a comparative analysis of cell lysates from cells treated with TNFα and IL-1β compared with non-treated cells was performed. SILAC experimental phase mdMSCs isotope-labelled for 2 passages were cultured in 25 cm2 flask to 80 % confluency. The medium was replaced by inflammatory medium added with approximately 230 mg of plugs of cartilage. After 24 hours, plugs of cartilage, mdMSCs and supernatants were harvested. The same experiments were performed with mdMSCs at passage 4 and 5 but with inverted labels so that each experimental condition was obtained for both heavy and medium labels.  -After centrifugation (5 minutes, 1000 rpm at RT) to eliminate cellular debris, supernatants were concentrated (concentration factor  10x) using Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filters ultracel-3K during 40 minutes at 4 °C and 4000 rpm. Then, the protein content of supernatants was measured with Pearce assay (Thermo Fisher, 22660). 15 g of concentrated supernatant of a medium-labelled condition were mixed with 15 g of heavy-labelled experimental condition. The mix was immediately digested with trypsin and the remaining volumes of supernatants were fractionated and frozen at -80 °C. Digestion was performed as described below.  -Cells were washed with PBS and detached with scrapper in lysis buffer (Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (20 mM), NaCl (150 mM), Glycerol 15 %, SDS 2 %, complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 11697498001), phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM of Na3VO3, 10 mM 4-nitrophenylphosphate, 10 mM b-glycerophosphate and 5 mM NaF, final concentrations), TRITON X-100 1 %, SuperNuclease 1%(Sino Biologicals, 25 U/μL)) before frozen at -80 °C.  Mass spectrometry analysis – SILAC After extraction of proteins in buffer containing urea 7M, thiourea 2M, CHAPS 1%, ASB14 1%, Tris 30mM, SDS 1% at pH 8.5, protein concentration was determined with Pierce assay (Thermo Fisher, 22660) and 35 µg were processed. Digestion was performed with filtered-aided sample preparation that consists in diluting samples in urea buffer (Tris-HCl 0.1 M, Urea 8 M, pH 8.5), reducing proteins with dithiothreitol 8 mM, alkylating them with iodoacetamide 50 mM and digest protein with trypsin (Promega) (1 μg of trypsin for 50 μg of proteins) on Microcon Ultracel PL-30 (Millipore). After final concentration of the samples with speed vac, samples were diluted in acetonitrile 2 % and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1% (final concentration 500ng/µL) before being frozen at -80 °C until mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.  The digest was analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims TOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) coupled with an UHPLC nanoElute (Bruker). Peptides were separated by nanoUHPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) on a 75 μm diameter, 25 cm C18 column with integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Aurora, ionopticks, Melbourne) at a flow rate of 400 nL/minutes, at 50°C. LC mobile phase A was water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and phase B was CAN with formic acid 0.1% (v/v). Samples were loaded directly on the analytical column at a constant pressure of 800 bar. The digest (1 µL) was injected, and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased linearly from 2% B to 15 % in 36 minutes, from 15 % B to 25% in 19 minutes, from 25% B to 37 % in 5 minutes and from 37% B to 95% in 5 minutes. Data acquisition on the tims TOF Pro was performed using Hystar 5.1 and timsControl 2.0. tims TOF Pro data were acquired using 100 ms TIMS accumulation time, mobility (1/K0) range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm².  Mass spectrometry analyses were carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method 29. One MS spectrum was followed by ten PASEF MSMS spectra per total cycle of 1.1 s. Two injections per sample were done.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio X Pro with ion mobility module and Q module for SILAC quantification. Protein identifications were conducted using PEAKS search engine with 15 ppm as parent mass error tolerance and 0.05 Da as fragment mass error tolerance. Carbamidomethylation was allowed as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, 4,4,4,4-D4 Lysine, 13C(6), 13C(6) 15N(4), 13C(6) 135N(2) as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the maximum number of missed cleavages per peptide was set to one. The peak lists were searched against the proteome databases of Equus Caballus and Bos Taurus from UNIREF 100 (96566 sequences). Peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were normalized to less than 1.0% false discovery rate and with SILAC-3plex quantitation auto normalization method. For the quantitation, mass error and ion mobility tolerance were set respectively to 15 ppm and 0.05 1/k0.  For the SILAC quantitation results, feature vector filter quality score was set to ≥ 50 and protein significance score threshold was set to 20. The significance score was calculated as the -10log10 of the significance testing p-value (0.01). Paired t-test was used as the significance testing method. Only proteins with at least two peptides were used for the quantitation. Statistical analyses were performed with Prism. P values for pro-inflammatory gene expression were calculated using a Kurskal-Wallis test. P values of other assays were calculated with Wilcoxon test. P value was considered statistically significant below < 0.5 (* = 0.05<p≧0.01; ** =0.01<p>0.001; *** =p<0.001)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stem cells; equine, Secretome

### Affiliations
Université de Namur - URBC Narilis
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia RENARD
Université de Namur - URBC Narilis


