### Accession
PXD009802

### Title
phytophthora infestans LC/MS/MS

### Description
The oomycete potato blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans secretes a diverse set of proteins to manipulate host plant immunity. However, there is limited knowledge about the role(s) of majority of these secreted proteins. Here we subjected extracellular proteins from in vitro cultured hyphae to LC/MS/MS to investigate the cargo of protein secretion pathways in P. infestans, in particular the conventional secretory pathway. Like the apoplastic effector EPIC1 (a cysteine protease inhibitor), we show that secretion of cell wall degrading enzymes and pathogen associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-like proteins is inhibited by brefeldin A (BFA) in vitro and in planta, demonstrating that these proteins are secreted by the conventional, Golgi-mediated pathway. For comparison, an RXLR (Arg-any amino acid-Leu-Arg) effector, Pi22926, was shown to be unconventionally secreted at haustoria, pathogen structures that penetrate host plant cells, and delivered into infected cells to suppress host defences, consistent with previous findings. We further characterised a pectinesterase (PE), a cell wall degrading enzyme, and INF4, a PAMP-like protein. Both were highly expressed early in infection, enhanced P. infestans colonization, and secreted at haustoria. Notably, in P. infestans transformed lines, PE-mRFP accumulated around the base of haustoria while INF4-mRFP was found to envelop the whole haustorium. We propose that the haustorium is a major site for both non-conventional and conventional secretion, and cell wall degrading enzymes and PAMP proteins are secreted at these sites to facilitate pathogenicity in P. infestans.

### Sample Protocol
P. infestans transformants were cultured in amended lima bean (ALB) liquid medium containing 20 µg/ml geneticin antibiotic. Mycelium was separated after 2 dpi using a 70 µm filter. To test the effects of BFA on protein secretion in vitro, mycelia of transformants expressing EPIC1-mRFP were incubated for 24 h in the dark at 19 °C in 1 ml of ALB liquid medium, containing 20 µg/ml geneticin and 50 µg/ml BFA (5 mg/ml in dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) stock solution of BFA was diluted in water to 50 µg/ml). The culture filtrate (CF) was retained separately after removing mycelia, and four times the sample volume of cold (-20°C) acetone was used to precipitate proteins overnight. Protein was collected by centrifugation at 10 000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Secreted protein mixtures were digested by trypsin. Digested peptides were run on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (ThermoFisher, UK) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Eluent A (3 % acetonitrile / 0.05 % formic acid), Eluent B (80 % acetonitrile / 0.04 % formic acid) were used for a 2-40% gradient. The top 7 most intense peaks in each MS1 scan were then taken for MS2. Resolution for MS2 spectra was 6000 and was fragmented using CID (collision induced dissociation) and a mass range of 335-1800 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed using Maxquant version 1.6.0.16 against the P. infestans T30-4 database from Uniprot; MS/MS-FIMS tolerance was set to 20 ppm, ITMS match tolerance is 0.15. Fixed modifications are carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications are oxidation (M), maximum missed cleavages value of 2. Protein FDR was set to 0.01. Minimum peptide Length is 7.Output data from Maxquant were filtered by Perseus_1.5.6.0, peptide intensity was transformed and used for P value analysis, and a two way T-test was used for analysing differentially expressed proteins in the two samples being compared.

### Publication Abstract
The oomycete potato blight pathogen <i>Phytophthora infestans</i> secretes a diverse set of proteins to manipulate host plant immunity. However, there is limited knowledge about how and where they are secreted during infection. Here we used the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-to-Golgi secretion pathway inhibitor brefeldin A (BFA) in combination with liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify extracellular proteins from <i>P.&#xa0;infestans</i> that were conventionally secreted from <i>in vitro</i>-cultured hyphae. We identified 19 proteins with predicted signal peptides that potentially influence plant interactions for which secretion was attenuated by BFA. In addition to inhibition by the apoplastic effector EPIC1, a cysteine protease inhibitor, we show that secretion of the cell wall-degrading pectinesterase enzyme PE1 and the <u>m</u>icrobe-<u>a</u>ssociated <u>m</u>olecular <u>p</u>attern (MAMP)-like elicitin INF4 was inhibited by BFA <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in planta</i>, demonstrating that these proteins are secreted by the conventional, Golgi-mediated pathway. For comparison, secretion of a cytoplasmic RXLR (Arg-[any amino acid]-Leu-Arg) effector, Pi22926, was not inhibited by BFA. During infection, whereas INF4 accumulated outside the plant cell, RXLR effector Pi22926 entered the plant cell and accumulated in the nucleus. The <i>P.&#xa0;infestans</i> effectors, the PE1 enzyme, and INF4 were all secreted from haustoria, pathogen structures that penetrate the plant cell wall to form an intimate interaction with the host plasma membrane. Our findings show the haustorium to be a major site of both conventional and nonconventional secretion of proteins with diverse functions during infection.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> There are many different classes of proteins secreted from <i>Phytophthora infestans</i> that may influence or facilitate infection. Elucidating where and how they are secreted during infection is an important step toward developing methods to control their delivery processes. We used an inhibitor of conventional secretion to identify the following different classes of infection-associated extracellular proteins: cell wall-degrading and cell wall-modifying enzymes, microbe-associated molecular pattern-like proteins that may elicit immune responses, and apoplastic effectors that are predicted to suppress immunity. In contrast, secretion of a cytoplasmic effector that is translocated into host cells is nonconventional, as it is insensitive to inhibitor treatment. This evidence further supports the finding that proteins that are active in the apoplast and effector proteins that are active in the host cytoplasm are differentially secreted by <i>P.&#xa0;infestans</i> Critically, it demonstrates that a disease-specific developmental structure, the haustorium, is a major secretion site for diverse protein classes during infection.

### Keywords
Phytophthora infestans culture filtrate

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Division of Plant Sciences, University of Dundee (at the James HuttonInstitute), Errol Road, Invergowrie, Dundee DD2 5DA, UK

### Submitter
shumei wang

### Lab Head
Dr Paul RJ Birch
Division of Plant Sciences, University of Dundee (at the James HuttonInstitute), Errol Road, Invergowrie, Dundee DD2 5DA, UK


