### Accession
PXD030246

### Title
Mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCHF5 controls BAK function independently of BH3-only proteins

### Description
Intrinsic apoptosis is principally regulated by the BCL-2 family of proteins, but some non-BCL-2 proteins also serve as important regulators. To identify novel apoptosis regulators, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 library screen, and it identified the mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCHF5/MITOL/RNF153 as an important regulator of BAK apoptotic function. Deleting MARCHF5 in multiple BAX-deficient cell lines conferred profound resistance to BH3-mimetic drugs. The loss of MARCHF5 or its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity surprisingly drove BAK to adopt an active conformation, with resistance to BH3-mimetics afforded by the formation of inhibitory complexes with pro-survival proteins MCL-1 and BCL-XL. Importantly, these changes to BAK conformation and pro-survival association occurred independently of BH3-only proteins. This study identifies a mechanism by which MARCHF5 regulates apoptotic cell death and provides new insight into how cancer cells respond to BH3-mimetic drugs. These data also highlight the emerging role of ubiquitin signalling in apoptosis that may be exploited therapeutically.

### Sample Protocol
MEF cells were harvested, and mitochondria were isolated and enriched using a Mitochondria isolation kit as the manufacturer’s introductions (Miltenyi Biotec Cat#130096946). HeLa cells were harvested and permeabilized by 0.025% w/v digitonin (Biosynth) in permeabilization buffer for 10 mins on ice, and then mitochondria were isolated and enriched using gradient centrifugation (Johnston et al., 2002). As previously described (Hock et al., 2020), membrane fractions were normalized for protein content using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (23227; ThermoFisher Scientific), subjected to trypsinization, and peptides were labelled with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT; 90061; ThermoFisher Scientific). For TMT labelling, protein pellets were solubilized and digested into tryptic peptides for mass spectrometry using the iST-NHS kit (PreOmics GmbH, Planegg, Germany) as per manufacturer instructions. Peptides were labelled with 6plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 8:1 label:protein ratio as per manufacturer instructions. Pooled samples were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer's instructions. Individual fractions were dried using a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) and reconstituted in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000).The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). The mass spectrometer was operated in a centroid data spectrum mode. The tryptic peptides were injected to the trap column at an isocratic flow of 5 μl/min of 2% (v/v) CH3CN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 5 min applied before the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (1) 0–6min at 3% B, (2) 6–95 min, 3–22% B (3) 95–105 min 22–40% B (4) 105–110 min, 40–80% B (5) 110–115 min, 80–80% B (6) 115–125 min, 80–3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 5 min before the next sample injection. For TMT and LFQ analysis, in brief data were collected in positive mode using Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375–1450 as MS scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the 12 most intense ions with charge ≥ 2. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS maximum injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3E6, normalized collision energy was at 27% energy, isolation window of 1.2 Da, MS/MS resolution 17,500, MS/MS AGC target of 5E4, MS/MS maximum injection time 50 ms, minimum intensity was set at 2E3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.5.0) and searched against UniProt human or mouse database using default settings for a TMT 6plex experiment with the following modifications: deamination (NQ), oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsic apoptosis is principally governed by the BCL-2 family of proteins, but some non-BCL-2 proteins are also critical to control this process. To identify novel apoptosis regulators, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 library screen, and it identified the mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCHF5/MITOL/RNF153 as an important regulator of BAK apoptotic function. Deleting MARCHF5 in diverse cell lines dependent on BAK conferred profound resistance to BH3-mimetic drugs. The loss of MARCHF5 or its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity surprisingly drove BAK to adopt an activated conformation, with resistance to BH3-mimetics afforded by the formation of inhibitory complexes with pro-survival proteins MCL-1 and BCL-XL. Importantly, these changes to BAK conformation and pro-survival association occurred independently of BH3-only proteins and influence on pro-survival proteins. This study identifies a new mechanism by which MARCHF5 regulates apoptotic cell death by restraining BAK activating conformation change and provides new insight into how cancer cells respond to BH3-mimetic drugs. These data also highlight the emerging role of ubiquitin signalling in apoptosis that may be exploited therapeutically.

### Keywords
Apoptosis; bak; bcl-2; marchf5/mitol; e3 ubiquitin ligase; mitochondria; bh3 mimetic

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia


