### Accession
PXD031297

### Title
O-Fucose glycans on mouse NOTCH1 from activated T cells of Fringe mutant mice

### Description
NOTCH1 (N1) is a transmembrane receptor that initiates a cell-cell signaling pathway controlling various cell fate specifications in metazoans. The addition of O-fucose by Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1) to Epidermal Growth Factor-like (EGF) repeats in the N1 extracellular domain is essential for N1 function, and modification of O-fucose with GlcNAc by the Fringe family of glycosyltransferases modulates Notch activity. Prior cell-based studies showed that POFUT1 modifies EGF repeats containing the appropriate consensus sequence at high stoichiometry, while Fringe GlcNAc-transferases (LFNG, MFNG and RFNG) modify O-fucose on only a subset of NOTCH1 EGF repeats. Previous in vivo studies showed that each FNG affects naïve T cell development. To examine Fringe modifications of N1 expressed at a physiological level, we used mass spectral glycoproteomic methods to analyze O-fucose glycans of endogenous N1 from activated T cells obtained from mice lacking all Fringe enzymes, or expressing only a single FNG. While most O-fucose sites were modified at high stoichiometry, only EGF6, EGF16, EGF26, and EGF27 were extended in control T cells. Cell-based assays of N1 lacking fucose at each of those O-fucose sites revealed minor functional correlations in the EGF16 and EGF27 mutant with Notch ligand binding. In activated T cells expressing only LFNG, MFNG or RFNG alone, the extension of O-fucose with GlcNAc in the same EGF repeats was diminished, consistent with cooperative interactions when all three Fringes were present. The combined data open the door for the analysis of O-glycans on endogenous N1 derived from different cell types.

### Sample Protocol
Glycoproteomic mass spectral analysis of mouse N1 Reduction, alkylation, digestion, and mass spectral analysis is based on our previous protocol (3). TCEP (25 mM final, Thermo) was added to the immunopurified N1 in 8 M urea and heated to 100 oC for 5 min. After cooling to room temperature, iodoacetamide (25 mM final concentration) was added and incubated in the dark for 30 min. The sample was diluted 8 fold using mass spectral grade water. Diammonium phosphate (20 mM final concentration) was added, followed by 0.5 g of trypsin (Sigma), 0.5 g of chymotrypsin (Thermo), or 0.5 g of V8 (Thermo). Digestion was performed for 4-6 hours at 37 oC. Peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 Spin Tip (Thermo), washed with 0.1% formic acid, and eluted with 50% Acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were separated using an Easy nano-LC HPLC system with a C18 EasySpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 mm 3 15 cm, Thermo). Separation of glycopeptides was carried out using a 30-min binary gradient consisting of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were detected by a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Higher energy collisional dissociation-tandem mass spectrometry (HCD-MS/MS) method was used, and the 10 most abundant precursor ions in each MS scan were selected for fragmentation (collision energy was 27%, 2 x 105 gain control, isolation window m/z 3.0, dynamic exclusion enabled, and 17,500 fragment resolution). Peak lists and .raw data files were generated using Xcalibur software set to its default settings.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo) and were searched against a mouse N1 ECD database (Q01705, 18 April 2012—v3). Byonic software version 2.10.5 (Protein Metrics) was used as a node inside Proteome Discoverer for identifying peptides with glycan modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (+57.021464) on cysteines; variable modifications were oxidation (+15.994915) on methionine, histidine, asparagine, and aspartic acid. Glycoforms were searched as rare 1 modification: fucose (+146.057909), fucose-HexNAc (+349.137281), fucose-HexNAc-hexose (+511.190105), Fucose-HexNAc-Hexose-NeuAc (+802.285522), Fucose-HexNAc-Hexose-NeuGc (+818.280436), Hexose (+162.052824), Hexose-Pentose (+294.095082), Hexose-Pentose-Pentose (+426.137341), HexNAc (+203.079373), HexNAc-Hexose (+365.132196), and HexNAc-Hexose-NeuAc (+655.227613). Protein and peptide false discovery rates were set to a threshold of 1% and calculated in Byonic software version 2.10.5 (Protein Metrics) using the 2-dimensional target decoy strategy as described (4). EICs for parent ions of all glycopeptides were generated using Xcalibur Qual Browser 4.0.27.19 (Thermo) with precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm. The glycoform distribution on each EGF repeat was quantified based on area under the curve of each EIC for all biological and technical replicates. Byonic search results are provided in Tables S1-S8. Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method was used for quantitative analysis of EGF12 peptide modified with O-fucose monosaccharide. The m/z 1028.48 ion was followed since it is the most abundant and reproducible ion in the MS/MS spectra (Fig. S10A). The m/z 693.24 ion was followed for the PRM of the control peptide.

### Publication Abstract
NOTCH1 is a transmembrane receptor that initiates a cell-cell signaling pathway controlling various cell fate specifications in metazoans. The addition of O-fucose by protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1) to epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) repeats in the NOTCH1 extracellular domain is essential for NOTCH1 function, and modification of O-fucose with GlcNAc by the Fringe family of glycosyltransferases modulates Notch activity. Prior cell-based studies showed that POFUT1 modifies EGF repeats containing the appropriate consensus sequence at high stoichiometry, while Fringe GlcNAc-transferases (LFNG, MFNG, and RFNG) modify O-fucose on only a subset of NOTCH1 EGF repeats. Previous in&#xa0;vivo studies showed that each FNG affects na&#xef;ve T cell development. To examine Fringe modifications of NOTCH1 at a physiological level, we used mass spectral glycoproteomic methods to analyze O-fucose glycans of endogenous NOTCH1 from activated T cells obtained from mice lacking all Fringe enzymes or expressing only a single FNG. While most O-fucose sites were modified at high stoichiometry, only EGF6, EGF16, EGF26, and EGF27 were extended in WT T cells. Additionally, cell-based assays of NOTCH1 lacking fucose at each of those O-fucose sites revealed small but significant effects of LFNG on Notch-Delta binding in the EGF16 and EGF27 mutants. Finally, in activated T cells expressing only LFNG, MFNG, or RFNG alone, the extension of O-fucose with GlcNAc in the same EGF repeats was diminished, consistent with cooperative interactions when all three Fringes were present. The combined data open the door for the analysis of O-glycans on endogenous NOTCH1 derived from different cell types.

### Keywords
Fringe, Notch1, T cell, O-fucose, Pofut1

### Affiliations
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center

### Submitter
Kenjiroo Matsumoto

### Lab Head
Dr Kenjiroo Matsumoto
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center


