### Accession
PXD030465

### Title
An evolutionary conserved, immobility associated antithrombotic mechanism

### Description
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) comprising deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is a main cause of morbidity and mortality that causes tremendous health care costs. Short term immobility related conditions arising from hospitalization, acute trauma and forced bed rest are major risk factors for the development of VTE. In contrast, chronically paralyzed patients with post-spinal cord injury are protected from VTE despite immobilization. Similarly, free-ranging brown bears (Ursus arctos) that hibernate (immobilize) have adapted to this threat through yet to be discovered mechanisms and do not develop VTE. This suggests that long-term immobility can induce antithrombotic mechanisms that are evolutionarily conserved. Here we aimed to identify these adaptive mechanisms of VTE protection in a cross-species approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified platelet expressed heat shock protein 47 (Hsp47) as the most substantially downregulated protein during brown bear hibernation. In a clinical bed rest study and in spinal-cord injured humans, we likewise observed drastic reduction of platelet-expressed Hsp47. Genetic ablation and pharmaceutical inhibition of platelet Hsp47 attenuates deep vein thrombosis and thromboinflammatory responses in mice and human blood cells. This suggests that Hsp47 downregulation is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that also protects immobilized patients from VTE. Our translational approach thus identified an antithrombotic signature that may give rise to novel antithrombotic therapeutics and prognostic markers.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation was carried out with the 96 well PreOmics iST kit (P.O.00027) following the manufacturers protocol. Purified peptide concentration was set to 0.2 mg/ml after determination of concentration by nanodrop. Bear Plasma samples were fractionated in three fractions with the PreOmics iST fractionation add-on kit (P.O.00102) according to the manufacturers protocol. 27 ng of purified peptides were dried in a 96 well plate (Eppendorf Twintec) and resuspended in enrichment equilibration buffer (1% (v/v) TFA, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). Subsequent to the priming (0.1% (v/v) TFA in 99% acetonitrile) of Fe-NTA cartridges, phosphorylated peptides were enriched on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent Technologies) and eluted from the cartridges (1% ammonium hydroxide (v/v) in H2O). All steps were conducted according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Resulting peptides were vacuum-dried and resuspended in buffer A* (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software, version 1.6.11.0, and peptide lists were searched against the Uniprot FASTA database for the organism investigated (Ursus arctos). A contaminant database generated by the Andromeda search engine was configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. MS raw files of the human phosphorylation data were analyzed by Spectronaut software version 15.1.210713 (Biognosys) in reference to the human Uniprot FASTA database (standard and additional). Enzymatic cleavage was defined by Trypsin/P and phosphorylation at Serine, Threonine, or Tyrosine was added as variable modification to default settings. We included peptide lengths of 7-52 amino acids and limited the maximum number of missed cleavages to 2. The FDR threshold for peptides was set to 0.01 while PTM localization filtering was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) comprising deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Short-term immobility-related conditions are a major risk factor for the development of VTE. Paradoxically, long-term immobilized free-ranging hibernating brown bears and paralyzed spinal cord injury (SCI) patients are protected from VTE. We aimed to identify mechanisms of immobility-associated VTE protection in a cross-species approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed an antithrombotic signature in platelets of hibernating brown bears with heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) as the most substantially reduced protein. HSP47 down-regulation or ablation attenuated immune cell activation and neutrophil extracellular trap formation, contributing to thromboprotection in bears, SCI patients, and mice. This cross-species conserved platelet signature may give rise to antithrombotic therapeutics and prognostic markers beyond immobility-associated VTE.

### Keywords
Thromboinflammation, Hibernation, Proteomics, Antithrombotic mechanism, Bears

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


