### Accession
PXD039711

### Title
UBE2O targets a novel substrate IFIT3 for ubiquitination and degradation, impeding the interferon pathway activation and interferon sensitization in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Abstract Rationale: Interferon (IFN) plays a key role in immunotherapy by acting through interferon-stimulated genes. Interferon resistance limits its efficacy. Ubiquitination modification of key proteins is a popular research direction in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and it is also one of the important mechanisms of interferon resistance. This study is dedicated to discovering the link between the pathogenesis of interferon resistance and ubiquitination modifications in HCC.  Methods: We first combined the TCGA LIHC dataset and genes from the iUUCD 2.0 database to screen the most promising ubiquitination-related gene, UBE2O, in HCC using a bioinformatics approach. A combination of proteomic analysis, mass spectrometry, and survival analysis was used to screen for pathways and proteins negatively regulated by UBE2O. The effect of silencing UBE2O on interferon sensitivity in HCC cells was assessed using in vitro clone formation, migration, and wound healing assays and in vivo subcutaneous tumor xenograft models. Changes in the half-life of substrates following inhibition of UBE2O were assessed using a cycloheximide method. Two databases were used to predict ubiquitination sites on IFIT3. After rescue experiments to exclude the effect of substrate, proteomic analysis was reperformed to analyze the effect on the interferon pathway and phenotype. The effect on substrate and interferon sensitivity was observed using arsenic trioxide (ATO) to inhibit UBE2O.  Results: Initially, UBE2O was deduced from 807 UUCRGs in the TCGA LIHC dataset by six consecutive screening steps. UBE2O was significantly overexpressed in HCC cell lines and tissues compared to the corresponding normal group, and low expression of UBE2O was associated with a better prognosis. UBE2O was knocked down for proteomic analysis, and the results suggested that UBE2O negatively regulates the interferon-alpha/beta signaling (p＜0.01) and the interferon pathway (p＜0.01). IFIT3 in the interferon pathway was identified as a possible ubiquitinated substrate of UBE2O by combining mass spectrometry, the human protein atlas (HPA), and TCGA-based survival analysis. There was a significant negative correlation between UBE2O and IFIT3, including survival analysis showing opposite trends and a negative correlation in protein expression. UBE2O binds to IFIT3, and interferon-α promotes this binding. The stability of IFIT3 protein increased with decreasing UBE2O  (p＜0.05), and these effects disappeared with the mutational inactivation of UBE2O. K236 of IFIT3 is the active site of ubiquitination. By increasing IFIT3, the knockdown of UBE2O increases the sensitivity of HCC cells to interferon, leading to reduced proliferation and migration (all p＜0.05). These effects disappeared after the elimination of IFIT3. Additionally, ATO inhibited UBE2O and therefore increased interferon sensitivity in HCC cells.  Conclusions: UBE2O exerts a protumor role and targets a new substrate, IFIT3, for ubiquitination and degradation, impeding the interferon pathway activation and interferon sensitization in HCC. The findings will shed light on the interferon-based targeted or combination therapeutic strategies for HCC in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Constructs of stably transfected Sh-UBE2O and Sh-con. samples were digested using trypsin and then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen, respectively. Enrichment strategy using reactome. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis: The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A and then separated using a NanoElute ultra performance liquid chromatography system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient settings were: 0-70 min, 6%-24%B; 70-84 min, 24%-35%B; 84-87 min, 35%-80%B; 87-90 min, 80%B, and the flow rate was maintained at 450 nL/min. The peptides were separated by the UHPLC system and injected into the Capillary ion source for ionization and then into the The peptides were separated by the UHPLC system and injected into the Capillary ion source for ionization and then analyzed by timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set at 1.65 kV, and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using a high-resolution TOF. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range was set to 100-1700. data acquisition mode was used in parallel accumulated serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. One primary mass spectrum acquisition was followed by 10 PASEF mode acquisitions of secondary spectra with parent ion charge numbers in the range of 0-5. The dynamic exclusion time of the serial mass spectrometry scans was set to 30 s seconds to avoid repeated scans of the parent ions.

### Data Protocol
The reactome enrichment analysis was performed based on the "ReactomePA" R package (version 1.36.0). For each comparison group, we performed reactome enrichment analysis with up-regulated differential proteins, down-regulated differential proteins, and all differential proteins separately. We used bubble plots to show the top 20 pathways ranked according to their P values.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon (IFN) exerts its effects through interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), but its efficacy is limited by interferon resistance, which can be caused by the ubiquitination of key proteins. UBE2O was initially identified as a promising therapeutic target based on data from the TCGA and iUUCD 2.0 databases. Through the inhibition of UBE2O, interferon &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; signaling and overall interferon signaling were activated. Integrating data from proteomic, mass spectrometry, and survival analyses led to the identification of IFIT3, a mediator of interferon signaling, as a ubiquitination substrate of UBE2O. The results of in vitro and in vivo experiments demonstrated that the knockdown of UBE2O can enhance the efficacy of interferon-&#x3b1; by upregulating IFIT3 expression. K236 was identified as a ubiquitination site in IFIT3, and the results of rescue experiments confirmed that the effect of UBE2O on interferon-&#x3b1; sensitivity is dependent on IFIT3 activity. ATO treatment inhibited UBE2O and increased IFIT3 expression, thereby increasing the effectiveness of interferon-&#x3b1;. In conclusion, these findings suggest that UBE2O worsens the therapeutic effect of interferon-&#x3b1; by targeting IFIT3 for ubiquitination and degradation.

### Keywords
Interferon sensitivity, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Ube2o, Interferon pathway, Ifit3

### Affiliations
Department of Comprehensive Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) West District/Anhui Provincial Cancer Hospital, Hefei, China.
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan 250002, PR.China. Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230001, China. Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Hefei 230001, China. Anhui Provincial Clinical Research Center for Hepatobiliary Diseases, Hefei 230001, China.

### Submitter
li heng

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Jiabei
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan 250002, PR.China. Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230001, China. Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Hefei 230001, China. Anhui Provincial Clinical Research Center for Hepatobiliary Diseases, Hefei 230001, China.


