### Accession
PXD012113

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteome and proteome analysis emphasize the influence of phosphorylation events during the nutritional stress of Trypanosoma cruzi: the initial moments of in vitro metacyclogenesis

### Description
Phosphorylation is an important event in cell signaling that is modulated by kinases and phosphatases. In T. cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas disease, approximately 2% of the genome comprises protein kinases. This parasite has a heteroxenic life cycle with four different development stages. In the midgut of triatomine, epimastigotes differentiate into metacyclic trypomastigotes in a process known as metacyclogenesis. This process can be reproduced in vitro by submitting parasites to nutritional stress (NS). Aiming to contribute to the elucidation of mechanisms that trigger metacyclogenesis, we applied super-SILAC (super-stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) and LC-MS/MS to analyze different points during NS. This analysis resulted in the identification of 4,205 protein groups and 3,643 phosphopeptides with the location of 4,846 phosphorylation sites. Several phosphosites were considered modulated along NS and are present in proteins associated with various functions, such as fatty acid synthesis and the regulation of protein expression, reinforcing the importance of phosphorylation and signaling events to the parasite. These modulated sites may be triggers of metacyclogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi Dm28c epimastigotes were cultured in liver infusion tryptose medium (LITB) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum without agitation at 28ºC. The parasites were collected after 5 days of culture in the early stationary phase (ST-0min). To obtain parasites in different times of stress, the parasites were harvested after 5 days of culture by centrifugation at 7,000 x g for 5 min at 20°C, washed once with TAU medium, resuspended in TAU at a final concentration of 5 x 108 parasites/mL and incubated for 5 minutes (ST-5min), 15 minutes (ST-15min), 1 hour (ST-1h) and 2 hours (ST-2h).  For the super-SILAC standard, T. cruzi Dm28c epimastigotes were cultured in LM-14B medium, replacing lysine and arginine with lysine 13C615N2 (Lys-8) and arginine 13C615N4 (Arg-10) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), without agitation at 28ºC. Then, 3 x 109 cells were collected after 3 and 5 days of culture and at different times (5 min, 15 min, 1 h, and 2 h) of NS in vitro, which were mixed in the same proportion, generating the super-SILAC standard. Then, 1.5 x 109 cells from the super-SILAC standard was combined with 1.5 x 109 cells from each experimental time point (ST-0min, ST-5min, ST-15min, ST-1h, ST-2h).  Cells were lysed and the total protein extract (about 10 mg) were digested by FASP procedure. After protein digestion, the peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography generating 4 fractions (ACN 10%, 14%, 18% and 60%). Approximately 50 µg of peptides were separated for the proteomics analysis, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, desalted and stored in C18 Stage-Tips. The remaining volume was dried and processed for phosphopeptide enrichment with TiO2 beads, desalted and stored in C18 Stage-Tips. After elution from C18 Stage-Tips, the peptide mixtures were separated by online C18 reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nano-UPLC) and analyzed by nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry (nanoESI MS/MS) in duplicate.  The experiments were performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Separation of the peptides was performed at a flow rate of 250 nL/min of the mobile phase (MeCN, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO) with a linear gradient from 5 to 40% MeCN in 120 min for phosphoproteomics. For proteomics, the gradient ranged from 5 to 28% MeCN in 214 min followed by 28-40% MeCN in 26 min (total of 240 min). The chromatography was performed on an analytical silica column of 30 cm, 75 micron ID and C18 particles with a diameter of 1.9 µM and heated to 60 °C. The peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray (voltage 2.7 kV) and injected into the MS. The mode of acquisition was data dependent analysis (DDA) conducted as follows: a preview full scan was acquired on the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000, followed by a selection of the 10 most intense ions, which were fragmented by CID and analyzed in the Ion trap. Parallel to the MS/MS, a full scan was acquired on the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. When selecting ions for MS2, a dynamic exclusion list of 90 seconds was used. In phosphoproteomics runs, the isolation and fragmentation of the precursors containing phosphate groups were performed using the methods of neutral loss and multistage activation. The lock mass option was used at 401.922718 m/z to obtain better accuracy - error below 0.5 ppm – on a mass of tryptic peptides detected by MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by peptide sequence match in Andromeda algorithm embedded into MaxQuant platform version 1.5.2.8. The parameters were settled as the default, briefly, specific cleavage for trypsin except sites before Prolin, maximum of two missed cleavages, 20 ppm (first search) and 4.5 ppm (main search) for peptide tolerance in the MS and MS/MS match tolerance of 0.5 Da were enabled. The options “match between runs” and “re-quantify” were enabled and for phosphoproteomics, phospho (STY) sites was settled as a variable modification. The database used for peptide identification was T. cruzi Dm28c database of the UniProt (www.uniprot.org), downloaded on April 03, 2016, containing 11,346 sequences. A false positive rate of 1% was allowed by using a decoy database containing the reverse sequence of each database entry and a minimum of one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is an important event in cell signaling that is modulated by kinases and phosphatases. In Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas disease, approximately 2% of the protein-coding genes encode for protein kinases. This parasite has a heteroxenic life cycle with four different development stages. In the midgut of invertebrate vector, epimastigotes differentiate into metacyclic trypomastigotes in a process known as metacyclogenesis. This process can be reproduced in vitro by submitting parasites to nutritional stress (NS). Aiming to contribute to the elucidation of mechanisms that trigger metacyclogenesis, we applied super-SILAC (super-stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) and LC-MS/MS to analyze different points during NS. This analysis resulted in the identification of 4205 protein groups and 3643 phosphopeptides with the location of 4846 phosphorylation sites. Several phosphosites were considered modulated along NS and are present in proteins associated with various functions, such as fatty acid synthesis and the regulation of protein expression, reinforcing the importance of phosphorylation and signaling events to the parasite. These modulated sites may be triggers of metacyclogenesis.

### Keywords
Super-silac, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Nutritional stress, Metacyclogenesis, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Carlos Chagas Institute
Functional Genomics Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil

### Submitter
Aline Lucena

### Lab Head
Dr Fabricio Klerynton Marchini
Functional Genomics Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil


