### Accession
PXD005796

### Title
Membrane-bound TGF-beta on tumor-associated mesenchymal stem-like cells initiates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human colorectal cancer

### Description
Growing evidence indicates that tumor-associated stroma plays a negative role in human colorectal cancer (CRC). Nature of specific stromal cell populations involved and mechanisms underlying their negative impact remain to be fully understood. In this study we describe the expansion from human primary CRCs of a mesenchymal cell population, referred to as tumor-associated stromal cells (TASCs), resembling bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) in morphology, phenotypes and differentiation potential. We found that, upon co-culture with tumor cells, TASCs acquire membrane-bound TGF-mbTGF-expression, a phenomenon mediated by v6 integrin. MbTGF-expression proved to be critical for triggering epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells, eventually leading to enhanced dissemination of circulating tumor cells and increased metastasis formation, in an orthotopic mouse model. Our data identify CRC-associated mesenchymal stem-like cells as critical EMT initiators and suggest mbTGF- as potential novel therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics was performed on TASCs and corresponding MASCs isolated from three different CRC samples as previously described (43). In brief, cells (106/sample) were lysed in 2% Sodium Deoxycholate, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced, alkylated and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin). After desalting and drying under vacuum, peptides were labeled with isobaric tag (TMT 10-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described (43), desalted, dried under vacuum and subsequently subjected to high pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation (PMID: 21500348) and LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive Orbitrap Analyzer coupled to an Easy-1000 LC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and applying the same MS parameters as previously illustrated (43).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.1), against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2014/11/24, total number of entries: 84610). Results were imported into the Scaffold Q+ software (Proteome Software, Inc), protein false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the scaffold local FDR algorithm and set to 1%, based on the number of decoy hits. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statically analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script. All ratios were corrected for ratio distortion using the spiked-in protein calibration mix (43).

### Publication Abstract
Stromal infiltration is associated with poor prognosis in human colon cancers. However, the high heterogeneity of human tumor-associated stromal cells (TASCs) hampers a clear identification of specific markers of prognostic relevance. To address these issues, we established short-term cultures of TASCs and matched healthy mucosa-associated stromal cells (MASCs) from human primary colon cancers and, upon characterization of their phenotypic and functional profiles in vitro and in vivo, we identified differentially expressed markers by proteomic analysis and evaluated their prognostic significance. TASCs were characterized by higher proliferation and differentiation potential, and enhanced expression of mesenchymal stem cell markers, as compared to MASCs. TASC triggered epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells in vitro and promoted their metastatic spread in vivo, as assessed in an orthotopic mouse model. Proteomic analysis of matched TASCs and MASCs identified a panel of markers preferentially expressed in TASCs. The expression of genes encoding two of them, calponin 1 (CNN1) and tropomyosin beta chain isoform 2 (TPM2), was significantly associated with poor outcome in independent databases and outperformed the prognostic significance of currently proposed TASC markers. The newly identified markers may improve prognostication of primary colon cancers and identification of patients at risk.

### Keywords
Stem cells, Colorectal cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klinglebergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klinglebergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel


