### Accession
PXD011178

### Title
The use of LysargiNase complementary to trypsin in large scale phosphoproteome study for unambiguous phosphosite localization

### Description
Understanding of kinase-guided signaling pathways requires identification and analysis of phosphorylation sites. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics is a rapid and highly sensitive approach for high-throughput identification of phosphorylation sites. However, the exact localization of phosphorylation sites which depends on trypsin-centric shotgun phosphoproteomics is often arbitrary and unreliable because of the limited product ion coverage in the MS2 spectra. Therefore, phosphorylation site determination from MS data with a single protease cannot be expected to be comprehensive, regardless of the strategy used for phosphopeptide detection. Here, we have explored the application of LysargiNase which was recently reported to mirror trypsin in specificity to cleave arginine and lysine residues exclusively at the N-terminal side. Our data demonstrates that the combined application of LysargiNase and trypsin results in higher sequence coverage with more complete ladder sequences which is helpful to pinpoint the precise phosphorylation sites. Therefore, the combined use of these two enzymes will partially overcome the limitations of trypsin-centric phosphoproteomics to achieve a more reliable phosphoproteome and to increase the identification of novel phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were suspended in phospholysis buffer (9 M Urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 30 mM NaCl, 5 mM IAA, 5 mM Na4P2O7, 100 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 8.0), 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM sodium glycerophophate, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and cocktail 3 (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and sonicated on ice for 8 minutes. Then the total cell lysates were centrifuged at 17,000g for 15 min at 10 °C to remove debris. The evaluation of protein concentration and in-gel digestion were performed sequentially. In brief, 1 mg of HepG2 proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 37 °C and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. To clean the samples, proteins were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel running for a length of 0.8 cm1. The entire gel lanes were cut into 1 mm3 small cubes and incubated with trypsin2 (15 ng/μL) or LysargiNase3 (30 ng/μL) at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw files were searched in Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (version 2.1.21, Matrix Science Mascot) against the neXtProt database (version 201506). The parameters were as follows: cysteine carbamidomethyl was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, N-acetylation and phospho (STY) were set as variable modifications. The tolerances of precursor and fragment ions were set at 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. For digestion, trypsin or LysargiNase was set as protease both with two missed cleavages permitted. The identifications of proteins were filtered by: (1) the peptide length ≥7; (2) the FDR ≤ 1% at peptide level; (3) the FDR ≤ 1% at protein level; (4) at least two different peptides (non-nested) for protein identification. Additionally, PTMiner7 was employed for the evaluation of phosphosite localization.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding of the kinase-guided signaling pathways requires the identification and analysis of phosphosites. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics is a rapid and highly sensitive approach for high-throughput identification of phosphosites. However, phosphosite determination from MS data with a single protease is more likely to be ambiguous, regardless of the strategy used for phosphopeptide detection. Here, we explored the application of LysargiNase, which was recently reported to mirror trypsin in specificity to cleave arginine and lysine residues exclusively at the N-terminal side. We found that the combination of trypsin and LysargiNase mirror spectra resulted in higher ion coverage in MS<sub>2</sub> spectra. The median ion coverage values of b ions in tryptic spectra, LysargiNase spectra, and combined spectra are 8.3, 20.5, and 25.0%, respectively. As for the median ion coverage of y ions, these values are 27.8, 10.0, and 32.3%. Higher ion coverage was helpful to pinpoint the precise phosphosites. Compared to trypsin alone, the combined use of trypsin and LysargiNase mirror spectra enabled 67.1% of mirror spectra with unreliable scores (confidence score &lt;0.75) to become reliable (confidence score &#x2265; 0.75). Meanwhile, all of the mirror peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) with multiple potential phosphosites from trypsin and LysargiNase digests could be assigned one precise phosphosite after applying the combination strategy. Besides, the combination strategy could identify more novel phosphosites than the union strategy did. We synthesized three phosphopeptides corresponding to the three novel phosphosites and validated the reliability of the identification. Taken together, our data demonstrated the distinctive potential of the combination strategy presented here for unambiguous phosphosite localization (Project accession PXD011178).

### Keywords
Phosphosite localization, Phosphoproteome, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
NCPSB
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China

### Submitter
Feng Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China


