### Accession
PXD028604

### Title
Shotgun proteomics on sterile culture supernatant from S. aureus clinical isolates

### Description
Shotgun proteomics on sterile culture supernatant from S. aureus clinical isolates to determine proteins associated with pro-inflammatory phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration of S. aureus secretome was determined via DirectDetect® infrared spectrometer (Merck) as well as BCA assay according manufacturer’s protocol. S. aureus secretomes were diluted to 1 μg protein per μL in 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide and 1% sodium deoxycholate in 100mM Tris pH 8.5. An aliquot of 10 μg of protein was heated for 5 minutes at 95°C and diluted 1 in 10 in water, then 0.2 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added and incubated overnight at 37°C. The next day, trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5%, and the samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant collected and the peptides were cleaned-up using 20 μg capacity C-18 tips (Glygen). After rehydrating the membrane twice with buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and equilibrating in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) 3 times, the peptides was bound using 10 pipetting cycles. The tip was washed once with buffer A and then peptides were eluted in buffer B. Peptides were analysed on a Thermo U3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The HPLC setup used a C-18 trap column (DX160454) and a 50 cm EasySpray C-18 analytical column (ES803A) from Thermo Scientific. Mobile phases were A: 0.1% formic acid, and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. 4 µL of sample equivalent to 1 μg of peptides were loaded in 2% B, and peptides eluted over a gradient from 2% - 50% B over 45 minutes at 250 nL/min. An EasySpray source was ran in positive ion data-dependent analysis mode with settings typical of peptide analyses. Briefly, full MS scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution, automatic gain control target was 3e6, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 fragmentation was carried out on the top ten precursors, excluding 1+ precursors. Precursor isolation width was 1.4 m/z and normalized collision energy was 28. MS2 resolution was 17,500 with an automatic gain control target of 5e5. Maximum injection time was 50 ms and the exclusion window was 10 seconds. Protein concentration of S. aureus secretome was determined via DirectDetect® infrared spectrometer (Merck) as well as BCA assay according manufacturer’s protocol. S. aureus secretomes were diluted to 1 μg protein per μL in 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide and 1% sodium deoxycholate in 100mM Tris pH 8.5. An aliquot of 10 μg of protein was heated for 5 minutes at 95°C and diluted 1 in 10 in water, then 0.2 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added and incubated overnight at 37°C. The next day, trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5%, and the samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant collected and the peptides were cleaned-up using 20 μg capacity C-18 tips (Glygen). After rehydrating the membrane twice with buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and equilibrating in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) 3 times, the peptides was bound using 10 pipetting cycles. The tip was washed once with buffer A and then peptides were eluted in buffer B. Peptides were analysed on a Thermo U3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The HPLC setup used a C-18 trap column (DX160454) and a 50 cm EasySpray C-18 analytical column (ES803A) from Thermo Scientific. Mobile phases were A: 0.1% formic acid, and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. 4 µL of sample equivalent to 1 μg of peptides were loaded in 2% B, and peptides eluted over a gradient from 2% - 50% B over 45 minutes at 250 nL/min. An EasySpray source was ran in positive ion data-dependent analysis mode with settings typical of peptide analyses. Briefly, full MS scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution, automatic gain control target was 3e6, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 fragmentation was carried out on the top ten precursors, excluding 1+ precursors. Precursor isolation width was 1.4 m/z and normalized collision energy was 28. MS2 resolution was 17,500 with an automatic gain control target of 5e5. Maximum injection time was 50 ms and the exclusion window was 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification against the reviewed UniProtKB database (SwissProt; S. aureus; 11.10.2018; 11,075 proteins) using the ‘match between runs’ function, normalization by label-free quantification and refining to a minimum of one unique peptide. The MaxQuant outputs were imported into Perseus and after the removal of proteins only identified by site, reverse sequences, and contaminants, the remaining 348 proteins were subjected to further analyses. The LFQ normalized MS intensity values were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed from normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a common type of skin cancer that typically arises from premalignant precursor lesions named actinic keratoses (AK). Chronic inflammation is a well-known promoter of skin cancer progression. AK and SCC have been associated with an overabundance of the bacterium <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (<i>S. aureus</i>). Certain secreted products from <i>S. aureus</i> are known to promote cutaneous pro-inflammatory responses; however, not all <i>S. aureus</i> strains produce these. As inflammation plays a key role in SCC development, we investigated the pro-inflammatory potential and toxin secretion profiles of skin-cancer associated <i>S. aureus</i>. Sterile culture supernatants ("secretomes") of <i>S. aureus</i> clinical strains isolated from AK and SCC were applied to human keratinocytes <i>in vitro.</i> Some <i>S. aureus</i> secretomes induced keratinocytes to overexpress inflammatory mediators that have been linked to skin carcinogenesis, including IL-6, IL-8, and TNF&#x3b1;. A large phenotypic variation between the tested clinical strains was observed. Strains that are highly pro-inflammatory <i>in vitro</i> also caused more pronounced skin inflammation in mice. Proteomic characterization of <i>S. aureus</i> secretomes using mass spectrometry established that specific <i>S. aureus</i> enzymes and cytolytic toxins, including hemolysins, phenol-soluble modulins, and serine proteases, as well as currently uncharacterized proteins, correlate with the pro-inflammatory <i>S. aureus</i> phenotype. This study is the first to describe the toxin secretion profiles of AK and SCC-associated <i>S. aureus</i>, and their potential to induce a pro-inflammatory environment in the skin. Further studies are needed to establish whether these <i>S. aureus</i> products promote SCC development by mediating chronic inflammation.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Shotgun proteomics, Culture supernatant

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, 4102, Queensland, Australia. 
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Annika Krueger

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Frazer
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia


