### Accession
PXD039802

### Title
Discontinuation of chronic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol diminishes impact on male fertility and the sperm epigenome in rhesus macaques

### Description
Cannabis is commonly used amongst reproductive age males. Our group and others have shown that chronic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) use adversely impacts male fertility, but less is known about the potential reversibility of these changes. Our study’s objective was to determine if THC discontinuation mitigates THC-associated changes in male reproductive health using a rhesus macaque (RM) model of daily THC edible consumption over a 280-day period (4 spermatogenic cycles). Testicular volume, serum male hormones, semen parameters, sperm DNA fragmentation, seminal fluid proteomics, and whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) of sperm DNA were assessed at pre-THC, moderate-THC, and heavy-THC dosing, and at 70 and 140 days after THC discontinuation. Chronic THC use resulted in significant testicular atrophy, increased gonadotropins, decreased serum sex steroids, and increased DNA fragmentation. THC discontinuation led to partial recovery of testicular volume, sex steroids and sperm DNA integrity. Seminal fluid proteome analysis revealed differential expression of proteins enriched for processes related to cellular secretion, immune response, and fibrinolysis. WGBS identified significant differential methylation in heavy-THC versus pre-THC sperm, with partial restoration of methylation after discontinuation of THC. Genes associated with differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were enriched for pathways involved in nervous system development and function. This is the first study demonstrating that chronic THC use in RMs adversely impacts male reproductive health, methylation of genes involved in development, and expression of proteins important for male fertility. THC discontinuation improves impacts to male fertility, including partial restoration of THC-associated sperm DMRs in genes important for development.

### Sample Protocol
Animals: All procedures were approved by the Oregon National Primate Research Center (ONPRC) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and conformed to all applicable regulations (IP0001389). The impact of discontinuing daily THC use in a cohort of sexually mature, adult male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) (n=6) ages 8-10 years old and weighing 9.3-12.7kg, with prior proven paternity was performed.   Animals were socially housed and maintained on a standard chow diet (LabDiet 5000, Purina Mills, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) with a daily cookie containing THC (THC edible), made using research-grade THC obtained directly from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Drug Supply Program. Animals were fed the same diet of fresh chow and produce enrichment; water was always available. THC cookies were consumed on an empty stomach prior to the animal’s morning chow to ensure complete ingestion. Animals were slowly titrated up to 2.5mg/7kg/day of THC with a dose increase every 70 days (the NHP sperm life cycle is about 64 days) to model published medical marijuana acclimation recommendations. Animals were initially dosed at 0.5mg/7kg/day of THC for days 1 to 70, 1mg/7kg/day (moderate-THC dose) for days 71-140, and 2.5mg/7kg/day (heavy-THC dose) for days 141 to 210. This THC dosage was calculated from the recommended THC starting dose of 5mg (NIDA’s designated standard unit of THC for research) for a 68kg adult, 10mg for moderate users, and 20-30mg for heavy users. To minimize potential confounders and inter-animal variability, we utilized a longitudinal, single-case experimental design, where each male served as its own control during the study.   To determine peak THC concentrations with each increase in THC dosage, blood was sampled (2mL at 3-hour post ingestion) at each dose adjustment time point during THC induction. In addition, blood was sampled (2mL) during THC induction and every 70 days after THC was discontinued to determine reproductive hormone concentrations. Animal weight, scrotal ultrasound, and semen analysis were performed at the times of blood sampling.  Semen Collection/Processing: Prior to THC initiation, all males were trained by the ONPRC Behavioral Services Unit for collaborative semen collection by non-sedated electro-ejaculations. Collections were performed on three separate occasions pre-THC for baseline semen measurements and at the end of each THC dosing timepoint. For each occasion, three samples were collected from each male for proteomics, with a total of 18 samples per male. Semen samples were collected and allowed to liquefy at 37C for 30 min before evaluation. The rhesus macaque ejaculate is comprised of liquid (seminal fluid) and solid (coagulum) fractions that were separated.   Seminal Fluid Proteomic Analysis Relative protein quantitation between multiple samples was performed using isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) by the OHSU Proteomics Shared Resource. TMT reagents were used to achieve high throughput with good reproducibility and accuracy. After sample collection, a sperm-free protein assay was done on all 29 seminal fluid samples. Proteins were digested using an S-Trap micro cartridge following manufacturer’s instructions (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY). Briefly, 100 micrograms of protein/sample was dried, suspended in diluted 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, heated to 90C for 5min, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, bound to an S-trap micro column, washed to removed SDS and digested using trypsin overnight at 37C. Seminal fluid peptides were eluted from the S-trap column using 50mM TEAB, followed by 0.2% Formic acid and 50% Acetonitrile containing 0.2% Formic acid. Eluted peptides were dried, dissolved in 100 microliters of HPLC water and calorimetric peptide assay done. A common pooled sample was prepared by pooling equal volumes of each sample. Samples were distributed into two TMTpro 18-plex experiments along with 2 or 3 common pooled samples. 13 micrograms of peptides/sample (17 samples per plex) were labeled with TMTpro 18-plex reagent kits by incubating with 100 micrograms of TMT reagent for 1 hour at room temp. TMTpro labeled peptides were pooled and 45g of the pooled sample analyzed by LC-MS on a Dionex Ultimate HPLC operating in 2-D mode coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using the SPS MS3 scan mode for TMT quantitation. Each plex was separated into 20 first dimension fractions and each fraction was analyzed with a 140-min LC method.

### Data Protocol
Raw File Conversion and Database Search: MSConvert (Proteowizard toolkit) was used to convert RAW files to MS2 format for the samples. The two plexes produced 609,591 MS2/MS3 scans in total. Software (available at https://github.com/pwilmart/fasta_utilities.git) was used to download a rhesus macaque reference proteome (version 2022.05; 21,894 sequences) from UniProt. To this, a concatenated sequence-reversed decoy database was added along with common contaminants (175 sequences) to obtain 44,138 entries. Peptide sequences were assigned to the MS2 spectra (PSMs) using the Comet search engine, which was configured as follows: tryptic cleavage (maximum of two missed cleavages); monoisotopic parent ion mass tolerance of 1.25 Da; monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance of 1.0005 Da; fragment bin offset of 0.4; b-, y-, and neutral loss ions were used in scoring (flanking peaks were not used); variable modification of oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine was specified; static modifications of alkylation (+57.0215 Da) of cysteines and TMT reagents (+304.2071) at lysines and peptide N-termini were specified.    PSM Error Control: The PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git) and the target/decoy method was used for post-processing the highest scoring matches for individual PSMs (obtained from Comet) using false discovery rate (FDR) error control. Peptides of different charge states (2+, 3+, and 4+ were considered) and modification state (unmodified or oxidized) were processed to derive accurate delta mass conditional score histograms. FDR values were estimated based on target and decoy score histograms as a function of a Peptide-Prophet-like discriminant score to set thresholds for experiment-wide PSM FDR of 1%. A minimum length of 7 amino acids-length were considered for peptide matches. The number of confidently identified (1% FDR) PSMs was 104,392.  Protein Inference: The expressed proteins were inferred, using basic parsimony principles, based on the filtered PSM sequences. Homologous protein family members were grouped using an extended parsimony algorithm when evidence to distinguish family members was insufficient. In total, 1,681 proteins were detected after grouping (excluding common contaminant proteins) with 14 decoy matches, for a protein FDR of about 0.8%. Protein relative abundances were estimated from summed reporter ions of all unique PSMs mapped to each protein. The reporter ion intensities were put on a common measurement scale using the reference standard channels in each plex and the internal reference scaling method. After IRS, there were 1,395 quantifiable proteins.  Comparative Analysis: Comparison of samples for protein abundance changes associated with THC-dosing and durations was performed with Bioconductor R packages. Identified monkey protein sequences were compared to human protein sequences using BLAST to find orthologs between species and use the better protein annotation information for human.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cannabis, Quantitative proteomics, Seminal fluid, Male fertility, Isobaric labeling, Rhesus macaque, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Mail Code L-458, Portland, OR, 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Jamie Lo, MD MCR
Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Mail Code L-458, Portland, OR, 97239, USA


