### Accession
PXD019991

### Title
PRMT5 methyl proteomics in MiaPaca2 cells

### Description
Goal: To determine total PRMT5 methyl substrates and those that function through the novel substrate adaptor binding site

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteomes from 3 biological samples each in duplicate were digested with trypsin (samples=PRMT5 KO-rescue CRISPR-Cas9 KO of endogenous PRMT5 and replacement with ectopic 3X HA-tagged wildtype, "ADA" N239A, K240D, F243A mutant or catalytically dead PRMT5 in MiaPaca2 cells). Following digest, peptides underwent symmetric dimethyl arginine enrichment using the anti-SDMA antibody from Cell Signaling Technology.  2e6 cells stably expressing 3X HA tagged WT, ADA or CD mutants were infected with lentiviral sgRNA targeting PRMT5 in 6 well dishes containing 10 µg/mL polybrene (Santa Cruz). 48 hours after infections, cells were split into 10 cm dishes and selected with puromycin (1 µg/mL) for 48 hours. Following selection, cells were expanded to 3 x 150mm dishes and grown for an additional 5 days. Cells were harvested by scraping and washing 3 times in sterile DPBS. 5% of the cell pellets were set aside to confirm equivalent expression of the PRMT5 constructs and efficient and equivalent knockout of the endogenous PRMT5 across samples. The remaining cell pellets were lysed in PTMScan® Urea Lysis Buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 9.0 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (activated), 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM ß-glycerol-phosphate). Protein concentration was determined by BCA and 2.8 mg of cell lysate was used from each sample for subsequent analyses.  Mass spectrometry samples were analyzed using the PTMScan method as previously described37,38. Briefly, cellular extracts were prepared in urea lysis buffer, sonicated, centrifuged, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide.  2.8mg total protein for each sample was digested with trypsin and purified over C18 columns for enrichment with the Symmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Antibody (Cell Signaling #13563). Enriched peptides were purified over C18 STAGE tips39. Enriched peptides were subjected to secondary digest with trypsin and second STAGE tip prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Replicate injections of each sample were run non-sequentially on the instrument. Peptides were eluted using a 120-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min.  Tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using a top-twenty MS/MS method, a dynamic repeat count of one, and a repeat duration of 30 sec.  Real time recalibration of mass error was performed using lock mass (Olsen) with a singly charged polysiloxane ion m/z = 371.101237.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST and the Core platform from Harvard University40. Files were searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens FASTA database.  A mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin, with at least one tryptic (K- or R-containing) terminus required per peptide and up to four mis-cleavages allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was specified as a static modification, oxidation of methionine and mono- or di-methylation on arginine residues were allowed as variable modifications. Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using a 2.5% FDR in the Linear Discriminant module of Core. Peptides were also manually filtered using a -/+ 5ppm mass error range and presence of a di-methyl arginine residue. All quantitative results were generated using Skyline41 to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments. Accuracy of quantitative data was ensured by manual review in Skyline or in the ion chromatogram files.

### Publication Abstract
PRMT5 is an essential arginine methyltransferase and a therapeutic target in MTAP-null cancers. PRMT5 uses adaptor proteins for substrate recruitment through a previously undefined mechanism. Here, we identify an evolutionarily conserved peptide sequence shared among the three known substrate adaptors (CLNS1A, RIOK1, and COPR5) and show that it is necessary and sufficient for interaction with PRMT5. We demonstrate that PRMT5 uses modular adaptor proteins containing a common binding motif for substrate recruitment, comparable with other enzyme classes such as kinases and E3 ligases. We structurally resolve the interface with PRMT5 and show via genetic perturbation that it is required for methylation of adaptor-recruited substrates including the spliceosome, histones, and ribosomal complexes. Furthermore, disruption of this site affects Sm spliceosome activity, leading to intron retention. Genetic disruption of the PRMT5-substrate adaptor interface impairs growth of MTAP-null tumor cells and is thus a site for development of therapeutic inhibitors of PRMT5.

### Keywords
Prmt5, Lc-msms, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Broad Institute, Dana Farber Cancer Institute
Broad Institute

### Submitter
KATHLEEN MULVANEY

### Lab Head
Dr William Raj Sellers
Broad Institute, Dana Farber Cancer Institute


