### Accession
PXD014175

### Title
A chemical proteomic analysis of illudin-interacting proteins

### Description
The illudin natural product family are fungal secondary metabolites with a characteristic spirocyclopropyl-substituted fused 6,5-bicyclic ring system. They have been extensively studied for their cytotoxicity in various tumor cell types and semisynthetic derivatives with improved therapeutic characteristics have progressed into clinical trials. While it is believed that this potent alkylating compound class is mainly acting via DNA modification, little is known about its binding to protein sites in a cellular context. In order to reveal putative protein targets of the illudin family in live cancer cells, we employed a semisynthetic strategy to access a series of illudin-based probes for activity-based protein profiling (ABPP). While the probes largely retained potent cytotoxicity, proteomic profiling studies unravelled multiple protein hits suggesting that illudins exert their mode of action not from addressing a specific protein target but rather from DNA modification and unselective protein binding.

### Sample Protocol
Preparative in situ ABPP: Isotopically labelled A549 cells (SILAC) at 90% confluence (15 cm dishes; Sarstedt) were treated (37°C, 5% CO2, 1 h) with probe (3 µM) or DMSO in PBS (10 mL; final concentration of DMSO 0.1%). Isotopic labels were switched for replicate experiments. For ILS-1 PP experiments, cells were irradiated with UV light (Philips TL-D 18W BLB, 360 nm maximum, 4°C, 30 min), prior to detachment by cell scraping and cell lysis (1 mL lysis buffer; 1% v/v NP40 and 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate in PBS; 4°C, 15 min). Following separation of soluble and insoluble fraction by centrifugation (20,000 x g, 4°C, 15 min) and resuspension of the insoluble fraction in PBS (sonication at 10% intensity, 15 s), protein concentration was measured by BCA assay and equal protein amounts resulting from probe- and DMSO-treated samples of the oppose isotopic label were pooled. Labelled proteins of both fractions (á 1880 µL) were reacted via CuAAC (0.20 mM azide-PEG3-biotin conjugate, 0.52 mM TCEP, 0.050 mM TBTA ligand and 0.50 mM CuSO4; RT, 1 h), followed by precipitation with ice-cold acetone (8 mL; -20°C, 18 h). Proteins were collected by centrifugation (16,900 x g, 4°C, 15 min), washed with ice-cold methanol (2 x 1 mL) and resuspended in 0.2% w/v SDS in PBS (0.5 mL; sonication at 10% intensity, 15 s). Affinity enrichment (RT, 1 h) was performed with avidin agarose resin (Sigma, pre-washed with 0.4% w/v SDS in PBS (3 x 1 mL); typically 50 μL of bead slurry was used for enrichment). Beads were stringently washed following pull-down (1 mL each time): 3 x 0.4% w/v SDS in PBS, 2 x 6 M urea in H2Odd and 3 x PBS. Avidin agarose beads with bound proteins were resuspended in denaturation buffer (200 µL; 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5), followed by reduction with dithiothreitol (DTT; 1 mM; 37°C, 45 min), alkylation using iodoacetamide (IAA, 5.5 mM; 25°C, 30 min) and treatment with DTT (4 mM; 25°C, 30 min). Enzymatic digestion using Lys-C (2.5 ng/µL, MS-grade; Wako) was carried out at RT for 2 h, upon which samples were diluted with triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB; 50 mM, dilution 1:4) and proteins further digested with trypsin (3.75 ng/µL; sequencing grade, modified, Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. Samples were acidified to 1% v/v formic acid (FA; final pH ~2-3) and peptides were desalted and concentrated using Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac cartridges (Waters): The C18 material was pre-treated with MeCN (1 mL), H2Odd/0.5% TFA (1 mL), 80% MeCN/0.5% FA (1 mL) and H2Odd/0.1% TFA (2 mL) prior to sample loading. The beads were pelleted and the peptide solution loaded to the cartridges. Peptides bound to the cartridges were washed with H2Odd/0.1% TFA (3 mL) and H2Odd/0.5% FA (1 mL) and eluted with 80% MeCN/0.5% FA (750 µL). The peptides were freeze-dried using a speedvac centrifuge. LC-MS/MS analysis: Prior to mass spectrometry peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% FA and filtered (0.22 µm PVDF filters; Millipore). Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed for 10 min with 0.1% FA, then transferred to an analytical column (Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC, 75 µM ID x 15 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using a 125 min gradient from 5% to 32% (105 min from 5% to 22%, 10 min to 32% and 10 min to 90%) MeCN in 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were ionised using a nanospray source at 1.9 kV and a capillary temperature of 275°C. Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a top speed data-dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Full scan acquisition (scan range of 300 – 1700 m/z) was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120000 (at m/z 200) and with an automatic gain control ion target value of 4e5, maximum injection time set to 50 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion of 60 s were enabled. Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of fluoranthene cations (EASY-ETD/IC source). Most intense precursors with charge states of 2 – 7 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Ions were collected to a target of 1e4 for a maximum injection time of 40 ms with “inject ions for all available parallelizable time” enabled. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detected in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.0) with Andromeda as search engine with following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as well as acetylation of protein N-termini as dynamic modifications; trypsin and LysC as the proteolytic enzymes with two missed cleavages allowed; 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, downloaded on 15.10.2018). Quantification of SILAC pairs was carried out based on unique peptides only using “Arg6” and “Lys4” as “light” and “Arg10“ and “Lys8“ as “heavy” isotope identifiers requiring a minimum ratio count of 2. “I = L” and “requantify” (default settings) options were used. For raw files resulting from label switched experiments, the isotope identifiers were defined in reverse order resulting in ratios probe vs. DMSO.

### Publication Abstract
The illudin natural product family are fungal secondary metabolites with a characteristic spirocyclopropyl-substituted fused 6,5-bicyclic ring system. They have been extensively studied for their cytotoxicity in various tumor cell types, and semisynthetic derivatives with improved therapeutic characteristics have progressed to clinical trials. Although it is believed that this potent alkylating compound class acts mainly through DNA modification, little is known about its binding to protein sites in a cellular context. To reveal putative protein targets of the illudin family in live cancer cells, we employed a semisynthetic strategy to access a series of illudin-based probes for activity-based protein profiling (ABPP). While the probes largely retained potent cytotoxicity, proteomic profiling studies unraveled multiple protein hits, suggesting that illudins exert their mode of action not from addressing a specific protein target but rather from DNA modification and unselective protein binding.

### Keywords
Illudins, Activity based protein profiling

### Affiliations
TU Muenchen Department of Chemistry Organic Chemistry II
TU München

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
TU Muenchen Department of Chemistry Organic Chemistry II


