### Accession
PXD003634

### Title
An up to date workflow for plant (phospho)proteomics

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most common post-translational modifications (PTMs), which can regulate protein activity and localization, as well as protein–protein interactions in numerous cellular processes. Phosphopeptide enrichment techniques enabled plant researchers to acquire insight in phosphorylation-controlled signaling networks in various plant species. However, most phosphoproteome analyses of plant samples still involve stable isotope labeling, peptide fractionation, and demand lots of mass spectrometry (MS) time. Here, we present a simple workflow to probe, map and catalogue plant phosphoproteomes, requiring low starting materials, no labeling, no fractionation, and limited analysis time. Following optimization of the different experimental steps on Arabidopsis material, we transferred our workflow to maize, a major monocot crop, to study stress signaling upon drought.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Tryptic Digestion Plant material was harvested in three biological replicates. One g of fresh weight material was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and manually ground into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar. Proteins were extracted in homogenization buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 0.1 M KCl, 30% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT in milliQ water, and the appropriate amounts of the Complete protease inhibitor mixture and the PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (both from Roche) were added. The samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4°C for 15 min at 2,500×g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 3, 1 and 4 volumes of methanol, chloroform and water, respectively. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000×g, and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of 4 volumes methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 2,500×g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone and re-suspended in 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM respectively, and the reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30°C in the dark. Before digestion, the samples were buffer exchanged on Illustra NAP columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) to 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8) and the protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay. One mg of the proteins was pre-digested with EndoLysC (Wako Chemicals) for 4 h, followed by a digestion with trypsin overnight (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade), both digestions occurring at 37°C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The eluates were split into two and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. One half of the samples served for proteome analyses and were re-dissolved in 30 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA right before LC-MS/MS analysis.   Phosphopeptide Enrichment The dried eluates were resuspended in 100 µl of loading solvent (80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA) and incubated with 1 mg MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC microspheres for 20 min at room temperature. The microspheres were next washed once with wash solvent 1 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and two times with wash solvent 2 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes (80 µl) of a 1% NH4OH solution, followed immediately by acidification to pH ≤ 3 with formic acid. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in 50 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  Mass Spectrometry Each sample was analyzed twice (i.e. in two technical replicates) via LC−MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 3 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water) and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 170 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 5 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8  charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis For the Arabidopsis samples, MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot database containing A. thaliana sequences (34,509 entries, version November, 2014) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8). For the maize samples, the searches were done against a Zea mays database downloaded from PLAZA Monocots 3.0 (Proost et al. 2015) containing sequences (39,305 entries, version 2014) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.30). For all searches, a precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass re-calibration) and set to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was selected as enzyme setting. Cleavages between lysine/arginine-proline residues and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues was selected as variable modification. For the samples enriched for phosphopeptides phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were set as additional variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30. The MaxLFQ algorithm allowing label-free quantification (Cox et al. 2014) and the ‘Matching Between Runs’ feature were enabled. All mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the PRIDE accession PXD0… . For the quantitative maize proteome and phosphoproteome analyses, the ‘ProteinGroups’ and ‘Phospho(STY)sites’ output files, respectively, generated by the MaxQuant search was loaded into Perseus, the data analysis software available in the MaxQuant package. Only proteins or phosphosites which were quantified in at least two of the three biological replicates of at least one sample were retained. Log2 transformed protein LFQ intensities or phosphosites intensities were centered by subtracting the median of the entire set of protein/phosphosite intensities per sample. A two-sample test with p<0.05 was carried out to test the differences between groups. The statistically significant hits were then Z-scored and clustered into groups by a hierarchical clustering analysis based on Euclidean distance.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most common post-translational modifications (PTMs), which can regulate protein activity and localization as well as protein-protein interactions in numerous cellular processes. Phosphopeptide enrichment techniques enable plant researchers to acquire insight into phosphorylation-controlled signaling networks in various plant species. Most phosphoproteome analyses of plant samples still involve stable isotope labeling, peptide fractionation, and demand a lot of mass spectrometry (MS) time. Here, we present a simple workflow to probe, map, and catalogue plant phosphoproteomes, requiring relatively low amounts of starting material, no labeling, no fractionation, and no excessive analysis time. Following optimization of the different experimental steps on Arabidopsis thaliana samples, we transferred our workflow to maize, a major monocot crop, to study signaling upon drought stress. In addition, we included normalization to protein abundance to identify true phosphorylation changes. Overall, we identified a set of new phosphosites in both Arabidopsis thaliana and maize, some of which are differentially phosphorylated upon drought. All data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003634, but to provide easy access to our model plant and crop data sets, we created an online database, Plant PTM Viewer ( bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/ptm_viewer/ ), where all phosphosites identified in our study can be consulted.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis, Maize

### Affiliations
Ghent University VIB
VIB/UGent

### Submitter
Elisabeth Stes

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
Ghent University VIB


