### Accession
PXD022287

### Title
A dataset for training/testing machine learning models of peptide feature detection: Human HELA LC-MSMS

### Description
We introduce MSTracer, a tool for peptide feature detection from MS1, which incorporates a machine-learning-combined scoring function based on peptide isotopic distribution and peptide intensity shape on the LC-MS map. By using Support Vector Regression (SVR), the quality of detected peptide features is remarkably improved. By utilising Neural Networks (NN), scores that indicate the quality of features are assigned for detected features as well. We use the Human HELA LC-MSMS dataset to train and test the results and compare with MaxQuant, OpenMS, and Dinosaur.

### Sample Protocol
The HELA protein sample were processed with disulfide reduction, alkylation, and then digested with enzyme Trypsin. The instrument is Orbitrap Fusion. Fragmentaion methods are HCD and ETD.

### Data Protocol
MSConverter was used to convert the “.raw” file to “.mzML”. Both MS and MS/MS spectra were centroided. MSGF+ was used to identify the peptides from the MS/MS spectra. The search parameters were the following: Enzyme is set to be trypsin; Carbamidomethylating on Cysteine was used as fixed PTM was used as variable PTM; Precursor mass tolerance was set to be 5ppm and isotope error range was set to be [0, 1]. The four programs, IsoTracer (our program), MaxQuant, Dinosaur and OpenMS, were used to detect peptide features from the MS spectra, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) has been widely used in proteomics. Although a typical experiment includes both MS and MS/MS scans, existing bioinformatics research has focused far more on MS/MS data than on MS data. In MS data, each peptide produces a few trails of signal peaks, which are collectively called a peptide feature. Here, we introduce MSTracer, a new software tool for detecting peptide features from MS data. The software incorporates two scoring functions based on machine learning: one for detecting the peptide features and the other for assigning a quality score to each detected feature. The software was compared with several existing tools and demonstrated significantly better performance.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Waterloo

### Submitter
Xiangyuan Zeng

### Lab Head
Dr Bin Ma
University of Waterloo


