### Accession
PXD033340

### Title
Multi-Omics and Informatics Analysis of FFPE Tissues Derived from Melanoma Patients with Long/Short Responses to Anti-PD1 Therapy Reveals Pathways of Response

### Description
Anti-PD-1 based immune therapies are thought to be dependent on antigen processing and presentation mechanisms. To characterize the immune-dependent mechanisms that predispose stage III/IV melanoma patients to respond to anti-PD-1 therapies, we performed a multi-omics study consisting of expression proteomics and targeted immune-oncology-based mRNA sequencing. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples were obtained from stage III/IV patients with melanoma prior to anti-PD-1 therapy. The patients were first stratified into poor and good responders based on whether their tumors had or had not progressed while on anti-PD-1 therapy for 1 year. We identified 263 protein/gene candidates that displayed differential expression, of which 223 were identified via proteomics and 40 via targeted-mRNA analyses. The downstream analyses of expression profiles using MetaCore software demonstrated an enrichment of immune system pathways involved in antigen processing/presentation and cytokine production/signaling. Pathway analyses showed interferon (IFN)-γ-mediated signaling via NF-κB and JAK/STAT pathways to affect immune processes in a cell-specific manner and to interact with the inducible nitric oxide synthase. We review these findings within the context of available literature on the efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy. The comparison of good and poor responders, using efficacy of PD-1-based therapy at 1 year, elucidated the role of antigen presentation in mediating response or resistance to anti-PD-1 blockade.

### Sample Protocol
To overcome the dynamic range in protein amounts from abundant, such as actin, to minute, proteomic workflows, we typically used peptide prefractionation and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (i.e., LC–MS/MS). Even with multiplexing, instrument time and cost remain barriers to the analysis of large cohorts [118]. Furthermore, some clinical samples (such as tissue microarray or laser capture microdissected specimens) have limited quantities of total protein (i.e., 1–2 μg) and are too small for effective prefractionation, such as the ones in this study. Therefore, digests of human FFPE melanoma tissue samples were analyzed using LC–MS/MS without prefractionation, but an alternative strategy can be used to generate additional protein identification and quantification. A pooled sample was created from excess material from each tryptic digest, fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography, and analyzed with LC–MS/MS. Then, the data analysis strategy includes peptide sequence identification from the individual LC–MS/MS data generated from each patient sample and matched to a library generated from the multiple LC–MS/MS analyses of the fractionated peptides from the pooled sample, which contained an equal mixture of all the samples in the patient cohort (Figure 1). Relative quantitation was significantly enhanced by matching the data to a comprehensive peptide library generated from the analysis of the pool in the same batch of samples. This matching greatly increased the number of peptide identifications, thereby providing more evidence for the measurement of each protein. FFPE tissue slices were deparaffinized with xylene, then rehydrated sequentially in 100%, 85%, and 70% ethanol. To assist in antigen retrieval, incubations with aqueous ammonium bicarbonate were performed for 2 h at 80 °C and 1 h at 60 °C, followed by sonication. After measuring the protein concentration, the proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate w/w ratio = 1:20), and the peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Hypersep C18, ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). A pooled peptide library was generated from an LC–MS/MS analysis of 24 fractions concatenated after basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography. A Dionex U3000 nanoUPLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Waltham, MA, USA) was used to analyze the fractions and each individual FFPE tissue sample.

### Data Protocol
The software packages Mascot and Sequest contained in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) were used to identify the proteins, and MaxQuant analyses were performed for relative quantification.  This upload contains the Mascot database search results. The data generated in the mRNA and proteomic experiments were analyzed. Within a sample derived from a patient, the mRNA panel was normalized by dividing the abundance of each mRNA by the geometric mean of 14 (out of 15) housekeeping genes. One housekeeping gene, TBP, was excluded from the analysis due to low signal intensity. A scaling factor of 400,000 was applied because it was the lowest multiple of 100,000 to result in no log2 values <1. Protein spectra, quantified using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute, Martinsried, Germany), were normalized using IRON (Iterative Rank-Order Normalization) (iron_generic --proteomics) against the median sample (findmedian --spreadsheet --pearson). Downstream 2-group differential expression analyses were performed (good and poor responders) and filtered using the following cutoffs: log2 ratio ≥log2 (1.5-fold change), t test <0.05, and Hellinger distance >0.25. For proteomics data, an additional filter excluded rows mapping to bovine proteins or entirely to reverse amino acid sequences. Gene lists were pruned from the proteomic and mRNA experiments to keep only those genes observed in their respective experimental proteomics, mRNA, or combined datasets. This pruning was completed to account for the immune bias of the mRNA targeted panel. Pathway enrichment of differentially expressed genes was performed by applying Fisher’s exact test to the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) gene lists. Prior to pathway enrichment of differentially expressed gene lists, the MSigDB gene lists were filtered to keep only those genes observed in their respective experimental proteomics, mRNA, or combined datasets. This prefiltering was performed to account for the immune-related bias of the targeted-mRNA panel. Literature interaction networks of differentially expressed genes were generated with MetaCore (Clarivate Analytics, Philadelphia, PA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Anti-PD-1 based immune therapies are thought to be dependent on antigen processing and presentation mechanisms. To characterize the immune-dependent mechanisms that predispose stage III/IV melanoma patients to respond to anti-PD-1 therapies, we performed a multi-omics study consisting of expression proteomics and targeted immune-oncology-based mRNA sequencing. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples were obtained from stage III/IV patients with melanoma prior to anti-PD-1 therapy. The patients were first stratified into poor and good responders based on whether their tumors had or had not progressed while on anti-PD-1 therapy for 1 year. We identified 263 protein/gene candidates that displayed differential expression, of which 223 were identified via proteomics and 40 via targeted-mRNA analyses. The downstream analyses of expression profiles using MetaCore software demonstrated an enrichment of immune system pathways involved in antigen processing/presentation and cytokine production/signaling. Pathway analyses showed interferon (IFN)-&#x3b3;-mediated signaling via NF-&#x3ba;B and JAK/STAT pathways to affect immune processes in a cell-specific manner and to interact with the inducible nitric oxide synthase. We review these findings within the context of available literature on the efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy. The comparison of good and poor responders, using efficacy of PD-1-based therapy at 1 year, elucidated the role of antigen presentation in mediating response or resistance to anti-PD-1 blockade.

### Keywords
Immune checkpoint blockade, Melanoma, Label free expression proteomics

### Affiliations
Cutaneous Oncology and Immunology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Markowitz, MD/PhD
Cutaneous Oncology and Immunology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


