### Accession
PXD008250

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum schizont proteome

### Description
Proteome of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum at schizont life cycle stage during blood stage development

### Sample Protocol
Human erythrocytes (Rh+) infected with P.falciparum parasites (Palo Alto strain, mycoplasma- free) were cultivated in growth medium (GM), consisting of RPMI 1640 supplemented with 25mM HEPES and NaHCO3, 0,032mg/ml gentamycin sulfate, 2mM glutamine, 20mM glucose, 5 mM adenine, 0,6 mM mannitole, and 10%(v/v) decomplemented Rh+ human plasma (local blood bank). Cultures were maintained at 37°C under 5% CO2-95% air-atmosphere, at 1% haematocrit. Synchronous cultures were obtained separating culture of predominant schizont stage on an isotonic 10/40/80% v/v Percoll gradient (containing PBS, 10mM glucose, 330mM mannitole) and collecting the fraction of schizonts lying on 40-80% interface. Parasites were then washed twice with warmed RPMI 1640 medium, containing 25 mM HEPES and blood was added to a parasitemia of 10%. Haematocrit was adjusted with GM to 1% and cultures were incubated in at 37C for schizogony. Isolated schizonts (7.5x107 infected erythrocytes) were harvested and subsequently lysed in 4% SDS in PBS, 4X Laemmli Sample Buffer, and reduced with 50 mM DTT at 95 0C for 5 minutes prior to protein gel electrophoresis. The soluble fraction was divided into three gel lanes and the pellet fraction into two gel lanes. Gel based fractionation of the proteins prior to tryptic digestion was conducted by SDS PAGE. Gels were stained with Coomassie G-250 (Bio-Rad) and cut into 10 slices per cellular fraction. Gel slices were treated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested by trypsin overnight at 37 0C Tryptic digests were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA and purified by STAGE tips. Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry:  Peptide identification experiments were performed using a nano-HPLC Agilent 1100 flow system connected on line to a 7 Tesla linear ion trap (LTQ) ion cyclotron resonance FT mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher,Bremen, Germany). Digested samples were measured up to four times to increase the number of low abundance protein identifications. Peptides were separated on 15 cm 100 um inner diameter PicoTip columns (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with 3 um Reprosil C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a 90 min gradient from 12% buffer B to 40% buffer B (buffer B contained 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column tip were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer with a spray voltage of 2.0 –2.2 kV. Data acquisition with the LTQ-FT instrument was performed in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS2. Full-scan MS spectra of intact peptides (m/z 350–1500) with an automated gain control accumulation target value of 1,000,0000 ions were acquired in the Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance cell with a resolution of 50,000. The four most abundant ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap by applying collisionally induced dissociation using an accumulation target value of 10,000, a capillary temperature of 100 °C, and a normalized collision energy of 27%. A dynamic exclusion of ions previously sequenced within 180 s was applied. All unassigned charge states and singly charged ions were excluded from sequencing. A minimum of 500 counts was required for MS2 selection.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectrum files were converted into Mascot generic peak lists by MaxQuant (version 1.0. 13.13). Proteins were identified by searching peak lists containing fragmentation spectra with Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Science) against the P. falciparum database (PlasmoDB version 6.1, 5479 sequences from http://plasmodb.org/common/downloads/release-6.1/Pfalciparum/) supplemented with the human International Protein Index database (version 3.52, 73,928 sequences) and frequently observed contaminants and concatenated with reversed copies of all entries. Mascot search parameters for protein identification specified an initial mass tolerance of 30 ppm for the parental peptide and 0.5 Da for fragmentation spectra and a trypsin specificity allowing up to three miscleaved sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. The required minimal peptide length was set at 6 amino acids. Internal mass calibration of measured ions and peptide validation by establishing false discovery rates (FDRs) was performed by MaxQuant. A final absolute recalibrated mass tolerance for the parental peptide was set at 10 ppm. We accepted proteins with an FDR better than 1% and multiply charged peptides with an FDR better than 1% and not more than three variable modifications based on the number of accepted identifications of the reversed protein sequences. For proteins identified by one peptide, we applied a more stringent threshold and accepted unmodified peptides with a Mascot score threshold of 40 that were unambiguously assigned to one protein by a Mascot peptide delta score larger than 10.  To determine protein abundance values mass spectrometric data were quantified by a peptide count analysis that computed emPAI values for all proteins with emPAI values calculated according to the following formula: emPAI = 10 EXP (PAI) with Protein Abundance Index (PAI) = n (observed peptides) / n (observable peptides).

### Publication Abstract
Infection with Plasmodium can elicit antibodies that inhibit parasite survival in the mosquito, when they are ingested in an infectious blood meal. Here, we determine the transmission-reducing activity (TRA) of naturally acquired antibodies from 648 malaria-exposed individuals using lab-based mosquito-feeding assays. Transmission inhibition is significantly associated with antibody responses to Pfs48/45, Pfs230, and to 43 novel gametocyte proteins assessed by protein microarray. In field-based mosquito-feeding assays the likelihood and rate of mosquito infection are significantly lower for individuals reactive to Pfs48/45, Pfs230 or to combinations of the novel TRA-associated proteins. We also show that naturally acquired purified antibodies against key transmission-blocking epitopes of Pfs48/45 and Pfs230 are mechanistically involved in TRA, whereas sera depleted of these antibodies retain high-level, complement-independent TRA. Our analysis demonstrates that host antibody responses to gametocyte proteins are associated with reduced malaria transmission efficiency from humans to mosquitoes.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Human malaria, Schizont

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry Plymouth University (UK)
Plymouth University

### Submitter
Edwin Lasonder

### Lab Head
Dr Edwin Lasonder
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry Plymouth University (UK)


