### Accession
PXD002027

### Title
Plasma membrane proteomics in the maize primary root elongation zone under water stress conditions

### Description
Maintenance of root growth is critical to plant adaptation to drought conditions. Previous work on the maize (Zea mays L.) primary root under water stress showed that cell elongation is maintained in the apical region of the growth zone but progressively inhibited further from the apex. These responses involve spatially differential and coordinated regulation of cellular growth processes, including modifications of both cell production rate and cell wall extensibility. As the interface between the cytoplasm and the apoplast (including the cell wall), the plasma membrane is likely to play major functions in the coordination of cell production and expansion. In addition, plasma membrane proteins may be involved in solute uptake for osmotic adjustment, pH regulation, ion homeostasis and other critical processes in roots growing under water-stressed conditions. Due to technical limitations, however, plasma membrane proteomic studies have not been reported for water-stressed tissues. Using a simplified method for enrichment of plasma membrane proteins, we compared the developmental distribution of plasma membrane proteins that are differentially regulated in the growth zone of well-watered and water-stressed roots.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from three distinct regions of maize primary roots subjected to well-watered and water-stressed conditions. Total protein extracts were subjected to ultracentrifugation and Brij-58 treatments to enrich for plasma membrane proteins using a previously described protocol (Zhang et al (2011)  Proteomics 11(9) 1780-1788). Plasma membrane-enriched fractions were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE and each gel lane cut into 20 slices. Proteins in each slice were digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides from each gel slice analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap instrument. Eight protein samples representing different treatment/root region conditions were analyzed in each experiment (8 x 20 gel slices), and the experiment was performed three times (160 samples x 3 replicates = 480 total MS samples).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Mascot Distiller version 2.3.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot (server version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to analyze the MS/MS spectra by searching an in-house Zea Mays database (ZeaMays_20101224.fasta; protein sequences downloaded from NCBI) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.80 Da. Oxidation of methionine and iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine were specified as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma membrane proteins, Gelc-ms/ms, Spectral counting, Maize

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Division of Biochemistry, University of Missouri

### Submitter
Jeff Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Peck
Division of Biochemistry, University of Missouri


