### Accession
PXD027737

### Title
Nrf2 is a central regulator of the metabolic landscape in macrophages and finetunes their inflammatory response

### Description
To overcome oxidative, inflammatory, and metabolic stress, cells have evolved networks of cytoprotective proteins controlled by transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2 p45-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and its main negative regulator the Kelch-like ECH associated protein 1 (Keap1). Here, we used high-resolution mass-spectrometry to characterize the proteomes of macrophages with altered Nrf2 status. Our analysis revealed significant differences among the genotypes in cellular metabolism and redox homeostasis, which we validated with Seahorse flux and metabolomics, as well as in anti-viral immune pathways, translational regulation and mitosis. Nrf2 disruption significantly affected the proteome following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation, with alterations in redox, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and innate immunity predominantly. Of note, LPS stimulation was found to promote mitochondrial fusion in a process that was dependent on Nrf2. The Keap1 inhibitor, 4-octyl itaconate (4-OI), a derivative of the mitochondrial immunometabolite itaconate, remodeled the inflammatory macrophage proteome, increasing redox and suppressing anti-viral immune effectors in a Nrf2-dependent manner. These data suggest that Nrf2 activation facilitates metabolic reprogramming, mitochondrial adaptation, and finetunes the innate immune response in macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, protein digestion, fractionation and peptide LC-MS analysis were performed as described (Howden et al, Nat. Immunol.). Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in 400 μl lysis buffer [4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride], lysates were boiled and sonicated before alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22 °C in the dark. Proteins were digested with LysC and Trypsin, subjected to TMT labeling and the TMT-labelled samples were fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase chromatography. Fractions were dried, peptides (1 μg) dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Dionex ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system (RSLCnano).

### Data Protocol
The TMT-labeled samples were collected and analyzed using Maxquant (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016) v. 1.6.2.10. The FDR threshold was set to 1% for each of the respective Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) and Protein levels. The data were searched with the following parameters; type was set to Reporter ion MS3 with 6plex TMT, stable modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications, oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus), deamidation (NQ), with a 2 missed tryptic cleavages threshold. Minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Proteins and peptides were identified using UniProt (SwissProt May 2018). Run parameters have been deposited to PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2019) along with the full MaxQuant quantification output.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Nrf2, Keap1, Tmt, Bmdm, Murine

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen A. Cantrell
Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


