### Accession
PXD010199

### Title
Dyslipidemia Alters HDL Metabolism and Function in NAFLD

### Description
Dyslipidemia and inflammation play key roles in the pathogenesis of both nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and atherosclerosis. NAFLD, particularly its severe form nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is associated with increased cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. HDL (high density lipoprotein- also a CVD risk) are decreased in NAFLD but whether HDL function is abnormal in NAFLD is unknown. Furthermore, it is unknown whether dyslipidemia contributes to reduced HDL function in NAFLD and whether hepatic inflammation further impairs HDL function in patients with NASH. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate HDL function and to examine the effect of dyslipidemia and inflammation on HDL metabolism in patients with biopsy-proven simple steatosis (SS) and NASH.  RESULTS: Compared to controls, SS and NASH subjects had significantly higher levels of plasma triglyceride, insulin, and were more insulin resistant (HOMA, P<0.05) with no differences in total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, ApoB100 and ApoAI levels. NAFLD patients had increased production and degradation rates of both HDLc and ApoAI that resulted in their levels remaining stable. The degradation rates also were increased of other HDL proteins, including ApoAII, ApoAIV, vitamin D-binding protein, and complement 3 (all P<0.05). NAFLD patients had increased activities of LCAT and CETP, indicating altered HDL lipidation. NAFLD induced alterations in HDL metabolism were associated with reduced anti-oxidant but increased pro-inflammatory activity of HDL. However, no differences were observed in either HDL function or the kinetics of HDLc and HDL proteins between SS and NASH subjects.

### Sample Protocol
H2O-metabolic labeling was used to study HDL function and HDL protein dynamics in SS, NASH patients (8/group) and BMI- and age-matched healthy controls (n=9) in vivo. To assess the role of HDL maturation and remodeling on stability of HDL proteins, we quantified the activities of lecithin cholesterol ester acyl transferase (LCAT) and cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP), the key HDL protein involved in HDL lipidation. HDL’s anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and cholesterol efflux properties were measured using in vitro assays.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, all the MS/MS spectra obtained from the mass spectrometer (included in the dataset as RAW) were transformed into a MZML peak list file using ProteoWizard MSconvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools), and the MZML file was searched using the Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The Search file is included in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ss, Disease, Cardiovascular, Dyslipidemia, Inflammation, Metabolism, Nash, Steatosis, Simple, Hepatic, Nafld, Steatohepatitis, Nonalcoholic

### Affiliations
Neomed
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Northeast Ohio Medical University Rootstown, OH, USA

### Submitter
Serguei Ilchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Takhar Kasumov
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences Northeast Ohio Medical University Rootstown, OH, USA


