### Accession
PXD004995

### Title
Sites of aspirin-mediated lysine acetylation in HeLa cells, part 2

### Description
Aspirin, or acetylsalicylic acid is widely used to control pain, inflammation and fever. Important to this function is its ability to irreversibly acetylate cyclooxygenases at active site serines. Aspirin has the potential to acetylate other amino-acid side-chains, leading to speculation that aspirin-mediated lysine acetylation could explain some of its drug actions or side-effects. Using a labeled form of aspirin, aspirin-d3, we identified over 12000 sites of lysine acetylation from cultured human cells. Although aspirin amplifies acetylation signals at thousands of sites, cells tolerate aspirin mediated acetylation very well unless endogenous deacetylases are inhibited. Apart from a limited number of cellular proteins that are substantially acetylated under endogenous conditions, aspirin mediated acetylation leads to a large increase in the acetylation of many proteins even although they remain at very low stoichiometry. This reinforces the idea that a major function of cellular deacetylases is the suppression of non-specific or non-enzymatic protein acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
For the SILAC experiments used for calculating acetylation site occupancy ("MixO") and for investigating dynamics of aspirin-mediated lysine acetylation (Mixes A-E) a single 150mm dish of cells was cultured for each time-point, except the 8h aspirin, 0h recovery condition, which had 8 plates because it was being used as a reference (see paper and "MS raw file detail_20160913" for further details).  Cells were washed three times with PBS and scraped off the dishes. The resultant cell pellet was lysed in 4 pellet volumes of 6M urea, 2M thiourea in 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (lysis buffer). The lysates were sonicated on ice (Branson sonifier, narrow tip, 40%) for a total sonication time of 140 s with 20 s on, 20 s off cycles. Protein yields were determined by Bradford’s assay to be 2-5mg per lysate. Samples were reduced by addition of DTT to 1mM for 30 min at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 5mM iodoacetamide during centrifugation at 20000g for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Any remaining debris was cleared from supernatants by 0.2 μm filtration. Proteins were digested by incubation with 1:200 (w:w) ratio LysC:protein (200 μg - Wako) at room temperature for 4 h. Peptide samples were diluted four times with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate before digestion each with 1:400 (w:w) ratio trypsin:protein (SIGMA trypsin gold) for 16 h at room temperature. Digestions were halted by acidification with addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution to pH ~2-3 (to approximately 0.6% TFA v:v). Precipitate was removed by centrifugation at 3000g for 15 mins before 0.2 μm filtration. For each sample peptides were purified by C18 reverse phase chromatography using spin columns (Waters Sep-Pak) as described by the manufacturers. Peptides were eluted from columns by 70% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Peptide concentrations were estimated using OD 260 and OD 280 measurements and the Warburg-Christian method. An volume equivalent to 300 μg peptide was removed for each batch (for use as ‘Crude’ analysis) and these along with the remaining peptide samples were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge attempting to avoid over-drying. The 300 μg ‘Crude’ samples were each resuspended to a concentration of 0.85 mg.mL-1 in 0.5% acetic acid, 0.1% TFA and carried forward for MS analysis. The remaining peptides were resuspended in IP buffer (50mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 100mM NaCl). Any undissolved peptides were removed by centrifugation at 20000g for 30 minutes. Peptide solutions were requantified by the Warburg-Christian method. To purify acetylated lysine peptides, immune affinity chomatorgraphy was used. Briefly: 10uL anti-acetylated lysine agarose beads (ImmuneChem) pre-equilibrated with IP buffer was mixed with each peptide solution for 16 h at 4ºC. The resin was washed three times with 1 mL IP buffer before elution of peptides with three washes with 100 μL 0.1% TFA. Peptide solutions were desalted using two 4 ply STAGE tips per prep, and lyophilized peptide elutions resuspended in 60 μL 0.5% acetic acid, 0.1% TFA. These were carried forward for MS analysis as ‘IP’ samples for each treatment.  Peptide samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) over various gradient lengths from 90 minutes to 240 minutes. Specific details of MS run conditions can be found within the raw data files.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and searched against UniProtKB human proteome (canonical and isoform sequences). The variable modification for lysine acetylated by aspirin was defined in Andromeda to allow automated database searching for Acetyl-d3 K. Specificity was considered only for lysines, composition was set to H-1C2OHx3 (monoisotopic mass 45.029394924), position at peptide C-termini was excluded, and two diagnostic peaks were defined; H8C7ONHx3 (128.1028942181) and H11C7ON2Hx3 (145.1294433196). To look for potential protein N-terminal acetylation by aspirin an identical modification was created but only considering protein N-termini as position and lacking the two diagnostic peaks. For RAW data analysis in MaxQuant enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Lysine and arginine were selected as special amino acid and a maximum number of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N-termini, d3-Acetylation of protein N-termini, acetylation of lysines and d3-acetylation of lysines were set as variable modifications. A minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum peptide mass was 5,000 Da. A false discovery rate of 1 % was set as a threshold at both protein and peptide level, and a mass deviation of 6 parts per million was set for main search and 0.5 Da for MS2 peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Aspirin, or acetylsalicylic acid is widely used to control pain, inflammation and fever. Important to this function is its ability to irreversibly acetylate cyclooxygenases at active site serines. Aspirin has the potential to acetylate other amino acid side-chains, leading to the possibility that aspirin-mediated lysine acetylation could explain some of its as-yet unexplained drug actions or side-effects. Using isotopically labeled aspirin-d<sub>3</sub>, in combination with acetylated lysine purification and LC-MS/MS, we identified over 12000 sites of lysine acetylation from cultured human cells. Although aspirin amplifies endogenous acetylation signals at the majority of detectable endogenous sites, cells tolerate aspirin mediated acetylation very well unless cellular deacetylases are inhibited. Although most endogenous acetylations are amplified by orders of magnitude, lysine acetylation site occupancies remain very low even after high doses of aspirin. This work shows that while aspirin has enormous potential to alter protein function, in the majority of cases aspirin-mediated acetylations do not accumulate to levels likely to elicit biological effects. These findings are consistent with an emerging model for cellular acetylation whereby stoichiometry correlates with biological relevance, and deacetylases act to minimize the biological consequences of nonspecific chemical acetylations.

### Keywords
Hela, Aspirin, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, Sir James Black Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH. UK.
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Thomas Hay
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, Sir James Black Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH. UK.


