### Accession
PXD039422

### Title
Effect of cryopreservation of lysate/tissue on EOC tissue-derived EVs

### Description
We optimized a method previously developed to extract EVs from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) tissues and investigated whether cryopreservation of EOC tissues in clinical practice affects the phenotypes, contents, and biological functions of subsequently extracted EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: samples were lysed via sonication, and centrifuged at 12,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min to remove solid impurities. The supernatant was then transferred to a new tube, following which protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit.  Trypsin digestion: Equal amounts of each protein sample were digested and the volume was adjusted to the same level as that of the lysis solution. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to obtain a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to obtain a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated for 15 min at room temperature while being protected from light. TEAB was added to dilute urea to ensure that its concentration was below 2 M; 1:50 ratio of protease was used. The proteins (m/m) were added to trypsin and digested overnight. Subsequently, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 (protease: protein, m/m) and digestion was continued for 4 h.  Liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis: Tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated using a gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 62 min, 25% to 35% in 20 min, increasing to 80% in 4 min, and remaining at 80% for the last 4 min, at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separated peptides were analyzed in a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. Applied electrospray voltage was 2.1 kV. Full MS scan resolution was set to 120,000 for a scan range of 400–1500 m/z. Up to 10 of the most abundant precursors were selected for further MS/MS analyses via 30 s of dynamic exclusion. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 28%. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. The automatic gain control target was set at 5E4, with an intensity threshold of 2.5E5 and a maximum injection time of 40 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database search: Resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missing cleavages. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, while mass tolerance for fragmented ions was set to 0.02 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for peptides was set to > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) and large extracellular vesicles (lEVs), play vital roles in intercellular communication. We optimized a method that extracts EVs from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) tissues for the purpose of investigating whether cryopreservation of EOC tissues affects the phenotypes, contents, and biological functions of extracted EVs. EV morphology, the number and size distribution of EVs, and EV-related markers were analyzed. Storage of lysates at -80&#xb0;C decreased lEV yield and increased sEV yield, whereas storage of tissues at -80&#xb0;C increased both sEV and lEV yields; neither changed the morphology or particle mass ratio of EVs. The two cryopreservation groups retained over 90% of proteins and 80% of miRNAs detected in the "fresh" group. EVs extracted following lysate/tissue storage at -80&#xb0;C could also promote angiogenesis and invasive migration ability in human endothelial cells. Cryopreserved EOC tissue may benefit clinical applications for studies of tissue-derived EVs, especially EV proteins-related ones.

### Keywords
Human, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006 Zhejiang, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Shizhen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Shizhen Shen
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006 Zhejiang, China


