### Accession
PXD012551

### Title
Intricate structure of the interphase chromocenter revealed by the analysis of a factor involved in species formation

### Description
In higher eukaryotes centromeres often coalesce into a large intranuclear domain called the chromocenter. Chromocenters are important for the organization of pericentric heterochromatin and a disturbance of their formation results in an upregulation of repetitive elements and causes defects in chromosome segregation. Mutations in the gene encoding for the centromere associated Drosophila speciation factor HMR show very similar phenotypes suggesting a role of HMR in chromocenter architecture and function. We performed confocal and super resolution microscopy as well as proximity based biotinylation experiments of HMR, centromeric protein dCenpA and heterochromatic protein HP1a to generate a molecular map of HMR, dCenpA and HP1a bound chromatin. Our work reveals an intricate internal structure of the centromeric chromatin region, which suggests a role of HMR in separating heterochromatin from centromeric chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol is described in Kochanova et al, "Intricate structure of the interphase chromocenter revealed by the analysis of a factor involved in species formation".

### Data Protocol
The protocol is described in Kochanova et al, "Intricate structure of the interphase chromocenter revealed by the analysis of a factor involved in species formation".

### Publication Abstract
During interphase centromeres often coalesce into a small number of chromocenters, which can be visualized as distinct, DAPI dense nuclear domains. Intact chromocenters play a major role in maintaining genome stability as they stabilize the transcriptionally silent state of repetitive DNA while ensuring centromere function. Despite its biological importance, relatively little is known about the molecular composition of the chromocenter or the processes that mediate chromocenter formation and maintenance. To provide a deeper molecular insight into the composition of the chromocenter and to demonstrate the usefulness of proximity-based biotinylation as a tool to investigate those questions, we performed super resolution microscopy and proximity-based biotinylation experiments of three distinct proteins associated with the chromocenter in Drosophila. Our work revealed an intricate internal architecture of the chromocenter suggesting a complex multilayered structure of this intranuclear domain.

### Keywords
Chromocenter, Drosophila, Centromeres, Chromatin proteomics

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Chromatin Proteomics Biomedical Center, LMU München Grosshaderner Strasse 9 D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried +4989218075420

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Chromatin Proteomics Biomedical Center, LMU München Grosshaderner Strasse 9 D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried +4989218075420


