### Accession
PXD009215

### Title
Vibrio vulnificus CMCP6 Proteome Analysis

### Description
Ribosomal proteins and global proteome were quantified by iTRAQ Labeling. Ribosomal proteins in 70S ribosomes purified from ΔrrnI-comp cells compared to those from ΔrrnI cells. Also, WT cells was measured.

### Sample Protocol
Global proteome quantification Relative abundance of total cellular proteins was quantified by iTRAQ labeling. Cells were resuspended in 95 °C pre-heated SDT-lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 100 mM dithiothreitol and 5% (w/v) SDS using 1:10 sample to buffer ratio (Nagraj et al., 2012). The lysates were heated for 10 min at 95 °C followed by sonication for 15 min to achieve complete lysis and further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the sample was loaded on Amicon centrifugal filter with a 10-kDa cutoff (Merck Millipore, Ireland). The proteins were alkylated by 40 mM chroloacetamide followed by overnight digestion at 37 °C with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) mixture in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Peptides were collected from the filter after centrifugation and eluted with 50 mM ABC twice. Total peptide concentration was measured using a Quantitative Colormetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol and 80 μg peptides of each sample was dried in vacuo. Peptides were labeled using six isobaric labeling reagents (113 to 118) in the iTRAQ 8-plex reagent (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA) for 2 h according to manufacturer’s instructions. The labeling reaction was quenched with 300 μL of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were then combined, speed-vacuum dried, and resuspended in 1% TFA. The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated on STAGE-Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) by strong anion exchange chromatography (Wisniewski et al., 2009) and reverse-phase chromatography using a stepwise gradient of increasing acetonitrile (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 20%, and 80%) in 2.5 mM ABC (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2017). The resulting thirteen fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Ribosomal protein quantification Relative abundance of ribosomal proteins in purified 70S ribosomes was quantified by iTRAQ labeling. Ribosomal proteins were purified from the 70S ribosomes using TRIzol® according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The ribosomal protein mixtures were dissolved in SDT-lysis buffer followed by incubation at 95 °C and further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the sample was loaded on Amicon centrifugal filter with a 10-kDa cutoff (Merck Millipore, Ireland). The proteins were alkylated by 40 mM chroloacetamide followed by overnight digestion at 37 °C with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) mixture in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Peptides were collected from the filter after centrifugation and eluted with 50 mM ABC twice. Total peptide concentration was measured using a Quantitative Colormetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. 80 μg of peptides from each sample were labeled using the iTRAQ 8-plex reagent (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After 2-h labeling at room temperature, the reaction was quenched with 300 μL of 0.05% TFA. The samples were then combined, speed-vacuum dried, and resuspended in 1% TFA. The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture was desalted and fractionated on STAGE-Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) by reverse-phase chromatography using a stepwise gradient of increasing acetonitrile (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 20%, and 80%) in 2.5 mM ABC (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2017). The resulting seven fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometric analysis for proteome quantification All spetra from iTRAQ-labeled peptide samples were acquired on Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 15-cm reversed phase analytical column (75-μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) using a 120-min gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 350 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS1 and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS1 spectra were acquired on mass range 300–1,800 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3e6 ions with a resolution of 70,000 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The top 12 most intense MS1 ions were isolated for MS2 analysis. After 5e5 ions were accumulated, ions were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) (NCE=27% and isolation width 2 m/z). m/z of fragmented ions were measured with a resolution of 17,500 and maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox et al., 2008). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI Reference Sequence (NC_04459.3, NC_004460.2) and UniProt YJ016 proteome database (February 4, 2017 released) with precursor and fragment ion mass errors set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively, and with up to two missed cleavages. Modifications at the N-terminal and lysine residue by the iTRAQ reagent and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was chosen as variable modifications for database searching. Reporter mass tolerance was set to 0.001 Da around their theoretical mass value. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate. Cellular proteome dataset was normalized using the quantile normalization method (Bolstad et al., 2003). Statistical differences between groups were calculated using Student’s t-test, with p value below 0.05 considered statistically significant. Bioinformatics analysis and visualization were performed using the Perseus 1.6.1.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Global proteome, Ribosome, Ribosomal proteins, Vibrio vulnificus, Itraq

### Affiliations
Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science
Center for Bioanalysis, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, 267 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34113, Korea

### Submitter
Yong-In Kim

### Lab Head
Dr J. Eugene Lee
Center for Bioanalysis, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, 267 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34113, Korea


