### Accession
PXD020537

### Title
Label free mass spectrometry-based quantification of linker histone H1 variants in clinical samples

### Description
Epigenetic aberrations have been recognized as important contributors to cancer onset and development, and increasing evidence suggests that linker histone H1 variants may serve as biomarkers useful for patient stratification, as well as play an important role as drivers in cancer. Although traditionally histone H1 levels have been studied using antibody-based methods and RNA expression, these approaches suffer from limitations. Mass-spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics represents the ideal tool to accurately quantify relative changes in protein abundance within complex samples. In this study, we used a label-free quantification approach to simultaneously analyze all somatic histone H1 variants in clinical samples, and verified its applicability to laser microdissected tissue areas containing as low as 1000 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) expressing a Doxycycline-inducible H1.0-targeting shRNAwere cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 g/ml Streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2. To induce H1.0 knockdown, MEFs were treated with 1 μg/ml of Doxycycline (Sigma, D9891) for 10 days (H1.0 KD). To increase H1.0 levels, MEFs were treated with 100 nM Quisinostat for 24h.  Untreated MEFs were used as control.Area of pancreatic tissues corresponding to ~20000, 10000, 5000, 2500, and 1000 acinar cells were microdissected using a UV-based LMD7 laser microdissection system (Leica Microsystems), collected into the caps of 0.5 mL PCR tubes and stored at 4˚C until further processing. Cell/tissue lysates or nuclear extracts were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel and a large band (20-45 KDa) around the size of histone H1 variants was excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin.The MS analysis was performed on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic) connected online to a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Sources (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry), which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot HUMAN_1802 and MOUSE 2019 databases were used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and two missed cleavages were allowed.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications and the FDR was set to 1%, both at the protein and peptide level. The label-free software MaxLFQ [26] was activated, as well as the “match between runs” feature (match from and to, matching time window=2 min).

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic aberrations have been recognized as important contributors to cancer onset and development, and increasing evidence suggests that linker histone H1 variants may serve as biomarkers useful for patient stratification, as well as play an important role as drivers in cancer. Although traditionally histone H1 levels have been studied using antibody-based methods and RNA expression, these approaches suffer from limitations. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics represents the ideal tool to accurately quantify relative changes in protein abundance within complex samples. In this study, we used a label-free quantification approach to simultaneously analyze all somatic histone H1 variants in clinical samples and verified its applicability to laser micro-dissected tissue areas containing as low as 1000 cells. We then applied it to breast cancer patient samples, identifying differences in linker histone variants patters in primary triple-negative breast tumors with and without relapse after chemotherapy. This study highlights how label-free quantitation by MS is a valuable option to accurately quantitate histone H1 levels in different types of clinical samples, including very low-abundance patient tissues.

### Keywords
Laser micro-dissection, Linker histone h1, Proteomics, Epigenetics, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
European Institute of Oncology, Milan

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology, Milan


