### Accession
PXD009448

### Title
Thylakoid membrane proteome remodelling in response to variation in plant growth irradiance

### Description
Plant thylakoid membranes contain hundreds of proteins closely interplaying to cope with ever-changing environmental conditions. We investigated how P. sativum (pea) grown at different irradiances optimizes light-use efficiency through the differential accumulation of thylakoid proteins. Thylakoid membranes from plants grown under limiting (LL), normal (NL) and high (HL) light intensity were characterized by combining chlorophyll fluorescence measurements with quantitative proteomic analysis. Protein sequences retrieved from available transcriptomic data considerably improved the protein profiling.  We found that increasing growth irradiance affects the electron transport kinetics but not Photosystem (PS) I and II relative abundance. Two acclimation strategies were evident comparing plants acclimated to LL with higher irradiances: 1) in NL, plants turn on photoprotective responses mostly regulating the PSII light-harvesting capacity either accumulating Lhcb4.3 or favouring the xanthophyll cycle; 2) in HL, plants reduce the LHCII pool and enhance the PSII repair cycle. At increasing growth irradiance, plants increase the accumulation of ATP synthase and boost the electron transport to finely tune the ΔpH across the membrane and adjust the thylakoid architecture to optimize protein trafficking. Our results provide a quantitative snapshot on how plants coordinate light-harvesting, electron transport and protein synthesis adjusting the thylakoid membrane proteome in a light-dependent manner

### Sample Protocol
Pisum sativum (pea) plants were grown for three weeks inside a growth chamber (SANYO MLR-351H) at 20 °C, 60% humidity and a 8 h light/16 h dark photoperiod with three different light intensities, 30 (low light, LL), 150 (normal light, NL) and 750 μmol m−2 s−1 photons (high light, HL). LL and NL were provided with 3 and 15 Fluorescent lamps (FL40SS W/37), respectively; HL was supplied by 4 LEDs (LXR7-SW50), mounted inside the growth chamber. Both light sources have similar spectral power distribution curves (see Fig. S1).Stacked thylakoid membranes were isolated from plants at the end of the daily dark phase as described earlier (Pagliano et al., 2012) and finally stored in 25 mM MES pH 6.0, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 2 M glycine betaine (MNMβ buffer). The Chl concentration was determined spectrophotometrically after extraction in 80% (v/v) acetone according to (Arnon, 1949).  For each light condition tested, thylakoid membranes corresponding to 150 µg of Chlorophyll from three biological replicates were centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 min at 4 °C; subsequently, pellets were rinsed in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5 to a final Chl concentration of 125 µg mL-1. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C in 4 volumes of cold acetone. After centrifuging at 20,000g for 20 min at 4 °C, proteins were solubilized in a buffer made of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 8 M urea and 2 M thiourea (denaturing buffer). Insoluble material was removed by centrifuging at 15,000g for 10 min. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as standard (Bradford, 1976). Denatured proteins (10 µg for each replicate) were pooled together from same biological condition.   Proteins at 0.5 mg mL-1 in the denaturing buffer were reduced with 10 mM DTT (at 37 °C, 30 min) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (at room temperature, 30 min in the dark). To preserve trypsin activity, the urea concentration was diluted to 1 M by adding 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Digestion was conducted by adding Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, WI, USA) to a final protein:protease ratio of 25:1 (w/w), followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) to terminate the tryptic digestion process. Insoluble material was removed by centrifuging at 15,000g for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides desalting was conducted by solid phase extraction (SPE) as in (Guo & Kristal, 2012). The resulting elutes were mixed with approximately 1,500 femtomoles of a synthetic heavy peptide used as internal standard (Cellmano Biotech, Hefei, China), and lyophilized. Dried peptides were dissolved in 30 µl of LC-MS/MS mobile phase A (water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed by a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, USA) system that included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with flow module 5-50 µL and a programmable autosampler CTC PAL with a Peltier unit (1.0-45.0 °C). The stationary phase was a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies Dublin, USA). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 µL min-1 and at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The injection volume was 4.0 µL. The oven temperature was set at 40 °C. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOFTM system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with DuoSprayTM Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System).  Peptide profiling was performed using a mass range of 100-1600 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 sec), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored per cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, and GAS2 at 20 psig, ionspray floating voltage (ISFV) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V. Tryptic digested samples, used to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library in DDA mode, were then subjected to cyclic DIA of mass spectra with a 25 Da window width: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50 ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were carried out on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25 Da SWATH (36 total SWATHs) for a total cycle time of 1.7408 s. Ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using rolling collision energy. Four replicates for each sample were subjected to the DIA analysis.  All MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral DDA data sets were analyzed and searched using the database search engine ProteinPilotTM v.5.0.0.0, 4769 (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) using the Paragon algorithm 5.0.0.0, 4767. The following sample parameters were used: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to carbamidomethylation and no special factors. Processing parameters were set to "Biological modification". In total 6 DDA-MS raw files, two for each biological condition, were searched for protein and transcript identification, thorough ID search effort, using either the UniProtKB/TrEMBL database containing Viridiplantae proteins (version 2017.06.12, with a total of 4,765,447 sequences) or a de novo proteome derived from the transcriptome of P. sativum (p.sativum_csfl_reftransV1 downloaded from https://www.coolseasonfoodlegume.org/organism/Pisum/sativum/reftrans/v1), both concatenated with a reversed “decoy” version of the “forward” database. After searching, we accepted non redundant protein IDs from both databases that had a ProteinPilot Unused Score of at least 1.3 (equivalent to a 95% confidence interval) as a cutoff threshold and an estimated local false discovery rate (FDR) not higher than 1% (Rardin et al., 2015).  Quantitative analysis based on DIA chromatogram was carried out in Skyline 3.5, an open source software project (http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software) (MacLean et al., 2010). Spectral libraries were generated in Skyline from database searches of the raw data files (.group) performed with ProteinPilot. All raw files acquired in DIA were directly imported into Skyline and MS1 precursor ions and MS2 fragment ions were extracted for all peptides present in the MS/MS spectral libraries. Quantitative analysis was based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of four DIA runs for each biological replicate, considering up to 5 MS/MS highest ranked fragment ions, typically y- and b-ions. Quantitative SWATH MS2 analysis was based on XICs matching to specific peptides present in the spectral libraries and unique to the proteins unambiguously identified in the database search. Proteins were considered eligible for quantitation with a minimum of two tryptic peptides with a length between 6 and 25 amino acids, excluding the 25 N-terminal residues and peptides with post-translational modifications, missed cleavages and containing cysteine or methionine residues. Few exceptions to this rule were applied allowing one missed cleavage in one peptide if necessary (e.g. for low molecular mass subunits). Proteins with unknown genome sequences and eligible for quantitation were further manually curated. The MS/MS-derived peptide sequence data were used to retrieve the translated transcripts (p.sativum_csfl_reftransV1) and for subsequent database searching and sequence-similarity based searching (BLAST). The highest ranked hit to a homologous protein with reviewed accession number, if available, was used for identification. Different proteins from the transcriptome, identified with unique peptides, but matching for the same homologous protein in the BLAST search were treated as isoforms and annotated with an asterisk (e.g. THF1, THF1* in Tab. S3).  For statistical analysis of quantitative differences of proteins and peptides between samples, MSstats (v.2.0), an open-source R-based package (Choi et al., 2014), was used. Significant variation threshold in protein amounts were defined according to (Clough et al., 2012) and only fold changes ≥ 1.35 or ≤ 0.74 with adjusted p-value ≤ 0.01 were further discussed.  This approach allowed to complement with 131 additional proteins identified using the custom proteome (Tab. S3a) the 63 quantifiable proteins identified on P. sativum entries present in the UniProtKB/TrEMBL database (Tab. S3b). The 51% of the 194 quantified proteins are embedded in, or peripherally bound to, the thylakoid membranes (Tab. S3). The proteins located in the lumen or in the stroma account for about 15% and 11% of the total, respectively. The remaining 23% are predicted to be located outside of the chloroplast or within the envelope, likely arising from cross-contamination during thylakoids isolation (Tab. S3). However, it should be pointed out that thylakoids were intentionally not extensively washed during isolation to preserve in situ the membrane-bound components eventually interacting on the stromal side. We found 44 potential contaminants (Tab. S3) accounting for less than 10% of the total chromatogram area (data not shown), and thus quantified only for statistical accuracy but not further discussed.

### Publication Abstract
Plant thylakoid membranes contain hundreds of proteins that closely interact to cope with ever-changing environmental conditions. We investigated how Pisum sativum L. (pea) grown at different irradiances optimizes light-use efficiency through the differential accumulation of thylakoid proteins. Thylakoid membranes from plants grown under low (LL), moderate (ML) and high (HL) light intensity were characterized by combining chlorophyll fluorescence measurements with quantitative label-free proteomic analysis. Protein sequences retrieved from available transcriptomic data considerably improved thylakoid proteome profiling, increasing the quantifiable proteins from 63 to 194. The experimental approach used also demonstrates that this integrative omics strategy is powerful for unravelling protein isoforms and functions that are still unknown in non-model organisms. We found that the different growth irradiances affect the electron transport kinetics but not the relative abundance of photosystems (PS) I and II. Two acclimation strategies were evident. The behaviour of plants acclimated to LL was compared at higher irradiances: (i) in ML, plants turn on photoprotective responses mostly modulating the PSII light-harvesting capacity, either accumulating Lhcb4.3 or favouring the xanthophyll cycle; (ii) in HL, plants reduce the pool of light-harvesting complex II and enhance the PSII repair cycle. When growing at ML and HL, plants accumulate ATP synthase, boosting both cyclic and linear electron transport by finely tuning the &#x394;pH across the membrane and optimizing protein trafficking by adjusting the thylakoid architecture. Our results provide a quantitative snapshot of how plants coordinate light harvesting, electron transport and protein synthesis by adjusting the thylakoid membrane proteome in a light-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Thylakoid membrane, Light acclimation, Photosynthesis, Swath analysis

### Affiliations
Politecnico di Torino
Applied Science and Technology Department–BioSolar Lab, Politecnico di Torino,Italy

### Submitter
Pascal Albanese

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Pagliano
Applied Science and Technology Department–BioSolar Lab, Politecnico di Torino,Italy


