### Accession
PXD016013

### Title
Data in support ofRapid proteome changes in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid following bacterial infection in preterm newborn pigs

### Description
Background: Neonatal infection and sepsis are common for preterm infants due to their immature immune system. Early diagnosis is important for effective treatment but few early markers of systemic and neuro-inflammatory responses in neonates are known. We hypothesized that systemic infection with Gram-positive Staphylococcus epidermidis (SE) induces acute changes to proteins in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), potentially affecting the immature brain of preterm neonates. Methods: Using preterm pigs as model for preterm infants, plasma and CSF samples were collected up to 24 h after SE infection and investigated by untargeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. Selected differential proteins were further studied in vitro assays. Results: The clinical signs of sepsis and neuroinflammation in SE-infected piglets were associated with changes in multiple CSF and plasma proteins. Eight plasma proteins, including APOA4, haptoglobin, MBL1, vWF, LBP and sCD14, were affected already 6 h after infection. Likewise, acute phase reactants, including complement components, showed a time-dependent activation pattern after infection. Feeding bovine colostrum reduced the sepsis-related change in clinical parameters as well as plasma proteins. Neuroinflammation-related neuropeptide Y (NPY), IL-18 and MMP-14 showed distinct changes in the CSF and several brain regions (prefrontal cortex, PVWM, hippocampus) 24 h after infection. These changes were verified in TLR2 agonist-challenged primary microglia cells, where exogenous NPY suppressed the inflammatory response. Conclusion: Systemic infection with Gram-positive SE induces inflammation with rapid proteome changes in plasma and CSF in preterm newborn pigs. The observed early markers of sepsis and neuroinflammation in preterm pigs may serve as novel biomarkers for sepsis in preterm infants.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein sample was performed using a filter-aided protocol, as previously described [22]. Protein concentration was determined by absorbance at 280 nm on a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. CSF or plasma sample containing 100 μg protein was transferred onto an Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter (10 kDa, 0.5 mL, Millipore, Søborg, Denmark), and mixed with a buffer containing sodium deoxycholate (5%) and triethylammonium bicarbonate (50 mmol/L, pH 8.0). Protein was reduced by TCEP solution (0.5 mol/L, 1:50 (v/v)), alkylated by chloroacetamide (0.5 mol/L, 1:50 (v/v)) and digested by trypsin (Promega, 1 µg/100 µg protein, 37 °C overnight) inside the spin filter with a centrifuge step (14,000 × g for 15 min) in between. Tryptic peptides were recovered by another step of centrifugation and purified by phase extraction using ethyl acetate acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (1%, v/v). Vacuum-dried peptides were suspended in a solution of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and applied onto a Dionex RSLC UPLC System (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for analysis. Five µg peptide was injected onto a 2 cm reverse-phase C18 material trapping column and separated on a 50 cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm ID, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) with both columns kept at 40˚C. Elution gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min started with a mixture of water (96%) and acetonitrile (4%) containing 0.1% formic acid, then increased to 30% acetonitrile in 225 min. Mass spectrometric data were obtained in positive ionisation mode in a data-dependent acquisition fashion with survey spectra and isolation/fragmentation spectra alternating using a top12 method. Selected peptides were excluded from re-analysis for 30 s. All samples were analysed in duplicates in a random order.

### Data Protocol
Protein annotation and quantification based on mass spectra of peptides were carried out  using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8)  against the UniProt reference database with isoforms (Sus scrofa, UP000008227, last modified 2016-08-02). Raw data was searched using an internal re-calibration at 4.5 ppm using two missed-cleavages. Cysteine carbamethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Allowable missed cleavages set as 1. Detection of at least two unique peptides per protein and protein being present in at least 70% of samples in each group were required for protein annotation and quantification. Common contaminants and reverse decoy matches were removed from the annotated protein list. Using the Perseus software (version 1.2.0.17) [25], protein abundance data were normalised and two-based logarithm transformed to conform normal distribution and to reduce variability from data acquisition, aligned with protein identities and grouping information, such as treatment and litter (sow). Aligned data were exported into R (version 3.4.1) integrated with R Studio (version 3.1.18) for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Neonatal infection and sepsis are common for preterm infants due to their immature immune system. Early diagnosis is important for effective treatment, but few early markers of systemic and neuro-inflammatory responses in neonates are known. We hypothesised that systemic infection with <i>Staphylococcus epidermidis</i> (SE), a Gram-positive bacteria, induces acute changes to proteins in the plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), potentially affecting the immature brain of preterm neonates. <b>Methods:</b> Using preterm pigs as a model for preterm infants, plasma and CSF samples were collected up to 24 h after SE infection and investigated by untargeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. Multiple differentially expressed proteins were further studied <i>in vitro</i>. <b>Results:</b> The clinical signs of sepsis and neuroinflammation in SE-infected piglets were associated with changes of multiple CSF and plasma proteins. Eight plasma proteins, including APOA4, haptoglobin, MBL1, vWF, LBP, and sCD14, were affected 6 h after infection. Acute phase reactants, including complement components, showed a time-dependent activation pattern after infection. Feeding bovine colostrum reduced the sepsis-related changes in clinical indices and plasma proteins. Neuroinflammation-related neuropeptide Y (NPY), IL-18, and MMP-14 showed distinct changes in the CSF and several brain regions (the prefrontal cortex, PVWM, and hippocampus) 24 h after infection. These changes were verified in TLR2 agonist-challenged primary microglia cells, where exogenous NPY suppressed the inflammatory response. <b>Conclusion:</b> Systemic infection with SE induces inflammation with rapid proteome changes in the plasma and CSF in preterm newborn pigs. The observed early markers of sepsis and neuroinflammation in preterm pigs may serve as novel biomarkers for sepsis in preterm infants.

### Keywords
Csf, Proteomics, Sepsis, Pig

### Affiliations
Alborg University
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Alborg University


