### Accession
PXD026557

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomics profiling depict drug addiction mechanisms in BRAFi-resistant melanoma

### Description
Acquired resistance to MAPK inhibitors limits the clinical efficacy in melanoma treatment. We and others have recently shown that BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi)-resistant melanoma cells can develop a dependency on the therapeutic drugs to which they have acquired resistance, creating a vulnerability for these cells that can potentially be exploited in cancer treatment. In drug addicted melanoma cells, it was shown that this induction of cell death was preceded by a specific ERK2-dependent phenotype switch, however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely lacking. To increase the molecular understanding of this drug dependency, we applied a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach on BRAFi-resistant BRAFMUT 451Lu cells, in which ERK1, ERK2 and JUNB were silenced separately using CRISPR–Cas9. Inactivation of ERK2 and, to a lesser extent, JUNB prevents drug addiction in these melanoma cell while, conversely, knock out of ERK1 fails to reverse this phenotype, showing a response similar to control cells. Our analysis reveals that ERK2 and JUNB share comparable proteome responses dominated by reactivation of cell division. Importantly, we find that EMT activation in drug addicted melanoma cells upon drug withdrawal is affected by silencing ERK2 but not ERK1. Moreover, transcription factor (regulator) enrichment shows that PIR acts as an effector of ERK2 and phosphoproteome analysis reveals that silencing of ERK2 but not ERK1 leads to amplification of GSK3 kinase activity. Our results depict possible mechanisms of drug addiction in melanoma, which may provide a guide for strategies in drug-resistant melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed, reduced and alkylated in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphinehydroxchloride (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM TRIS, pH 8.0 supplemented with protease inhibitor (cOmplete mini EDTA-free, Roche) and  phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Merck) and heated for 5 min at 95ᵒ C followed by sonication with a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 15 cycles of 30 s. Samples were diluted 1:10 with 50mM ammoniumbicarbonate (AMBIC), pH 8.0 and digested with Lys-C (1:200 ratio w/w, Wako) and trypsin (1:50 ratio w/w, Merck) at 37°C, overnight. Digestion was quenched by acidification to 2% formic acid and followed by desalting using 1cc Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to process the raw files. All data were analyzed under R-3.5.1 environment.

### Publication Abstract
Acquired resistance to MAPK inhibitors limits the clinical efficacy in melanoma treatment. We and others have recently shown that BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi)-resistant melanoma cells can develop a dependency on the therapeutic drugs to which they have acquired resistance, creating a vulnerability for these cells that can potentially be exploited in cancer treatment. In drug-addicted melanoma cells, it was shown that this induction of cell death was preceded by a specific ERK2-dependent phenotype switch; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely lacking. To increase the molecular understanding of this drug dependency, we applied a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach on BRAFi-resistant BRAF<sup>MUT</sup> 451Lu cells, in which ERK1, ERK2, and JUNB were silenced separately using CRISPR-Cas9. Inactivation of ERK2 and, to a lesser extent, JUNB prevents drug addiction in these melanoma cells, while, conversely, knockout of ERK1 fails to reverse this phenotype, showing a response similar to that of control cells. Our analysis reveals that ERK2 and JUNB share comparable proteome responses dominated by reactivation of cell division. Importantly, we find that EMT activation in drug-addicted melanoma cells upon drug withdrawal is affected by silencing ERK2 but not ERK1. Moreover, transcription factor (regulator) enrichment shows that PIR acts as an effector of ERK2 and phosphoproteome analysis reveals that silencing of ERK2 but not ERK1 leads to amplification of GSK3 kinase activity. Our results depict possible mechanisms of drug addiction in melanoma, which may provide a guide for therapeutic strategies in drug-resistant melanoma.

### Keywords
Melanoma; braf resistant; proteomics; phosphoproteomics; erk2/mapk1; erk1/mapk3; emt

### Affiliations
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 3 Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Bohui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 3 Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands


