### Accession
PXD023126

### Title
The type III secretion system effector EspO of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli inhibits apoptosis through an interaction with HAX-1

### Description
Many enteric pathogens employ a type III secretion system (T3SS) to translocate effector proteins directly into the host cell cytoplasm, where they subvert signaling pathways of the intestinal epithelium. Here, we report that the anti-apoptotic regulator HS1-associated protein X1 (HAX-1) is an interaction partner of the T3SS effectors EspO of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) and Citrobacter rodentium, OspE of Shigella flexneri and Osp1STYM of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. EspO, OspE and Osp1STYM have previously been reported to interact with the focal adhesions protein integrin linked kinase (ILK). We found that EspO localizes both to the focal adhesions (ILK localization) and mitochondria (HAX-1 localization), and that increased expression of HAX-1 leads to enhanced mitochondrial localization of EspO. Ectopic expression of EspO, OspE and Osp1STYM protects cells from apoptosis induced by staurosporine and tunicamycin. Depleting cells of HAX-1 indicates that the anti-apoptotic activity of EspO is HAX-1 dependent. Both HAX-1 and ILK were further confirmed as EspO1 interacting proteins during infection using T3SS-delivered EspO1. Using cell detachment as a proxy for cell death we confirmed that T3SS-delivered EspO1 could inhibit cell death induced during EPEC infection, to a similar extent as the anti-apoptotic effector NleH, or treatment with the pan caspase inhibitor z-VAD. In contrast, in cells lacking HAX-1, EspO1 was no longer able to protect against cell detachment, while NleH1 and z-VAD maintained their protective activity. Therefore during both infection and ectopic expression EspO protects cells from cell death by interacting with HAX-1. These results suggest that despite the differences between EHEC, C. rodentium, Shigella and S. Typhimurium infections, hijacking HAX-1 anti-apoptotic signaling is a common strategy to maintain the viability of infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
For peptides from pull down experiment, the LC-MS/MS analysis were performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. Both instrument and columns used here were from Thermo Fisher. The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 trap (100 µm i.d. × 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) for 10 min at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. × 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 5–45% ACN/0.1% FA in 70 min and total cycle was 100 min. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the Top Speed mode at 3 s per cycle. The survey scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 (AGC 4e5 and maximum injection time 50 ms). The multiply charged ions (2-7) with a minimal intensity of 1e4 counts were subject to MS/MS in HCD with a collision energy at 35% and an isolation width of 1.6 Th then detected in the orbitrap (AGC 1e5 and maximum injection time 105 ms). Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 7 ppm for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v. 2.3 (Thermo) and the searches were performed using SEQUEST search engine against the human Uniprot database (2019). The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages, 20 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of deamidation (NQ) and oxidation(M), as well as carbamidomethyl (C) as static modification. Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were estimated based on matches to reversed sequences in a concatenated target-decoy database using Percolator and set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, E.coli, Msms, Espo

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


