### Accession
PXD012752

### Title
Vipera ammodytes ammodytes venom proteomics

### Description
The nose-horned viper, its nominotypical subspecies Vipera ammodytes ammodytes (Vaa) in particular is, medically, the most relevant snake in Europe. The local and systemic clinical manifestations of poisoning by the venom of this snake are the result of the pathophysiological effects inflicted by enzymatic and non-enzymatic venom components acting, most prominently, on blood, cardiovascular and nerve systems. This venom comprises the most complex mixture of pharmacologically active proteins and peptides of all European snakes. To help improve the current antivenom therapy towards higher specificity and efficiency, and to assist drug discovery, we have constructed, by combining transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, the most comprehensive library yet of the Vaa venom proteins and peptides. At the protein level, 57 venom proteins belonging to 16 different protein families have been identified and, with SVSPs, sPLA2s, snaclecs and SVMPs, comprise about 80% of all venom proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Vaa venom, collected in 2005, from snakes from different parts of Croatia, was a gift from the Institute of Immunology, Zagreb, Croatia. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) was performed under optimized conditions.16 500 g of crude Vaa venom were dissolved in 450 μL of rehydration buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, 1% (v/v) ampholytes, 0.25% (m/v) ASB-14, 2.5% (m/v) CHAPS, 0.002% (m/v) bromophenol blue and 12 μL/mL DeStreak Reagent (GE Healthcare, Amersham Biosciences). A 24 cm immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip (GE Healthcare, Amersham Biosciences), covering the pH range 3 to 11 NL, was rehydrated passively with the sample overnight. The first dimension separation (isoelectric focusing; IEF) and the second dimension separation (polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate; SDS-PAGE) were carried out using the reported experimental protocols (Leonardi et al., 2012). Following reverse staining with imidazole-SDS-Zn2+, the gel was scanned by an Image Scanner using LabScan 5 software (GE Healthcare, Amersham Biosciences). The image was analyzed by Image Master 2D Platinum 6.0 software (GE Healthcare, Amersham Biosciences). The protein spots detected were cut out automatically using an Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare, Amersham Biosciences) and kept at –20 oC before analysis. Protein spots were de-stained, treated with trypsin in-gel and the resulting peptides analyzed using an ion trap mass spectrometer 1200 series HPLC-Chip-LC/MSD Trap XCT Ultra (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) with an ESI source operating in positive mode, controlled by ChemStation LC 3D systems Rev. B.01.03 SR1 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and LC/MSD Trap Control software version 6.0 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). An HPLC-Chip (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany), comprising a 40 nL enrichment column and a 43 mm x 75 μm analytical column packed with Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm particles, was used for separating tryptic mixtures. Peptides were loaded onto the enrichment column in 97% (v/ v) solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) and 3% (v/v) B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN) at 4 μL/min, and eluted from the analytical column with a gradient from 3% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B in 41 min, followed by a steep gradient to 90% (v/v) B in 1 min at a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min. MS acquisitions were carried out from 400 to 2200 m/z, followed by MS/MS scans of the five mostabundant ions in each MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were exported as Mascot generic format (mgf) files using in-house Agilent Technologies software, Data Analysis for 6300 Series Ion Trap LC/MS version 3.4 (Build 175). Search against the non-redundant National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Snakes database (taxid 8750, December 2017, 159187 entries) supplemented with our Vaa transcriptome data deposited in the GenBank NCBI database, was performed using a licensed version 2 of the MASCOT program, applying the following restrictions: 2+ and 3+ peptide charge; two mis-cleavages were allowed, peptide and fragment mass tolerance of ±1.2 and ±0.6 Da respectively; carbamidomethyl Cys (C) as the fixed modification and oxidized methionine (Mox) as variable, and an  automatic decoy database search. The results were further validated using Scaffold software (version 2, Proteome Software, Inc., USA) with the following thresholds: protein confidence of 99% and one peptide per protein at 95% confidence.

### Publication Abstract
The nose-horned viper, its nominotypical subspecies Vipera ammodytes ammodytes ( Vaa), in particular, is, medically, one of the most relevant snakes in Europe. The local and systemic clinical manifestations of poisoning by the venom of this snake are the result of the pathophysiological effects inflicted by enzymatic and nonenzymatic venom components acting, most prominently, on the blood, cardiovascular, and nerve systems. This venom is a very complex mixture of pharmacologically active proteins and peptides. To help improve the current antivenom therapy toward higher specificity and efficiency and to assist drug discovery, we have constructed, by combining transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, the most comprehensive library yet of the Vaa venom proteins and peptides. Sequence analysis of the venom gland cDNA library has revealed the presence of messages encoding 12 types of polypeptide precursors. The most abundant are those for metalloproteinase inhibitors (MPis), bradykinin-potentiating peptides (BPPs), and natriuretic peptides (NPs) (all three on a single precursor), snake C-type lectin-like proteins (snaclecs), serine proteases (SVSPs), P-II and P-III metalloproteinases (SVMPs), secreted phospholipases A<sub>2</sub> (sPLA<sub>2</sub>s), and disintegrins (Dis). These constitute &gt;88% of the venom transcriptome. At the protein level, 57 venom proteins belonging to 16 different protein families have been identified and, with SVSPs, sPLA<sub>2</sub>s, snaclecs, and SVMPs, comprise &#x223c;80% of all venom proteins. Peptides detected in the venom include NPs, BPPs, and inhibitors of SVSPs and SVMPs. Of particular interest, a transcript coding for a protein similar to P-III SVMPs but lacking the MP domain was also found at the protein level in the venom. The existence of such proteins, also supported by finding similar venom gland transcripts in related snake species, has been demonstrated for the first time, justifying the proposal of a new P-IIIe subclass of ancestral SVMP precursor-derived proteins.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Vipera ammodytes ammodytes, Lc-ms/ms, 2-de

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of molecular and biomedical sciences, Jozef Stefan Institute, Slovenia

### Submitter
Adrijana Leonardi

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Križaj
Department of molecular and biomedical sciences, Jozef Stefan Institute, Slovenia


