### Accession
PXD042874

### Title
Functional proteomics characterization of the role of SPRYD7 in colorectal cancer progression and metastasis

### Description
SPRY domain-containing protein 7 (SPRYD7) is a barely known protein identified by spatial proteomics as upregulated in highly-metastatic to liver KM12SM colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in comparison to its isogenic poorly-metastatic KM12C CRC cells. Here, we aimed at analyzing SPRYD7 role in CRC by functional proteomics. By immunohistochemistry, the overexpression of SPRYD7 was observed to be associated to poor survival of CRC patients, and to an aggressive and metastatic phenotype. SPRYD7 stably overexpression was performed in KM12C and SW480 poorly-metastatic CRC cells, and in their isogenic highly-metastatic to liver KM12SM and to lymph nodes SW620 CRC cells, respectively. After confirming the upregulation of SPRYD7, in vitro and in vivo functional assays confirmed a key role of SPRYD7 in proliferation and migration of CRC cells. Furthermore, SPRYD7 was observed as an inductor of angiogenesis. In addition, the dysregulated SPRYD7-associated proteome and SPRYD7 interactors were elucidated by 10-plex TMT quantitative proteins, immunoproteomics, and bioinformatics. After WB validation, the biological pathways associated to the stably overexpression of SPRYD7 were visualized. In conclusion, it was demonstrated here that SPRYD7 is a novel protein associated to CRC progression and metastasis. Thus, SPRYD7 and its interactors might be of relevance to identify novel therapeutic targets for advanced CRC.

### Sample Protocol
KM12C and KM12SM CRC cells stably overexpressing SPRYD7 at 90% confluence were harvested with PBS 1x containing 4 mM EDTA, and centrifuged at 260 g and RT for 5 min. Then, cell pellets were lysed with 500 µL of RIPA buffer supplemented with 1x protease and phosphatase inhibitors.  For immunoprecipitation (IP), 50 µL of Protein G agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were washed 3 times with 10x beads volume of RIPA buffer, and re-suspended in 1x beads volume of RIPA. Three mg of each protein extract were then incubated with 1:2 of equilibrated beads to remove unspecific proteins for 4 hours at 4°C (precleaning). After precleaning, supernatants were transferred to a new tube and incubated with the anti-SPRYD7 monoclonal antibody O/N and at 4°C, in a relation of 3 µg of antibody per 10 mg of protein extract. Next day, samples were incubated with 1:2 of equilibrated beads for 3 h at 4°C and in rotation, washed 4 times with 1x beads volume of RIPA, and interacting proteins were eluted twice in 50 µL of elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 0.1% SDS, 1.5% -mercaptoethanol) after 5 min incubation at 95°C. In addition, proteins non-specifically attached to the beads used during the precleaning step were also eluted and used as negative controls of the IP. All incubations were performed in rotation and all supernatants discarded or recovered by cen-trifugation at 1000 g and 4°C for 2 min. 50 µL of eluted proteins from the IP were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. After protein extract reduction with 10 mM TCEP for 45 min at 37°C and 600 rpm, and alkylation with 40 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at RT, 600 rpm in dark, proteins were bound to 100 µL of SeraMag magnetic beads mix (50% hydrophilic beads - 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) for 35 min at RT and 600 rpm in 200 μL of ACN. Then, supernatants were discarded, and magnetic beads washed twice with 200 μL of 70% ethanol and once with 200 μL of ACN. Finally, su-pernatants were discarded, and beads with the attached proteins were incubated with 0.2 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) O/N at 37°C and 600 rpm in 100 μL of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 for protein digestion. Finally, peptide samples were desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum centrifugation, and re-suspended in 5 μL of 0.1% FA, 2% ACN prior to analysis by nano LC-MS/MS using the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) of the Proteomics and Genomics Facility of the Center for Biological Research (CIB-CSIC). Peptide separation was carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18 of 50 cm long, with an inner diameter of 75 µm, and a particle size of 2 µm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in 100% ACN (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5%–35% solvent B for 90 min, 35%–100% solvent B for 4 min, and 100% solvent B for 8 min. 4 µL of each sample were injected per run. For ionization, 1900 V of liquid junction voltage and a capillary temperature of 300°C were used. The full-scan method employed a m/z 400–1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70000 (at m/z 200), an AGC of 3x106, and maximum IT of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27, and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 200, an AGC target of 3x105, a resolution of 17 500 (at m/z 200), an intensity threshold of 8x103, an isolation window of 2.0 m/z units, and a maximum IT of 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.3) using standardized work-flows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2022 database (20577 protein entries) using standard type for IP analyses. Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbami-domethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, acetylation N-terminal and Ser, Thr, and, Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction (PIF) with a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence.

### Publication Abstract
SPRY domain-containing protein 7 (SPRYD7) is a barely known protein identified via spatial proteomics as being upregulated in highly metastatic-to-liver KM12SM colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in comparison to its isogenic poorly metastatic KM12C CRC cells. Here, we aimed to analyze SPRYD7's role in CRC via functional proteomics. Through immunohistochemistry, the overexpression of SPRYD7 was observed to be associated with the poor survival of CRC patients and with an aggressive and metastatic phenotype. Stable SPRYD7 overexpression was performed in KM12C and SW480 poorly metastatic CRC cells and in their isogenic highly metastatic-to-liver-KM12SM-and-to-lymph-nodes SW620 CRC cells, respectively. Upon upregulation of SPRYD7, in vitro and in vivo functional assays confirmed a key role of SPRYD7 in the invasion and migration of CRC cells and in liver homing and tumor growth. Additionally, transient siRNA SPRYD7 silencing allowed us to confirm in vitro functional results. Furthermore, SPRYD7 was observed as an inductor of angiogenesis. In addition, the dysregulated SPRYD7-associated proteome and SPRYD7 interactors were elucidated via 10-plex TMT quantitative proteins, immunoproteomics, and bioinformatics. After WB validation, the biological pathways associated with the stable overexpression of SPRYD7 were visualized. In conclusion, it was demonstrated here that SPRYD7 is a novel protein associated with CRC progression and metastasis. Thus, SPRYD7 and its interactors might be of relevance in identifying novel therapeutic targets for advanced CRC.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; spryd7; cancer metastasis; proteomics; protein dysregulation; interactome

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme (UFIEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Madrid, Spain


