### Accession
PXD021930

### Title
Dire wolves were the last of an ancient New World canid lineage

### Description
Phylogenetic analysis of the extinct dire wolf was carried out to explore the relationship this species had with other Canids.

### Sample Protocol
100 μl 50 mM Ambic was added to a subsample of the Canis dirus (LACMP23-1619) purified collagen sample (~1mg) and heated at 65C for 1 hour. This was followed by digestion overnight at 37C; 50 μl of the heated sample was digested using 1 μl of 0.5 μg/μl porcine trypsin in trypsin resuspension buffer (Promega, UK) and the other 50 μl was dried down and resuspended in 50 μl 100 mM Tris solution to be digested with elastase (Worthington; USA) at the same concentration in 10% Tris solution. Two different enzymes were used to increase the protein sequence coverage for LC-MS/MS. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a concentration of 0.5-1% of the total solution. Peptides were desalted using zip-tips and eluted in 100 μl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA (v/v). The extracted peptides were analysed at the Discovery Proteomic Facility at Oxford University. The sample was analyzed on a Q-Exactive employing an Easyspray column (ES803, 367 500mmx75μm, Thermo) and a gradient of 2%-35% ACN in 0.1% FA/5%DMSO over 60 minutes. The MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 with an AGC target of 3E6. MS2 spectra for up to 15 precursors were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 1E5 for up to 128ms and 28% normalized collision energy (higher-energy collision dissociation). The precursors were excluded for 27 seconds from re-selection.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw files were converted to MGF files using Proteowizard and searched against a mammal collagen database which included common contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) in PEAKS v7.5. Mass tolerances were set at 0.5Da for the fragment ions and 10ppm for precursor ions and up to 3 missed cleavages were permitted. Searches allowed various post-translational modifications (PTMs) including oxidation (MHW) and hydroxylation of proline (both +15.99), deamidation (NQ; +0.98) and pyro-glu from E (- 379 18.01) and a fixed PTM of carbamidomethylation (+57.02) which occurs due to sample preparation. A maximum of 3 PTMs was allowed per peptide. Protein tolerances were set at 0.5% false discovery rate (FDR), >50% average local confidence (ALC; de novo only) and 10lgP score ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
Dire wolves are considered to be one of the most common and widespread large carnivores in Pleistocene America<sup>1</sup>, yet relatively little is known about their evolution or extinction. Here, to reconstruct the evolutionary history of dire wolves, we sequenced five genomes from sub-fossil remains dating from 13,000 to more than 50,000&#xa0;years ago. Our results indicate that although they were similar morphologically to the extant grey wolf, dire wolves were a highly divergent lineage that split from living canids around 5.7&#xa0;million years ago. In contrast to numerous examples of hybridization across Canidae<sup>2,3</sup>, there is no evidence for gene flow between dire wolves and either North American grey wolves or coyotes. This suggests that dire wolves evolved in isolation from the Pleistocene ancestors of these species. Our results also support an early New World origin of dire wolves, while the ancestors of grey wolves, coyotes and dholes evolved in Eurasia and colonized North America only relatively recently.

### Keywords
Dire wolf; collagen, Phylogenetics, Adna

### Affiliations
BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York
University of York

### Submitter
Samantha Presslee

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Oliver Craig
BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York


