### Accession
PXD045108

### Title
Ursolic acid derivative UAOS-Na treats experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by immunoregulation and direct anti-demyelination

### Description
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic, inflammatory, and demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS). Ursolic acid (UA) can be used in the MS treatment with anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective activities. However, UA is insoluble in water, which may affect its medication effectiveness. In this study, we evaluated the pharmacological effects of UAOS-Na, a water-soluble UA derivative, on experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse, explored its underlying mechanism, and verified the mechanism by in vitro and in vivo experiments. As we expected, UAOS-Na (30 mg/kg/d) delayed the onset time of EAE from 11.78 days post immunization (dpi) to 14.33 dpi, reduced the incidence from 90.0% to 42.9%, and was more effective than UA. UAOS-Na (60 mg/kg/d) significantly decreased the serum levels of IFN-γ, IL-17A, TNF-α and IL-6, reduced the mononuclear cell infiltration of spinal cord, and inhibited the overexpression of key transcription factors T-bet and ROR-γt of EAE mouse spinal cord and spleen. In addition, UAOS-Na attenuated demyelination and astrogliosis in the CNS of EAE and Cuprizone-induced mice. Mechanically, proteomics showed that 217 differential expression proteins (DEPs) were enriched and 215 were upregulated in EAE mice. After UAOS-Na treatment, 52 DEPs were enriched and 49 were downregulated, and these DEPs were markedly enriched in inositol phosphate metabolism, calcium, sphingolipid, cAMP, and antigen processing and presentation (APP) signaling pathways. Among them, there were few studies on APP signaling pathway related with MS. Therefore, we further investigated the effect of UAOS-Na on APP signaling pathway and found that UAOS-Na downregulated the protein levels of Tapbp and H2-T23 in MHC-I antigen presentation pathway and decreased the proliferation of splenic CD8 T cells, thereby inhibiting the CNS infiltration of CD8 T cells. Together, our findings demonstrated that UAOS-Na have both direct anti-demyelination and anti-inflammation effects. And it could reduce the inflammation of MS by downregulating the expression of Tapbp and H2-T23 in the MHC-I antigen presentation pathway.

### Sample Protocol
After 1 week of adaptive feeding, female C57BL/6 mice were immunized at three sites on the back (the middle of both shoulders and upper the groin on both sides) with 4 mg/mL heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra (#231141; BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) with 200 μg of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) 35-55 (#T510219-0001; Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) in 200 μL of emulsion containing 50% complete Freund’s adjuvant (#F5506; Sigma, St. Louis, MI, USA). The mice were then intraperitoneally injected with 400 ng pertussis toxin (#GC17532; GLPBIO, Montclair, CA, USA) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at 0- and 2- days post immunization (dpi). All animals were weighed and scored daily in a blinded manner using Weaver’s 15-point scoring system (Weaver et al., 2005; Dasilva and Yong, 2008).Nine spinal cord tissue samples (4 mice spinal cords were mixed into one sample, 3 samples per group) collected from the normal group, EAE group, and UAOS-Na group (60 mg/kg/d) were mixed with SDT buffer and homogenized using SCIENTZ-48 High Throughput Tissue Grinder (SB-3200DT, Xinzhi, Zhejiang, China). The homogenate was cracked on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 12000 ×g for 20 min. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was detected by a BCA kit (#P0012S; Beyotime).

### Data Protocol
Differential expression proteins (DEPs) were subjected to multiple bioinformatic analyses. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways enrichment analysis was performed using Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery Bioinformatics Resources (https://david.ncifcrf.gov). The potential protein-protein interactions (PPI) were analyzed via the STRING database (https://string-db.org) and CytoScape 3.9.0 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis; experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis; ursolic acid; mhc-i antigen presentation pathway; tapbp; h2-t23

### Affiliations
Shanghai university of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Southwest Medical University

### Submitter
Gao Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Maolin
Shanghai university of Traditional Chinese Medicine


