### Accession
PXD009536

### Title
Neuropeptidomic Analysis of the Stick Insect, <i> Carausius morosus </i>

### Description
One of the most thoroughly studied insect species, with respect to locomotion behaviour, is the stick insect Carausius morosus. Although detailed information exists on premotor networks controlling walking, surprisingly little is known about neuropeptides, which are certainly involved in motor activity generation and modulation. So far, only few neuropeptides were identified from C. morosus or related stick insects. We performed a transcriptome analysis of the central nervous system to assemble and identify 65 neuropeptide and protein hormone precursors of C. morosus, including five novel putative neuropeptide precursors without clear homology to known neuropeptide precursors of other insects (Carausius neuropeptide-like precursor 1, HanSolin, PK-like1, PK-like2, RFLamide). Using Q Exactive Orbitrap and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, 277 peptides including 153 likely bioactive mature neuropeptides were confirmed. Peptidomics yielded a complete coverage for many of the neuropeptide propeptides and confirmed a surprisingly high number of heterozygous sequences. Few neuropeptide precursors commonly occurring in insects, including those of insect kinins and sulfakinins, could neither be found in the transcriptome data nor did peptidomics support their presence. The results of our study represent one of the most comprehensive peptidomic analyses on insects and provide the necessary input for subsequent experiments revealing neuropeptide function in greater detail.

### Sample Protocol
Quadrupole Orbitrap MS with nanoflow HPLC: Dissected tissue samples were collected in 0.5 ml safe-lock tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), containing 20 µl peptide extraction buffer (50% MeOH in 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) or 1% FA). Samples were sonicated for 5 min in an ultrasonic bath, centrifuged for 2 min at 4 °C (15,000 rpm), again treated with multiple, contiguous bursts using an ultrasonic homogenizer (BANDELIN SONOPULS HD 200, BANDELIN electronic GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, Germany), replenished with 20 µl water and finally centrifuged at 15,000 rpm and 4°C for 15 min. The supernatants were transferred into safe-lock tubes (0.5 ml, Eppendorf) each and evaporation of the organic solvent was accelerated using a low speed centrifuge under low pressure vacuum (Hetovac VR-1, Heto Lab Equipment) until the volume of the supernatants was reduced to about 15 µl. Samples were desalted using self-packed Stage Tip C18 (IVA Analysentechnik e. K., Meerbusch, Germany) spin columns. Peptides were then separated on an EASY nanoLC1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using in-house packed RPC18-columns 50 cm (fused Silica tube with ID 50μm ± 3μm, OD 150 μm ± 6 μm; Reprosil 1.9μm, pore diameter 60A°; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and a binary buffer system (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA). Running conditions were as follows: linear gradient from 2 to 62% B in 110 min, 62 to 75% B in 30 min, and final washing from 75 to 95% B in 6 min (45°C, flow rate 250 nL/min). Finally, the gradients were re-equilibrated for 4 min at 5% B. The HPLC was coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in a top 10 data-dependent method dynamically choosing the most abundant peptide ions from the respective survey scans in a mass range of m/z 300−3000 for HCD fragmentation. Full MS1 acquisitions ran with 70,000 resolution, automatic gain control target (AGC target) at 3e6 and maximum injection time at 80 ms. HCD spectra were measured with a resolution of 35,000, AGC target at 1e6, maximum injection time at 120 ms, 28 eV normalized collision energy, and dynamic exclusion set at 25 s. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode (two to eight charges); singly charged and unassigned precursor ions were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap RAW data were analyzed by means of MaxQuant (v1.5.4.1, MPI, Martinsried, Germany) and PEAKS (PEAKS Studio 8.0, BSI, ON, Canada). For analyses using MaxQuant, only predicted peptides with a minimum amino acid length of five amino acid residues, a maximum molecular weight of 10 kDa and a P-score> 60 were taken into account. The maximum number of posttranslational modifications (PTM; Tyr-sulfation, C-terminal amidation, methylation [E, K, R], disulphide bridge, oxidation [M, W], N‐pyroglutamyl formation [Q, E], phosphorylation [S, T], acetylation [K, N-terminus], mannosylation [W], sulfation, per peptide was set to five; digestion mode was set to none. For analyses with PEAKS, the same set of PTMs was used and peptides were searched against an internal database comprising the C. morosus neuropeptide precursor sequences with a parent error mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. None enzyme mode was selected. The False discovery rate (FDR) was determined by the decoy database search implement in PEAKS 8.0 and set below 1%. To provide the accurate monoisotopic mass of a peptide, Q Exactive Orbitrap RAW data were corrected prior to the analysis (precursor mass correction only). Fragment spectra with a peptide score (-10 lgP) equivalent to a P-value of about 1%, were manually reviewed.

### Publication Abstract
One of the most thoroughly studied insect species, with respect to locomotion behavior, is the stick insect Carausius morosus. Although detailed information exists on premotor networks controlling walking, surprisingly little is known about neuropeptides, which are certainly involved in motor activity generation and modulation. So far, only few neuropeptides were identified from C.&#xa0;morosus or related stick insects. We performed a transcriptome analysis of the central nervous system to assemble and identify 65 neuropeptide and protein hormone precursors of C.&#xa0;morosus, including five novel putative neuropeptide precursors without clear homology to known neuropeptide precursors of other insects ( Carausius neuropeptide-like precursor 1, HanSolin, PK-like1, PK-like2, RFLamide). Using Q Exactive Orbitrap and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, 277 peptides including 153 likely bioactive mature neuropeptides were confirmed. Peptidomics yielded a complete coverage for many of the neuropeptide propeptides and confirmed a surprisingly high number of heterozygous sequences. Few neuropeptide precursors commonly occurring in insects, including those of insect kinins and sulfakinins, could neither be found in the transcriptome data nor did peptidomics support their presence. The results of our study represent one of the most comprehensive peptidomic analyses on insects and provide the necessary input for subsequent experiments revealing neuropeptide function in greater detail.

### Keywords
Neurohormones, Nervous system, Neuropeptide precursors, Peptidomics, Carausius morosus, Mass spectrometry, Stick insects

### Affiliations
Department for Biology, Institute for Zoology, University of Cologne, Predel Lab
Department for Biology, Institute for Zoology, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Sander Liessem

### Lab Head
Dr Reinhard Predel
Department for Biology, Institute for Zoology, University of Cologne


