### Accession
PXD013191

### Title
LGP2 binds PACT to regulate RIG-I- and MDA5-mediated antiviral response

### Description
The RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs: RIG-I, MDA5 and LGP2) trigger inflammatory and antiviral responses by sensing non-self RNA molecules produced during viral replication. LGP2 regulation of RIG-I and MDA5-dependant type-I interferon signaling is a matter of controversy. Here we show that LGP2 interacts with different components of the RNA silencing machinery. Particularly, we identified a direct protein-protein interaction between LGP2 and interferon-inducible double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase activator A (PACT). The LGP2-PACT interaction is mediated by the regulatory C-terminal domain of LGP2 and is necessary for inhibiting the RIG-I- and amplifying the MDA5-responses. We describe a point mutation within LGP2 that disrupts LGP2-PACT interaction and leads to the loss of LGP2 regulatory activity over RIG-I and MDA5. These results provide a model in which PACT-LGP2 interaction regulates RIG-I and MDA5 inflammatory response and allows cellular RNA silencing machinery to coordinate the innate immune response.

### Sample Protocol
1μg of precipitated proteins from ST-LGP2/protein and ST-Cherry/protein complexes were used in each nano-LC-MS/MS experiment. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 20 µl of a trypsin solution prepared as follows: HPLC water, 12.5 µg/ml trypsin sequencing grade (#PRV5111, Promega,), 10% HPLC grade ACN, 25 mM ammonium carbonate (#09830, Sigma Aldrich). Resulting peptide extracts were speed-vac dried and dissolved in 12-µl HPLC grade water, 0.1% formic acid. 5 µl were used for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis using a nano-chromatography system (Easy nLC, Proxeon) connected online to a LTQ Velos Orbitrap (ThermoFisher) mass spectrometer. A 2 cm long, 5 µm particle size C18 Easy column (Proxeon) was used for peptide trapping and dessalting. A 10 cm long and 3 µm particle size C18 Easy column (Proxeon) was used for peptides separation. The peptide elution gradient was from 100% buffer A (HPLC grade water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% buffer B (HPLC grade ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min using a constant flow of 300 nl/min. MS spectra were acquired on the Orbitrap analyzer at resolution R=30000. After each MS spectrum, an automatic selection of 20 most intense precursor ions was activated with 15 sec dynamic exclusion delay to acquire MS/MS spectra on the LTQ Velos analyser, using CID fragmentation mode at 35% relative resonant activation energy for 40 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were pre-processed using ProteomeDiscoverer version 1.4 (ThermoFisher).  Pre-processing consisted of MS/MS spectrum averaging of spectra from equal precursor molecular weight, with 5 ppm mass tolerance and 90 s time window. No threshold was applied neither to MS ions intensities nor to MS/MS fragment ions intensities. All spectra were analyzed using Mascot version 2.1 (Matrix Science). Query was performed against a non-redundant database of 20,352 human protein sequences from Swissprot (release 2013-02). Mascot was run in MS/MS Ion search mode with the following parameter settings: no fixed modification, variable modification (oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (Lys, N-term), deamidation (Asn, Gln), precursor mass tolerance 7 ppm, fragment ions mass tolerance 0.5 Da, 2 missed cleavages and trypsin as digestion enzyme. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were calculated for each peptide by the percolator node for validation of peptide identification.  In order to reduce the number of non-specific hits, if the protein hit presented a score higher than 20 in any of the 3 ST-Cherry replicates, the protein was immediately excluded from the list. A second filter was added where the protein had to have a score higher then 60 for two of the replicates, and could have for the third one a score higher than 40

### Publication Abstract
The retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2 stimulate inflammatory and antiviral responses by sensing nonself RNA molecules produced during viral replication. Here, we investigated how LGP2 regulates the RIG-I- and MDA5-dependent induction of type I interferon (IFN) signaling and showed that LGP2 interacted with different components of the RNA-silencing machinery. We identified a direct protein-protein interaction between LGP2 and the IFN-inducible, double-stranded RNA binding protein PACT. The LGP2-PACT interaction was mediated by the regulatory C-terminal domain of LGP2 and was necessary for inhibiting RIG-I-dependent responses and for amplifying MDA5-dependent responses. We described a point mutation within LGP2 that disrupted the LGP2-PACT interaction and led to the loss of LGP2-mediated regulation of RIG-I and MDA5 signaling. These results suggest a model in which the LGP2-PACT interaction regulates the inflammatory responses mediated by RIG-I and MDA5 and enables the cellular RNA-silencing machinery to coordinate with the innate immune response.

### Keywords
Rig-1, Virus, Rna silencing machinery, Pact, Lgp2

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Unité de Génomique Virale et Vaccination, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR-3569, Paris, France.

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Anastassia Komarova
Unité de Génomique Virale et Vaccination, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR-3569, Paris, France.


