### Accession
PXD017413

### Title
Transplantation of Telomerase/Myocardin Co-Expressing Mesenchymal Cells Promotes Revascularization and Tissue Repair in Murine Myocardial Infarction

### Description
Rationale and Objectives: Cellular therapies are hampered by poor survival and growth of grafts. We recently showed that the survival and repairing capacity of transplanted adult cells may be improved by co-expression of the anti-senescence telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) and anti-apoptotic myocardin (MYOCD). The current study aimed at testing whether forced co-expression of TERT and MYOCD improves post-infarct revascularization and tissue repair by adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (AT-MSCs).  Methods: We transplanted AT-MSCs engineered to overexpress MYOCD and TERT in a murine model of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). We analyzed the immunoregulatory properties of AT-MSCs on post-AMI. We characterized in vitro and in vivo paracrine effects of AT-MSCs and their interactions with murine cardiospheres (CSps), all as parts of their reparative repertoire.  Results: When transplanted into infarcted hearts of C57BL/6 mice, “rejuvenated” AT-MSCs overexpressing TERT and MYOCD (rAT-MSCs) decreased fibrosis and the intrafibrotic CD3 and B220 lymphocyte infiltration, and increased arteriolar density as well as ejection fraction compared with saline or mock-transduced AT-MSCs. These effects were accompanied by increased numbers of Ki-67+ and CD117+ cells, and the expression of cardiac actin and β-myosin heavy chain within the infarcted hearts. Both rAT-MSCs and their conditioned medium (CM) stimulated intracellular Ca2+ flux in CSps. CSp-derived cells had increased survival when preconditioned with CM or exosome-enriched fraction (Exo+) from rAT-MSCs and then exposed to simulated ischemia/reperfusion. Proteomic analysis of rAT-MSCs-Exo+ predicted the activation of vascular development and the inhibition of immune cell trafficking. Elevated concentration of miR-320a, miR-150-5p and miR-126-3p associated with regulation of apoptosis and vasculogenesis was confirmed in rAT-MSCs-Exo+. Conclusions: rAT-MSCs promote vasculogenesis and cell survival and reduce post-AMI inflammatory responses in a murine model of AMI. An integrated experimental and computational analysis revealed that Exo+ is the active component of the paracrine secretion by rAT-MSCs, with pro-angiogenic and pro-survival activities.

### Sample Protocol
The Exo+ of mock-transduced AT-MSCs and rAT-MSCs were digested following the Filter Aided Sample Prep (FASP) protocol. Then, instrumental triplicates were acquired for each sample by a platform nanoLC-ESI-QTOF-MS/MS performing label-free shotgun proteomics experiments to identify and simultaneously quantify expressed proteins.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by a dedicated software (Profile Analysis, Bruker, Markerlynx). Highlighted proteins were identified by database and fragmentation analysis, using peptide shaker and the SearchGUI software using mouse database (SwissProt. FASTA). A panel of differential proteins (considering only unique proteins) was subjected to an in-silico analysis by the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Ingenuity Systems, Mountain View, CA) and Gene Ontology in order to predict, in the mock-transduced AT-MSCs and rAT-MSCs, relevant transcriptional regulators in the activated or inhibited state (upstream analysis) and biological functions that are expected to be increased or decreased (downstream analysis), given the observed gene expression changes in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosomes, Adipose tissue–derived mesenchymal stromal cells; telomerase; myocardin; myocardial infarction, Extracellular vesicles.

### Affiliations
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara 
University of Chieti-Pescara, Depatment of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Piero Del Boccio

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
University of Chieti-Pescara, Depatment of Pharmacy


