### Accession
PXD000985

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of olfactory receptor signaling in prostate cancer cells

### Description
The olfactory receptor PSGR1 is not only expressed in olfactory tissue but shows expression in the prostate. In addition, the expression of this receptor is elevated in prostate cancer as well as other prostate diseases and can be used as diagnostic marker. The signalling cascade triggered by the activation of this receptor remains largely unknown until now. To investigate PSGR1 signalling, we stimulated the PSGR1 receptor with one of its known ligands, the odorant beta-ionone, and used a phosphoproteomics approach to identify mediators of PSGR1 signalling. We found the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Pyk2, the tumour suppressor NDRG1 as well as the sodium/hydrogen exchanger NHE1 to be downstream targets of activated PSGR1.

### Sample Protocol
LNCaP cells were labeled using triple SILAC labeling (Arg0/Lys0, Arg6/Lys4, Arg10/Lys8) and stimulated for 0, 2 and 10 min with 500 µM beta-ionone. Cells were lysed on ice in high-urea buffer and protein concentration was determined using a standard Bradford assay. Equal protein amounts were mixed and a volume corresponding to 1 mg total protein was digested using trypsin for 4h @ 42 °C. The resulting peptide mixture was desalted and separated using SCX chromatography. 32 fractions were collected throughout the gradient. A small part of each fraction was directly analyzed by LC/MS, while the major part was subjected to titanium dioxide enrichment. The eluates enriched for phosphopeptides were likewise subjected to LC/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data of all three replicates were jointly processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann 2008, Cox et al., 2011) and Andromeda as search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Peak lists of MS/MS spectra were generated by MaxQuant using default settings and searched against the Uniprot Human Proteome set (release date April 3, 2013) comprising 87,656 protein entries. Database searches were performed with trypsin as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to four missed cleavages. Arg0/Lys0, Arg6/Lys4 and Arg10/Lys8 were set as labels for light, medium and heavy SILAC labeling. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine (Ser), threonine (Thr) and tyrosine (Tyr) residues were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Phosphorylation sites identified in peptides sequences with a probability of ≥ 0.75 were considered “localized sites”. Sites with a localization probability of ˂ 0.75 were counted as additional putative sites given that the amino acid sequence in combination with the number of phosphate moieties was not listed with localized sites elsewhere in the dataset. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to both peptide (on modified peptides separately) and protein lists.

### Publication Abstract
The prostate-specific G-protein-coupled receptor 1 (PSGR1) is an olfactory receptor specifically expressed in the prostate gland. PSGR1 expression is elevated both in benign prostatic hyperplasia tissue and in prostate cancer. Stimulation of PSGR1 by the odorant &#x3b2;-ionone leads to an increase in the intracellular Ca(2+) concentration, activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and a decrease in prostate cancer cell proliferation. To further extend our knowledge about PSGR1 signaling in prostate cancer cells, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomics study using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture and mass spectrometry. We report 51 differentially regulated phosphorylation sites in 24 proteins with functions in cytoskeletal remodeling, signaling and ion transport. Activation of PSGR1 evoked an increase in intracellular pH mediated by the sodium/hydrogen exchanger NHE1. Furthermore, we report the protein tyrosine kinase Pyk2 as a central effector of PSGR1 signaling cascades in LNCaP cells. Our data show that phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase is triggered by Pyk2. In addition, we confirmed dephosphorylation of the tumor suppressor protein N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) at Ser330 downstream of Pyk2. Since NDRG1 impacts oncogenic signaling pathways interfering with tumor progression, we suggest that the Pyk2-NDRG1 axis is possibly involved in conveying the anti-proliferative effect of &#x3b2;-ionone in prostate cancer cells. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Medical Proteomics.

### Keywords
Nhe1, Phosphoproteomics, Pyk2, Prostate cancer, Psgr1, Ionone

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Prof. Bettina Warscheid Funktionelle Proteomik Biologie II Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg Schänzlestr. 1 79104 Freiburg

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Prof. Bettina Warscheid Funktionelle Proteomik Biologie II Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg Schänzlestr. 1 79104 Freiburg


