### Accession
PXD012210

### Title
Urinary peptidomics in youths with and without type 1 diabetes

### Description
Although the early mechanisms responsible for diabetic kidney disease remain unclear, it is widely believed that chronic hyperglycemia disrupts the proteolytic milieu in the diabetic kidney and may contribute to early kidney injury. We thus performed mechanistic peptidomics in type 1 diabetes before the onset of microalbuminuria. In the discovery cohort of 30 participants, we identified 6550 peptides from 753 proteins. After removing false hits and potential contaminants, there were 6323 quantified peptides: 5708 peptides can be found in youths with type 1 diabetes, 5011 in healthy controls, and 4396 common to both groups. After applying a cut-off of 100%, there were 162 peptides found in each and every urine sample. From this subset, fifteen peptides were differentially excreted between youths with type 1 diabetes and their non-diabetic peers (P < 0.05, t-test); five remained significant after Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment (Q < 0.05). Excretion rates of six peptides were validated in a second cohort of thirty participants using parallel reaction monitoring (separate PRIDE file). Interestingly, these peptides originated from a small region near the C-terminus of uromodulin, a kidney-specific protein. In silico analyses of cleavage sites implicated several metallo and serine proteases involved in wound healing. Two of the uromodulin peptides activated NFκB in a TLR4-dependent manner in cultured kidney tubular cells and also promoted neutrophil migration in vitro. In summary, the differential excretion of uromodulin peptides may shed light onto early inflammatory processes in the diabetic kidney.

### Sample Protocol
We followed the Standard Protocol for Urine Collection and Storage, created by the Human Kidney and Urine Proteome Project (HKUPP) and the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO). Following collection, all second-morning midstream urine samples were kept at 4C until further processing. All urine samples were centrifuged at 1000g for 10 minutes to remove intact cells and debris. The supernatants were then stored at -80C. This initial processing step was completed within 3 hours of urine collection to obviate the need for urine preservatives. Samples were de-identified and randomized so that investigators were blinded to experimental groups during sample processing.  Frozen samples were thawed, vortexed, and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes to remove any remaining cells and debris. Sample volumes were normalized to 90 μmol of creatinine. After adjusting the pH to 8 using ammonium bicarbonate, we used Vivaspin Centrifugal Concentrators (VivaProducts) with 10-kDa cut-off membranes to isolate urinary peptides. We added dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 2mM to reduce protein disulfide bonds; and subsequently iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 4 mM to alkylate and prevent the re-formation of disulfide bonds. The peptides were then passed through solid-phase extraction Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters Corporation), after adjusting pH to 4 with formic acid. To remove urinary pigments, we added ethyl acetate, vortexed and centrifuged the sample, and then discarded the supernatant. The extracted peptides were speed-vacuumed until the final sample volume was less than 200 uL, topped off to 500 uL in running buffer, and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL ATM column (The Nest Group, Inc.) containing a hydrophilic, anionic polymer (poly-2-sulfoethyl aspartamide). We ran a 1-hour fractionation method using high-performance liquid chromatography strong cation exchange (HPLC-SCX) on a linear gradient of 0.26 M formic acid in 5% acetonitrile as the running buffer and 1M ammonium formate added as the elution buffer. We collected twelve fractions per sample at a rate of one fraction per two minutes after the start of the elution gradient. In order to reduce time on the mass spectrometer, we selected seven fractions, which covered the largest area of peptide abundance on the chromatogram, and then pooled these seven fractions into three collections. Pooled collections were further desalted using Bond Elut OMIX C18 tips (Agilent Technologies), eluted in 5 uL of 65% acetonitrile, and diluted with 60 uL of 0.1% formic acid in pure MS-grade water.  We ran the desalted collections over a 60-minute gradient on the EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nano-electrospray ionization source. Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was utilized to generate RAW files of each MS run.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) and were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version July 2016) using the built-in Andromeda search engine(55). To study endogenous peptides, we selected the “unspecific” digestion mode. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, proline oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation with a maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was the only fixed modification. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids and was determined by searching a randomized database. Matching between runs was selected. We first analyzed the peptide list generated by MaxQuant software using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3). False hits matching the randomized database were removed, and peptide intensities were log-transformed. We applied a stringent cut-off filter to identify peptides found in all samples. A volcano plot was generated to depict fold-change and statistical differences of each peptide between groups.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic hyperglycemia is known to disrupt the proteolytic milieu, initiating compensatory and maladaptive pathways in the diabetic kidney. Such changes in intrarenal proteolysis are captured by the urinary peptidome. To elucidate the early kidney response to chronic hyperglycemia, we conducted a peptidomic investigation into urines from otherwise healthy youths with type 1 diabetes and their non-diabetic peers using unbiased and targeted mass spectrometry-based techniques. This cross-sectional study included two separate cohorts for the discovery (<i>n</i> = 30) and internal validation (<i>n</i> = 30) of differential peptide excretion. Peptide bioactivity was predicted using PeptideRanker and subsequently verified <i>in vitro</i> Proteasix and the Nephroseq database were used to identify putative proteases responsible for peptide generation and examine their expression in diabetic nephropathy. A total of 6550 urinary peptides were identified in the discovery analysis. We further examined the subset of 162 peptides, which were quantified across all thirty samples. Of the 15 differentially excreted peptides (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), seven derived from a C-terminal region (<sup>589</sup>SGSVIDQSRVLNLGPITRK<sup>607</sup>) of uromodulin, a kidney-specific protein. Increased excretion of five uromodulin peptides was replicated in the validation cohort using parallel reaction monitoring (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). One of the validated peptides (SGSVIDQSRVLNLGPI) activated NF&#x3ba;B and AP-1 signaling, stimulated cytokine release, and enhanced neutrophil migration <i>in vitro. In silico</i> analyses highlighted several potential proteases such as hepsin, meprin A, and cathepsin B to be responsible for generating these peptides. In summary, we identified a urinary signature of uromodulin peptides associated with early type 1 diabetes before clinical manifestations of kidney disease and discovered novel bioactivity of uromodulin peptides <i>in vitro</i> Our present findings lay the groundwork for future studies to validate peptide excretion in larger and broader populations, to investigate the role of bioactive uromodulin peptides in high glucose conditions, and to examine proteases that cleave uromodulin.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Type 1 diabetes, Lc-ms/ms, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Julie Anh Dung Van

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Konvalinka
Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada


