### Accession
PXD008966

### Title
An Internal Standard for Assessing Phosphopeptide Recovery from Metal Ion/Oxide Enrichment Strategies

### Description
Phosphorylation-mediated signaling pathways have major implications in cellular regulation and disease. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a well-established approach for quantifying thousands of phosphorylation events in a single experiment. However, proteins with roles in signaling pathways are frequently less abundant and phosphorylation is often sub-stoichiometric. As such, the efficient enrichment and subsequent recovery of phosphorylated peptides is vital. To understand better phosphopeptide recovery from enrichment strategies, we designed a peptide internal standard-based assay directed toward sample preparation strategies for mass spectrometry analysis. We coupled mass-differential tandem mass tag (mTMT) reagents (specifically, TMTzero and TMTsuper-heavy), nine mass spectrometry-amenable phosphopeptides (phos9), and peak area measurements from extracted ion chromatograms to determine phosphopeptide recovery. We showcase this mTMT/phos9 recovery assay by evaluating three commercial phosphopeptide enrichment workflows. Our assay provides data on the recovery of phosphopeptides, which complement other metrics, namely the number of identified phosphopeptides and enrichment specificity. Our mTMT/phos9 assay is applicable to any enrichment protocol in a typical experimental workflow irrespective of sample origin or labeling strategy.

### Sample Protocol
We developed a method to evaluate phosphopeptide recovery by analyzing chromatographic peak area measurement differences of non-isobaric, mass-differential TMT (mTMT)-labeled phosphopeptide internal standards (phos9) that are added before and after enrichment. The phosphopeptides used for this assay were synthesized by Cell Signaling Technology (CST). We assembled two equi-molar cocktails of phos9 peptides, one labeled with TMTzero and another with TMTsh. We applied our recovery assay to three commercial phosphopeptide enrichment workflows: High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (IMAC1; High-Select), Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (IMAC2; Fe-NTA), and High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (TiO2). To perform the assay, approximately 0.5 pmol of each TMTzero-labeled phos9 peptides were added to 1mg of tryptic peptides from human whole cell lysate, and the enrichment procedures were performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Following enrichment, 0.5 pmol of each TMTsh-labeled phos9 peptide were added to the eluent. The sample was then desalted and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Our mass spectrometry data were collected in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Famos Autosampler (LC Packings) and an Accela600 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 1 µg of peptide were loaded onto the column and separated over a 90-min gradient. Mass spectra were processed with a SEQUEST-based software pipeline [5] and SkyLine 3.7 [20, 21]. SEQUEST searches were performed with phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues (+79.966 Da) set as a variable modification. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1% [22, 23]. Peak areas from the mTMT-labeled phos9 peptides were extracted and quantified with Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation-mediated signaling pathways have major implications in cellular regulation and disease. However, proteins with roles in these pathways are frequently less abundant and phosphorylation is often sub-stoichiometric. As such, the efficient enrichment, and subsequent recovery of phosphorylated peptides, is vital. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a well-established approach for quantifying thousands of phosphorylation events in a single experiment. We designed a peptide internal standard-based assay directed toward sample preparation strategies for mass spectrometry analysis to understand better phosphopeptide recovery from enrichment strategies. We coupled mass-differential tandem mass tag (mTMT) reagents (specifically, TMTzero and TMTsuper-heavy), nine mass spectrometry-amenable phosphopeptides (phos9), and peak area measurements from extracted ion chromatograms to determine phosphopeptide recovery. We showcase this mTMT/phos9 recovery assay by evaluating three phosphopeptide enrichment workflows. Our assay provides data on the recovery of phosphopeptides, which complement other metrics, namely the number of identified phosphopeptides and enrichment specificity. Our mTMT/phos9 assay is applicable to any enrichment protocol in a typical experimental workflow irrespective of sample origin or labeling strategy. Graphical Abstract &#x115f;.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tmt0, Tmtsh, Tmtzero, Mtraq, Lumos, Tmt super-heavy

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


