### Accession
PXD021817

### Title
Proteogenomics of Hyphomicrobium sp. MC8b strain

### Description
This project is a proteomic comparison of Hyphomicrobium sp. MC8b grown with dichloromethane or with methanol. The datasets were obtained using the annotated genome of Hyphomicrobium sp. MC8b.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer with a 90-min gradient time.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MASCOT Daemon search engine, the results were then parsed with IRMA, and spectral counts were compared using the T-Fold test.

### Publication Abstract
Several bacteria are able to degrade the major industrial solvent dichloromethane (DCM) by using the conserved dehalogenase DcmA, the only system for DCM degradation characterised at the sequence level so far. Using differential proteomics, we rapidly identified key determinants of DCM degradation for <i>Hyphomicrobium</i> sp. MC8b, an unsequenced facultative methylotrophic DCM-degrading strain. For this, we designed a pan-proteomics database comprising the annotated genome sequences of 13 distinct <i>Hyphomicrobium</i> strains. Compared to growth with methanol, growth with DCM induces drastic changes in the proteome of strain MC8b. Dichloromethane dehalogenase DcmA was detected by differential pan-proteomics, but only with poor sequence coverage, suggesting atypical characteristics of the DCM dehalogenation system in this strain. More peptides were assigned to DcmA by error-tolerant search, warranting subsequent sequencing of the genome of strain MC8b, which revealed a highly divergent set of <i>dcm</i> genes in this strain. This suggests that the <i>dcm</i> enzymatic system is less strongly conserved than previously believed, and that substantial molecular evolution of <i>dcm</i> genes has occurred beyond their horizontal transfer in the bacterial domain. Our study showed the power of pan-proteomics for quick characterization of new strains belonging to branches of the Tree of Life that are densely genome-sequenced.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Shotgun proteomics, Differential proteomics, Hyphomicrobium

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


