### Accession
PXD030103

### Title
Proteomic Profiling and Functional Analysis of B Cell-Derived Exosomes upon Pneumocystis Infection

### Description
Pneumocystis is a life-threatening fungal pathogen frequently causing fatal pneumonia (PCP) in immunocompromised individuals with high mortality. Recently, B cells have been reported to play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of PCP through producing antibodies and activating CD4+ T cell response. Exosomes are nano-scale small extracellular vesicles (EVs) abundant of protein cargo and can mediate immune response during infectious disease. Here, using quantitative proteomic analysis coupled with bioinformatic analysis, we attempted to characterize exosomes derived from B lymphocytes in response to PCP. Also, the effects of B-cell exosomes on CD4+ T cell response and phagocytic function of macrophages were clarified. Briefly, 1701 proteins were identified from B-cell exosomes and the majority of them were reported in Vesiclepedia. 51 differentially expressed proteins of B-cell exosomes were found in response to PCP. They were mainly associated with immune response and transcription regulation. Particularly, a variety of histone components were enriched in B cell-derived exosomes when infected with Pneumocystis. Moreover, functional study revealed the pro-inflammatory profile of B-cell exosomes on CD4+ T cell response in PCP. Taken together, our results suggest the involvement of exosomes derived from B cells in cell-to-cell communication, providing new information on the function of B cells in response to PCP.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation   Three biological replicates of B-cell exosomes isolated from Pneumocystis infected and uninfected control mice were prepared. Quantitative proteomics was conducted by Applied Protein Technology (Shanghai, China). To extract protein, exosomes samples were lysed with SDT buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT, pH7.6). The amount of protein was analyzed with BCA method as mentioned above. Protein digestion by trypsin was performed employing filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure described by Matthias Mann. The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and further reconstituted in 40 µl 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  TMT Labeling and Peptide Fractionation 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled with TMT 6 Plex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and then fractionated using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)   Each peptide fraction was subjected to Easy nLC, an HPLC liquid phase system (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Eluent A was 0.1% formic acid and eluent B was 84% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid. The chromatographic column was equilibrated with 95% eluent A. Then the peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) and separated by the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The MS data were obtained using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in positive ion mode. Parameters were set as follows. The survey scan of precursor ions was 300-1,800 m/z. Automatic gain control target was set to 1e6, and maximum inject time to 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 60.0 s. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and resolution for MS/MS scans was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z. MS/MS activation type was high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation. Isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification MS/MS raw data were searched by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Swissprot database of Mus musculus (updated to 06 January 2021) using the algorithms of the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2). The criteria for protein identification were as follows. Trypsin was selected as the digestive enzyme; two missed cleavages were allowed; peptide mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS spectra acquired; and fragment mass tolerances were set at 0.1 Da for all MS/MS spectra acquired; fixed modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 6 plex (N-terminal) and TMT 6 plex (lysine, K); oxidation (methionine, M) and TMT 6 plex (tyrosine, Y) were defined as variable modifications; the peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 0.01. Proteins were quantified on the basis of the median of only unique peptides of each protein. To control experimental bias, the median protein ratio was normalized to 1. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were defined as fold change > 1.2 (up- or downregulation) and P-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pneumocystis</i> is a life-threatening fungal pathogen that frequently causes fatal pneumonia (PCP) in immunocompromised individuals. Recently, B cells have been reported to play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of PCP through producing antibodies and activating CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell response. Exosomes are nanoscale small extracellular vesicles abundant with protein cargo and can mediate immune response during infectious disease. In this study, using tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics coupled with bioinformatic analysis, we attempted to characterize exosomes derived from B lymphocytes in response to PCP. Several proteins were verified by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. Also, the effects of B cell exosomes on CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell response and phagocytic function of macrophages were clarified. Briefly, 1701 proteins were identified from B cell exosomes, and the majority of them were reported in Vesiclepedia. A total of 51 differentially expressed proteins of B cell exosomes were found in response to PCP. They were mainly associated with immune response and transcription regulation. PRM analysis confirmed the significantly changed levels of histone H1.3, vimentin, and tyrosine-protein phosphatase nonreceptor type 6 (PTPN6). Moreover, a functional study revealed the proinflammatory profile of B cell exosomes on CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell response in PCP. Taken together, our results suggest the involvement of exosomes derived from B cells in cell-to-cell communication, providing new information on the function of B cells in response to PCP.

### Keywords
B lymphocytes, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry, Pneumocystis pneumonia

### Affiliations
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Institute of Respiratory Medicine and Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Institute of Respiratory Medicine and Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University

### Submitter
Zhao-Hui Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaohui Tong
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Institute of Respiratory Medicine and Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China


