### Accession
PXD026401

### Title
Discovery of biomarkers with clinical utility for recurrent aphthous stomatitis using saliva as liquid biopsy and mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
The objective of this project was to characterize the salivary proteome of patients with recurrent aphthous stomatitis using mass spectrometry-based proteomics(nLC-MS/MS) and assess its clinical usefulness in identifying the most representative biological and molecular processes during the course of lesions. To do this, we conducted a case-control study, analyzing the saliva of healthy controls and patients with recurrent aphthous stomatitis during a complete ulcerative cycle (active ulcers and absence of lesions).

### Sample Protocol
We prospectively collected 118 salivary samples from 68 volunteers after obtaining informed consent. The subjects were divided into healthy controls (n=31; people with no history of oral ulcers) and recurrent aphthous stomatitis (n=36). The latter group was evaluated at study entry, during the ulcerative stage, and when lesions disappeared (remission stage, n=36). Additionally, we collected samples from recurrences that occurred after the remission phase (n=15). Saliva samples were randomized and pooled into 9 sets: healthy controls (n=3, 11 samples per set), ulcerative (n=3, 12 samples per set), and remission phase (n=3, 12 samples per set).  Proteins were precipitated by adding 5 volumes of cold acetone and incubated overnight at -80 °C. Then, they were equilibrated at room temperature for 10 min, they were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min at 4 ° C and the supernatant was discarded. The resulting pellet was washed 3 times with cold 80% acetone. Subsequently, the protein pellet was allowed to dry in a rotary concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 30 μL 8M Urea and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then, they were reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Then, they were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were diluted 8 times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was performed with sequencing grade trypsin (#V5071, Promega) in a 1:50 ratio of protease: protein (mass/mass), incubated for 16 h at 37 ° C. Digestion reaction was stopped by pH adding formic acid to the 10%. The samples were then subjected to Clean Up SepPack Vac C-18 (Waters), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Subsequently, clean peptides were dried in a rotary concentrator at 1,000 rpm overnight at 10°C. The pure and dry peptides were resuspended in 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid and then quantified in Direct Detect IR (Millipore), leaving a dilution of 0.5 μg/μl, for injection in the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). A complex mixture of tryptic peptide derived from salivary samples was diluted with 0.1% formic acid to 0.5 µg/µL concentration. We injected 500 ng of peptides into a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) using an Aurora UHPLC column (25cm x 75μm ID, 1.6μm C18, IonOpticks). Chromatographic separation was performed using a 90 minutes linear gradient of 2% to 35% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Next, we collected MS data using the oTOF software (Bruker Daltonics) under 10 PASEF cycles with an m/z range of 100 to 1,700. The capillary ionization was 1,600 V and its temperature was 200°C. TOF frequency was 10 KHz at a resolution of 50,000 FWHM.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MsFragger. For all searches, a protein sequence database of reviewed human proteins (accessed 06/15/2020 from UniProt; 74,823 entries) was used. Decoy sequences were generated and appended to the original database using Philosopher. We did an open and semi-tryptic search. A maximum of two missing cleavages were allowed, the required minimum peptide sequence length was 7 amino acids, and the peptide mass was limited to a maximum of 5,000 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N termini ([^), pyro-glutamic acid and pyro-carbamidomethyl cysteine (nQnC) and water loss on any peptide N-terminus (NE) as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set from -150 to +500 Da, and precursor true tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm. Mass calibration and parameter optimization were enabled. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and the number of enzymatic termini was set to two. Isotope error was set to 0. The minimum number of fragment peaks required to include a PSM in modelling was set to two, and the minimum number required reporting the match was four. A minimum of 15 fragment peaks and the top 100 most intense peaks were used as initial settings. In IonQuant, we selected match between runs (MBR), mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, retention time tolerance was set to 0.4 minutes, ion mobility (1/K0) tolerance was set to 0.05, normalization was enabled, and minimum isotope count was set to 2 by default. Minimum ion counts 2 was selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Aphthous stomatitis, Microbiota, Proteomics, Case-control studies, Nutrients, Saliva, Vitamins, Oral ulcers, Computational biology

### Affiliations
Departmento de Ciencias Básicas Biomédicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Región del Maule, Chile
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas Biomédicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Talca

### Submitter
César Rivera

### Lab Head
Dr César Rivera
Departmento de Ciencias Básicas Biomédicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Región del Maule, Chile


