### Accession
PXD010305

### Title
Characterization of F. tularensis LVS outer membrane vesicles

### Description
Francisella tularensis is a Gram-negative bacteria responsible for tularemia, a disease for which the high prevalence of failure and relapses is a main concern. Directed evolution experiments carried out in presence of antibiotics revealed that acquisition of fluoroquinolones (FQ) resistance was not exclusively related to mutations in DNA gyrase genes which are the first targets of these molecules. Here, using F. tularensis LVS as model, we investigated the role of FupA/B (Fer-Utilization Protein), whose possible contribution to FQ resistance was suggested by genomic analysis of resistant isolates. Using trans-complementation/mutagenesis approaches we definitely connected FupA/B expression to FQ sensitivity. Furthermore, we showed that the virulent strain F. tularensis subsp. tularensis SCHU S4, lacking the homologous FupA protein, exhibited a lower FQ susceptibility. Importantly, the deletion of this lipoprotein promoted an increased secretion of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic characterization of OMVs from LVS and LVS-∆fupA/B strains led to the identification of 801 proteins among which a subset of 23 proteins exhibited a differential abundance between OMVs from both strains and may therefore contribute to the observed increased FQ susceptibility. We finally demonstrated that OMVs are structural key elements of F. tularensis LVS biofilms providing protection against FQ. Taken together, these results showed that mutations targeting FupA/B contribute to antimicrobial resistance through quantitative and qualitative modulations of OMV biogenesis and biofilm formation, providing new basis for understanding and fighting against Francisella antibiotic resistance and/or persistence.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were grown in MMH at 37°C under shaking to late logarithmic (OD600nm 0.8) or stationary (OD600mm 2) growth phase. After addition of azide (0.01% w/v), bacteria were pelleted by centrifugation (7,000 × g, 10 min) and the supernatants passed through a 0.22-μm filter unit to remove intact bacteria. In preliminary experiments, recovered supernatants were plated on PVX-CHA plates to ensure sterility. The pelleted OMVs collected by ultracentrifugation (Sorvall Ultracentrifuge; 100,000 × g, 2 h) were resuspended in PBS for washing. The ultracentrifugation step was repeated and the freshly resuspended OMVs were used for direct quantification (Nanosight, Malvern Instrument) as well as for SDS-PAGE analysis. OMV proteins were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using F. tularensis subsp. holarctica LVS database from MicroScope and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides and razor + unique peptides were set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Francisella tularensis</i> is the causative agent in tularemia for which the high prevalence of treatment failure and relapse is a major concern. Directed-evolution experiments revealed that acquisition of fluoroquinolone (FQ) resistance was linked to factors in addition to mutations in DNA gyrase. Here, using <i>F. tularensis</i> live vaccine strain (LVS) as a model, we demonstrated that FupA/B (Fer-Utilization Protein) expression is linked to FQ susceptibility, and that the virulent strain <i>F. tularensis</i> subsp. <i>tularensis</i> SCHU S4 deleted for the homologous FupA protein exhibited even higher FQ resistance. In addition to an increased FQ minimal inhibitory concentration, LVS&#x394;<i>fupA/B</i> displayed tolerance toward bactericidal compounds including ciprofloxacin and gentamicin. Interestingly, the FupA/B deletion was found to promote increased secretion of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic characterization of vesicles from LVS and LVS&#x2206;<i>fupA/B</i> identified 801 proteins, including a subset of 23 proteins exhibiting differential abundance between both strains which may therefore contribute to the reduced antibiotic susceptibility of the FupA/B-deleted strain. We also demonstrated that OMVs are key structural elements of LVS&#x394;<i>fupA/B</i> biofilms providing protection against FQ. These results provide a new basis for understanding and tackling antibiotic resistance and/or persistence of <i>Francisella</i> and other pathogenic members of the <i>Thiotrichales</i> class.

### Keywords
Tolerance, Fluoroquinolone, Omvs, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


