### Accession
PXD014701

### Title
Arsenic response of three altiplanic Exiguobacterium strains with different tolerance levels against the metalloid species: a proteomics study

### Description
In this work we compare the protein expression patterns of the three strains in response to arsenic by proteomic approach, strains were grown in absence of the metalloid and in presence of As(III) and As(V) sublethal concentrations and the protein separation was carried out in 2D electrophoresis gels (2D-GE). In total, 999 spots were detected, between 77 and 173 of which showed significant changes for As(III) among the three strains, and between 90 and 143 for As(V) respectively compared to the corresponding control condition. Twenty-eight of those were identified by mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation – Two-hundred µg of protein for each sample were lyophilized, resuspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM tris, 4% w/v CHAPS, 65mM dithioerythritol (DTE), protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics) and incubated at room temperature on a rotating wheel for 2 h. Next, the samples were centrifuged 30 min at 20,000g and the supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C until use. Protein quantification was performed using the RC DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad).   Two-dimension gel electrophoresis – Ten µg of protein extracts diluted in the IEF buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % w/v CHAPS, 65mM DTE, 0.0025% v/v bromophenol blue and 1% v/v IPG-buffer, pH 3-10 NL) were incubated for 1 h at room temperature on a rotating wheel. Precast IPG Strip (7 cm) with immobilized pH 4–7 gradient (Bio-Rad) were rehydrated with 125 µl of samples overnight. Isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out on an EttanTM IPGphorTM system (GE Healthcare) at 20°C using a gradient mode to a total amount of 8000 Vh. After IEF, proteins were reduced in equilibration buffer (65 mM DTT in 6 M urea, 1.5 M tris–HCl, pH 8.8, 30% v/v glycerol, 2% v/v SDS and 0.001% v/v bromophenol blue) for 10 min, and then alkylated in equilibration buffer containing 135 mM iodoacetamide instead of DTT for 10 min. The proteins were separated in the second dimension on homemade 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels using the Criterion Dodeca Cell system (Bio-Rad) at a constant voltage of 120 V during 80 min. Analytical gels were stained with silver nitrate. Tree biological replicates per conditions and per strain were performed.

### Data Protocol
Image analysis and spot selection – Gels were scanned (Epson perfection V750 Pro) and images were analyzed with the Progenesis Samespot® software v3.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics). After accurate gel alignment, the protein spots were detected automatically, and the quality of the automatic match was critically evaluated for each gel and, if necessary, corrections were made manually to eliminate any error or artifact in the protein spot assignment. Changes with statistical significance between the three conditions for each strain were taken into consideration as well as the comparison between the three strains by condition to select the protein spots of interest. Differential expression analysis was also performed using the R package Limma (Ritchie et al., 2015), with the intensity values expressed as a percentage of normalized volumes.  Spot picking and digestion in gel with trypsin – Each selected protein spot was excised from preparative gels and washed successively with water, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) and 100% Acetonitrile. Dried protein spots were rehydrated in 50 mM TEABC containing 0.1 μg of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptides of each gel piece were extracted successively with 100% acetonitrile, 50 mM TEABC and 5% formic acid and the supernatant were recovered into a new tube. The pooled peptide solutions were stored at -20°C until use.   Mass spectrometry and protein identification –The protein digests were analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with a nano-flow HPLC (RSLC U3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 15 cm reverse phase column (Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Nano Viper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using a 30 min gradient of 2 to 40% gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0,1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS/MS analyses were performed in a data-dependent mode. Full scans (375 – 1,500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z. The twelve most intense ions (charge states ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented by HCD (high-energy collisional dissociation) in the collision cell and detected at 17,500 resolution. The spectral data were analyzed via the Proteome DiscovererTM 1.4.1.12 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For protein identifications, databases used were: Exiguobacterium sp. (strain ATCC BAA-1283) (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000000716_EXISA-cano_2017_11.fasta) with the subsequent parameters: Trypsin as the enzyme, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of cystein as fixed modification and oxidation as variable modification. The MS identification of all proteins follows some filters: Mascot Significance Threshold (Significance threshold: 0.01) and peptides per Protein (minimal number of peptides: 1, count only rank 1 peptides: true, count peptide only in top scored proteins: true).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Exiguobacterium</i> is a polyextremophile bacterial genus with a physiology that allows it to develop in different adverse environments. The Salar de Huasco is one of these environments due to its altitude, atmospheric pressure, solar radiation, temperature variations, pH, salinity, and the presence of toxic compounds such as arsenic. However, the physiological and/or molecular mechanisms that enable them to prosper in these environments have not yet been described. Our research group has isolated several strains of <i>Exiguobacterium</i> genus from different sites of Salar de Huasco, which show different resistance levels to As(III) and As(V). In this work, we compare the protein expression patterns of the three strains in response to arsenic by a proteomic approach; strains were grown in absence of the metalloid and in presence of As(III) and As(V) sublethal concentrations and the protein separation was carried out in 2D electrophoresis gels (2D-GE). In total, 999 spots were detected, between 77 and 173 of which showed significant changes for As(III) among the three strains, and between 90 and 143 for As(V), respectively, compared to the corresponding control condition. Twenty-seven of those were identified by mass spectrometry (MS). Among these identified proteins, the ArsA [ATPase from the As(III) efflux pump] was found to be up-regulated in response to both arsenic conditions in the three strains, as well as the Co-enzyme A disulfide reductase (Cdr) in the two more resistant strains. Interestingly, in this genus the gene that codifies for Cdr is found within the genic context of the <i>ars</i> operon. We suggest that this protein could be restoring antioxidants molecules, necessary for the As(V) reduction. Additionally, among the proteins that change their expression against As, we found several with functions relevant to stress response, e.g., Hpf, LuxS, GLpX, GlnE, and Fur. This study allowed us to shed light into the physiology necessary for these bacteria to be able to tolerate the toxicity and stress generated by the presence of arsenic in their niche.

### Keywords
Resistance, Arsenic, Exiguobacterium, 2-de

### Affiliations
Universidad Andres Bello
Universidad Andres Bello, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida

### Submitter
Juan Castro-Severeyn

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Castro-Severyn
Universidad Andres Bello, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida


