### Accession
PXD038668

### Title
Identification of Nrg1 enhancer binding proteins

### Description
Hyperglycemia is a risk factor for breast cancer-related morbidity and mortality. Hyperglycemia induces Neuregulin 1 (Nrg1) overexpression in breast cancer, which subsequently promotes tumor progression. However, molecular mechanisms underlying hyperglycemia-induced Nrg1 overexpression remain poorly understood. Here, We used DNA-protein pull-down using Nrg1 enhancer sequence as bait followed by LC/MS and identified RBPJ as a key component of the Nrg1 enhanceosome. We show that hyperglycemia causes active histone modifications at the Nrg1 enhancer, forming enhanceosome complexes where RBPJ, P300, and SETD1A are recruited to upregulate Nrg1 expression.

### Sample Protocol
Part of the Nrg1 enhancer was amplified as an oligonucleotide bait for enhancer-binding proteins using biotinylated primers Nuclear extracts from Met1 cancer cells were prepared in hypertonic and high salt concentration buffers and then incubated overnight at 4 °C with the enhancer baits and poly dI-dC (Sigma, P4929). Baits and nuclear protein complexes were precipitated using streptavidin-coated beads (Thermo Scientific, #20349) and eluted using Laemmli sample buffer. Each eluted sample (10%) was separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by silver staining (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To identify candidate proteins, the remaining portion of the eluted sample was separated by 10% SDS-PAGE until the samples covered 2 cm on the gel. The gels were divided into six slices and then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS on the Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. To separate peptides, we used a C18 reverse-phase HPLC column (250 mm × 75 μm ID) with a 2.4–35% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 120 min. For MS/MS analysis, the precursor ion scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) was acquired in an Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 with an internal lock mass. Twenty ions with the highest intensities were isolated and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
• MS/MS samples were analyzed on the Sequest Sorcerer platform (Sagen-N Research, San Jose, CA). Sequest was set up to interrogate the Mus musculus protein database (17,278 entries, UniProt, GCA_000001635.8 from Ensembl (http://www.uniprot.org/)) that includes frequently observed contaminants, assuming trypsin is used. Sequest selected proteins with fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethyl and methionine oxidation were specified as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Scaffold v5.0.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identities. Peptide identities were accepted if they had > 94.0% probability of achieving <1.0% FDR based on the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identities were accepted if they had > 99.0% probability of achieving < 1.0% FDR and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm49. Proteins with similar peptides that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.     •

### Publication Abstract
Hyperglycemia is a risk factor for breast cancer-related morbidity and mortality. Hyperglycemia induces Neuregulin 1 (Nrg1) overexpression in breast cancer, which subsequently promotes tumor progression. However, molecular mechanisms underlying hyperglycemia-induced Nrg1 overexpression remain poorly understood. Here, we show that hyperglycemia causes active histone modifications at the Nrg1 enhancer, forming enhanceosome complexes where recombination signal binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa J region (RBPJ), E1A binding protein p300 (P300), and SET domain containing 1&#x2009;A (SETD1A) are recruited to upregulate Nrg1 expression. Deletions in RBPJ-binding sites causes hyperglycemia-controlled Nrg1 levels to be downregulated, resulting in decreased tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Mice with modest-temporary hyperglycemia, induced by low-dose short-exposure streptozotocin, display accelerated tumor growth and lapatinib resistance, whereas combining lapatinib with N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl]-S42 phenylglycine t-butyl ester (DAPT) ameliorates tumor growth under these modest hyperglycemic conditions by inhibiting NOTCH and EGFR superfamilies. NOTCH activity is correlated with NRG1 levels, and high NRG1 levels predicts poor outcomes, particularly in HER2-positive breast cancer patients. Our findings highlight the hyperglycemia-linked epigenetic modulation of NRG1 as a potential therapeutic strategy for treating breast cancer patients with diabetes.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Breast cancer cells, High glucose

### Affiliations
UNIST
Department of Biological Sciences, College of Information and Bioengineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Changhu Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Jiyoung Park
Department of Biological Sciences, College of Information and Bioengineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea


