### Accession
PXD011088

### Title
PPR proteins in Arabidopsis mitoribosomes

### Description
Investigation of the protein composition of mitoribosomal subunits in Arabidopsis thaliana by complexome profiling

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes in cross linked and non-cross linked mitochondria isolated from an Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture and Arabidopsis leaves were solubilized by digitonin and separated on large pore blue native (lpBN) gels. Gel lanes were cut into approximately 48 fractions and submitted to in-gel tryptic digestion followed by extraction of peptides from the gel matrix according to Senkler et al. 2017 (The mitochondrial complexome of Arabidopsis thaliana, Plant J., 89, 1079-1092). Extracted peptides were subsequently submitted to liquid chromatography coupled tandem MS (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data processing involving MaxQuant (for protein identification and quantitation) and NOVA (for cluster analysis, Giese, et al. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics, 31: 440-441) was performed as described in Senkler et al. 2017 (The mitochondrial complexome of Arabidopsis thaliana, Plant J., 89, 1079-1092) with the following exception: for hierarchical clustering of the protein abundance profiles, iBAQ values were used here instead of the previously employed LFQ data.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial transcripts are subject to a wealth of processing mechanisms including cis- and trans-splicing events, as well as base modifications (RNA editing). Hundreds of proteins are required for these processes in plant mitochondria, many of which belong to the pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) protein superfamily. The structure, localization, and function of these proteins is only poorly understood. Here we present evidence that several PPR proteins are bound to mitoribosomes in plants. A novel complexome profiling strategy in combination with chemical crosslinking has been employed to systematically define the protein constituents of the large and the small ribosomal subunits in the mitochondria of plants. We identified more than 80 ribosomal proteins, which include several PPR proteins and other non-conventional ribosomal proteins. These findings reveal a potential coupling of transcriptional and translational events in the mitochondria of plants. Furthermore, the data indicate an extremely high molecular mass of the "small" subunit, even exceeding that of the "large" subunit.

### Keywords
Mitoribosomal subunits, Ppr proteins, Complexome profiling, Mitoribosomes

### Affiliations
Leibniz Universtät Hannover
Leibniz University Hannover  Institute of Plant Genetics  Unit V: Plant Proteomics

### Submitter
Holger Eubel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hans-Peter Braun
Leibniz University Hannover  Institute of Plant Genetics  Unit V: Plant Proteomics


