### Accession
PXD027091

### Title
Human plasma proteome changes during inhaled allergen challenge

### Description
Inhaled allergen challenge of subjects with allergic asthma allows the study of mechanisms involved in allergen-induced airway inflammation. The objective of this study was to identify changes in the plasma proteome associated with a late phase response (LPR) causing airway obstruction occurring 4-8 hours after the initial early response.  Serial plasma samples from asthmatics undergoing inhaled allergen challenge were analyzed. Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using a linear regression to model the relationship between the degree of airway obstruction during the LPR and plasma proteome changes evoked by the inhaled allergen challenge. Inhaled allergen challenge induced changes in the plasma proteome including upregulation of the protease inhibitors alpha-1-antitrypsin, alpha-1-antichymotrypsin and plasma serine protease inhibitor. Out of 396 quantified proteins, 150 showed a statistically significant change 23 hours post allergen challenge. Further proteomic changes were associated with the LPR, including altered levels of coagulation factors such as an increased factor XII A and a decreased von Willebrand factor.  Allergic reactions to inhaled allergens in asthmatic subjects was associated with changes in a large proportion of the measured plasma proteome, whereof protease inhibitors show the largest changes, likely to influence the inflammatory response. Of several other proteins altered in relation to the LPR, many are associated with coagulation.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of plasma samples for mass spectrometry analysis  Sample preparation was performed on the Agilent AssayMAP Bravo Platform. Ten microliters 1:10 diluted plasma sample was transferred to a 96-well plate (Greiner G650201) and 4 M Urea (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM AmBic (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final volume of 50 µL.  Proteins were reduced with 60 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration of 10 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 37°C followed by alkylation with 80 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration of 20 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Plasma samples were digested with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. Corporation) at an enzyme: protein ratio of 1:50 w/w for 5 hours at room temperature and further digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega) at a trypsin: protein ratio of 1:50 w/w overnight at room temperature.  The digestion was stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) and the digested peptides were desalted on the Bravo platform. Ninety percent acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA were used to prime and equilibrate the AssayMAP C18 cartridges (Agilent, PN: 5190-6532), respectively. Samples were loaded into the cartridges at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. The cartridges were washed with 0.1% TFA before  peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and resuspended in 25 μL of 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was measured using the Nanodrop (DeNovix Inc.). The samples were diluted to 0.5 µg/µL with 2% ACN/0.1% TFA and spiked with synthetic iRT peptides (JPT Peptide Technologies) before one µg µg of peptides was injected to the LC MS for analysis.  LC-MS proteomics  Plasma samples were analyzed on Hybrid mass spectrometer QExactive HF-X (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). A two-column setup was used on the HPLC system and peptides were loaded into an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 precolumn (75 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and subsequently separated on an EASY spray column (75 μm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) with the flow rate 350 nL/min. The column temperature was set to 45°C. Solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) were used to create a 90 min linear gradient from 3 to 38% of solvent B in solvent A for peptide elution. The QExactive HF-X was operated in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode and the instrument method was adopted from previous published work (1) and optimized for 90 min gradient analysis. Full MS survey scans from m/z 350-1650 with a resolution 120,000 were performed. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3 × 106 with the maximum injection time of 60 ms. One segment for MS1 was kept constant. Forty-four segments with variable isolation windows were acquired for MS2 with the resolution of 30,000. The stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was set 25.5, 27 and 30 keV and the AGC target for MS2 was 3 × 106. The maximum injection time was set to auto.    1. Bruderer R, Bernhardt OM, Gandhi T, Xuan Y, Sondermann J, Schmidt M, et al. Optimization of experimental parameters in data-independent mass spectrometry significantly increases depth and reproducibility of results. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2017 Dec;16(12):2296–309.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed by using Spectronaut against a plasma spectral library provided by Wåhlén et al (manuscript in preparation). The data was extracted based on the maximum intensity for both precursors and fragment ions. The default settings were applied for the peptides and proteins identification and quantification. In brief, excluding duplicate assay; generation decoy based on mutated method at 10% of library size; and estimation of FDRs using Q value as 0.01 for both precursors and proteins were performed for identification. The p-value was calculated by kernel-density estimator. For the quantification, interference correction was activated and a minimum of 3 fragment ions and 2 precursor ions were kept. The area of MS2 level was used for quantitation. Peptide (stripped sequence) quantity was measured by the mean of 1–3 most intensive precursors, and protein quantity was calculated accordingly by the mean of 1–3 best peptides. Data was filtered by q-value and cross run normalization was inactive.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Allergy, Plasma, Late phase response, Asthma

### Affiliations
Lung Biology, Department Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Lung biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science,  Lund University, Sweden.

### Submitter
Oskar Rosmark

### Lab Head
Dr Gunilla Westergren-Thorsson
Lung biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science,  Lund University, Sweden.


