### Accession
PXD039273

### Title
Detection of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma-associated proteins in serum

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal cancer types, partly because it is frequently identified at an advanced stage, when surgery is no longer feasible. Therefore, early detection using minimally invasive methods such as blood tests may improve outcomes. However, studies to discover molecular signatures for the early detection of PDAC using blood tests have only been marginally successful. In the current study, a quantitative glycoproteomic approach via data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) was utilized to detect glycoproteins in 29 patient-matched PDAC tissues and sera. Total of 892 glycopeptides originated from 141 glycoproteins had PDAC associated changes beyond normal variation. We further evaluated the specificity of these serum detectable glycoproteins by comparing their abundance in 53 independent PDAC patient sera and 65 cancer-free controls. The PDAC tissue-associated glycoproteins we have identified represent an inventory of serum detectable PDAC glycoproteins as candidate biomarkers that can be potentially used for the detection of PDAC using blood tests.

### Sample Protocol
Unlabeled tryptic peptides and glycopeptides were spiked with index Retention Time (iRT) peptides and subjected to data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The DIA raw files of serum samples were searched against a UniProt/SwissProt human protein database (v2019) via the direcDIA approach in Spectronaut (version 16.1, Biognosys) to identify and quantify glycopeptides and global proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal cancer types, partly because it is frequently identified at an advanced stage, when surgery is no longer feasible. Therefore, early detection using minimally invasive methods such as blood tests may improve outcomes. However, studies to discover molecular signatures for the early detection of PDAC using blood tests have only been marginally successful. In the current study, a quantitative glycoproteomic approach via data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry was utilized to detect glycoproteins in 29 patient-matched PDAC tissues and sera. A total of 892 N-linked glycopeptides originating from 141 glycoproteins had PDAC-associated changes beyond normal variation. We further evaluated the specificity of these serum-detectable glycoproteins by comparing their abundance in 53 independent PDAC patient sera and 65 cancer-free controls. The PDAC tissue-associated glycoproteins we have identified represent an inventory of serum-detectable PDAC-associated glycoproteins as candidate biomarkers that can be potentially used for the detection of PDAC using blood tests.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Serum, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Yingwei HU

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Johns Hopkins University


