### Accession
PXD008545

### Title
Proteomics of human cord blood reticulocyte-derived exosomes

### Description
Human reticulocytes were enriched from human umbilical blood, and cultured in vitro for the production of reticulocyte-derived exosomes (HuRex)to unveil their proteomic composition. As research on the molecular-cargo of exosomes is largely confounded by the lack of a “gold-standard” methodology, we applied several approaches for obtaining HuRex prior to MS. HuRex preparations were obtained from cultures in absence of serum (AS) from three donors and isolated by means of size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) (n=3) and ultracentrifugation (UC) (n=3). HuRex preparations in the presence of serum were obtained from three other donors and purified by SEC (n=3) and UC (n=1).

### Sample Protocol
Liquid Chromatography (nanoLCULTRA-EKSIGENT)followed by MS (nanoLC MS/MS) was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples of isolated vesicles in PBS were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, precipitated by 10% TCA, washed with 100% acetone and reconstituted in 2 uL of 8 M urea. Samples were brought to a concentration of 1.6 M urea, 1 ug of trypsin (Sus scrofa) was added and digestion was carried overnight at 37ºC. To increase exosomal protein coverage, some samples (CB30_PS_SEC; CB30_PS_UC; CB31_AS_SEC; CB31_AS_UC) were extracted with RIPA buffer and digested with Lys-C in addition to Trypsin digestions. The reaction was stopped with 1% formic acid. Trypsinized samples were injected into a precolumn (C18 PepMap100, 5 mm, ID300 um, 5 um, 100 A, Thermoscientific, San Diego, CA, USA) before being flushed into the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 15 cm, ID75 um, 3 um, 100 A, Thermoscientific, San Diego, CA, USA) and eluted at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a mobile phase gradient: 0 40% of solvent B in solvent A in the first 80-90 minutes and then 40-100% of solvent B in solvent A until the finish of the run at 100-110 minutes (A: 3% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 97% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid in water). The eluate was applied to the nanospray source of the Orbitrap spectrometer and a full scan was acquired for all spectra within the 400 1,500 m/z range with a 30,000 resolution and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. The MS/MS was performed in the LTQ using data-dependent dynamic exclusion of the top 20 most intense peptides using repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size of 500 and exclusion list duration 30 s as parameters. The top 20 most intense peptides were isolated and fragmented by low-energy collision-induced dissociation, 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed by Mascotv2.5.1 (Matrix Science) using the human sequences from the UniProt-Swiss-prot database (release April 2017) with a false-discovery rate below 1%. Proteins identified by a unique peptide were only accepted if present in two or more samples. The final list of proteins removed keratins and most abundant plasma proteins (de Menezes-Neto et al. JEV.2015)

### Publication Abstract
Reticulocyte-derived exosomes (Rex), extracellular vesicles of endocytic origin, were initially discovered as a cargo-disposal mechanism of obsolete proteins in the maturation of reticulocytes into erythrocytes. In this work, we present the first mass spectrometry-based proteomics of human Rex (HuRex). HuRex were isolated from cultures of human reticulocyte-enriched cord blood using different culture conditions and exosome isolation methods. The newly described proteome consists of 367 proteins, most of them related to exosomes as revealed by gene ontology over-representation analysis and include multiple transporters as well as proteins involved in exosome biogenesis and erythrocytic disorders. Immunoelectron microscopy validated the presence of the transferrin receptor. Moreover, functional assays demonstrated active capture of HuRex by mature dendritic cells. As only seven proteins have been previously associated with HuRex, this resource will facilitate studies on the role of human reticulocyte-derived exosomes in normal and pathological conditions affecting erythropoiesis.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Exosome, Reticulocyte

### Affiliations
ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain

IGTP Institut d’Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain
ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain  Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain  IGTP Institut d’Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain

### Submitter
Hernando A del Portillo

### Lab Head
Dr Hernando A. del Portillo
ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain  Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain  IGTP Institut d’Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain


