### Accession
PXD025631

### Title
The acyl-proteome of Syntrophus aciditrophicus reveals metabolic relationship with benzoate degradation

### Description
Syntrophus aciditrophicus is a model syntrophic bacterium that degrades fatty and aromatic acids into acetate, CO2, formate and H2 that are utilized by methanogens and other hydrogen-consuming microbes. The degradation of benzoate by S. aciditrophicus proceeds by a multi-step pathway that involves many reactive acyl-Coenzyme A species (RACS) as intermediates which can potentially result in Nε-acylation of lysine residues in proteins. Herein, we investigate post-translational modifications in the S. aciditrophicus proteome to identify and characterize a variety of acyl-lysine modifications that correspond to RACS present in the benzoate degradation pathway. Modification levels are sufficient to support post-translational modification analyses without antibody enrichment, enabling the study of a range of acylations located, presumably, on the most extensively acylated proteins. Seven types of acyl modifications were identified throughout the proteome, six of which correspond directly to RACS that are intermediates in the benzoate degradation pathway. Benzoate–degrading proteins are heavily represented among acylated proteins. The presence of functional deacylase enzymes in S. aciditrophicus indicates a potential regulatory system/mechanism by which these bacteria modulate acylation. Uniquely, Nε-acyl-lysine RACS are highly abundant in these syntrophic bacteria, raising the compelling possibility of enzyme modulation during benzoate degradation in this, and potentially, other syntrophic bacteria. Our results outline candidates to further study the impact of acylations within syntrophic systems.

### Sample Protocol
2D-PAGE were performed and analyzed as described in the Supplemental Materials section by James, K. L. et al. (2019) Syntrophus aciditrophicus uses the same enzymes in a reversible manner to degrade and synthesize aromatic and alicyclic acids. Environ. Microbiol. 21, 1833–1846. Briefly, S. aciditrophicus pure cultures and cocultures grown in duplicate 500-ml Schott bottles (triplicate for crotonate cocultures) with 250 ml of medium were used for whole-cell proteomic analysis. Washed cell pellets were digested with trypsin in solution with deoxycholate present, in accordance with the enhanced Filter Assisted Sample Prepartion (eFASP) method (Erde et al., 2014). Tryptic digests were analyzed by shotgun LC-MSE analysis or fractionated by hydrophilic interaction chromatography(HILIC) prior to LC-MSE analysis (James et al., 2016).Alternatively, peptides from eFASP processing were separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 nUPLC (Thermo Scientific) using a gradient of 5 – 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, and a flow rate of 300 nl • min−1 (total time 90 minutes). Tandem mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to a nanoelectrospray ionization source.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were converted into MGF format by Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched with Mascot version 2.5 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications. The search allowed for up to two missed cleavages and employed a precursor mass tolerance of ±5 ppm and a product mass tolerance of ±0.01 Da. Quantification was based on the three most intense peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Syntrophus aciditrophicus is a model syntrophic bacterium that degrades fatty and aromatic acids into acetate, CO<sub>2</sub>, formate, and H<sub>2</sub> that are utilized by methanogens and other hydrogen-consuming microbes. S.&#xa0;aciditrophicus benzoate degradation proceeds by a multistep pathway with many intermediate reactive acyl-coenzyme A species (RACS) that can potentially N<sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-acylate lysine residues. Herein, we describe the identification and characterization of acyl-lysine modifications that correspond to RACS in the benzoate degradation pathway. The amounts of modified peptides are sufficient to analyze the post-translational modifications without antibody enrichment, enabling a range of acylations located, presumably, on the most extensively acylated proteins throughout the proteome to be studied. Seven types of acyl modifications were identified, six of which correspond directly to RACS that are intermediates in the benzoate degradation pathway including 3-hydroxypimeloylation, a modification first identified in this system. Indeed, benzoate-degrading enzymes are heavily represented among the acylated proteins. A total of 125 sites were identified in 60 proteins. Functional deacylase enzymes are present in the proteome, indicating a potential regulatory system/mechanism by which S.&#xa0;aciditrophicus modulates acylation. Uniquely, N<sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-acyl-lysine RACS are highly abundant in these syntrophic bacteria, raising the compelling possibility that post-translational modifications modulate benzoate degradation in this and potentially other, syntrophic bacteria. Our results outline candidates for further study of how acylations impact syntrophic consortia.

### Keywords
2d-page, Lysine acylation, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine acetylation, Syntrophs

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,USA David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA-DOE Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
University of California, Los Angeles

### Submitter
Janine Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph A. Loo
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,USA David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA-DOE Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA


