### Accession
PXD009217

### Title
Quantitative subcellular proteomics using SILAC reveals enhanced metabolic buffering in ground state pluripotency

### Description
The ground state of pluripotency is defined as a minimal unrestricted state as present in the Inner Cell Mass (ICM). Mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) grown in a defined serum-free medium with two kinase inhibitors (‘2i’) reflect this state, whereas ESCs grown in the presence of serum (‘serum’) share more similarities with post implantation epiblast cells. Pluripotency results from an intricate interplay between cytoplasmic, nuclear and chromatin-associated proteins. Therefore, quantitative information on the (sub)cellular proteome is essential to gain insight in the molecular mechanisms driving different pluripotent states. Here, we describe a full SILAC workflow and quality controls for proteomic comparison of 2i and serum ESCs. We demonstrate that this workflow is applicable for subcellular proteomics of the cytoplasm, nuclear and chromatin. The obtained quantitative information revealed increased levels of naïve pluripotency factors on the chromatin of 2i ESCs. Further, we demonstrate that these pluripotent states are supported by distinct metabolic programs, which include upregulation of free radical buffering by the glutathione pathway in 2i ESCs. Through induction of intracellular radicals, we show that the altered metabolic environment renders 2i ESCs less sensitive to oxidative stress. Altogether, this work provides novel insights into the proteome landscape underlying ground state pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
Serum and 2i ESCs were grown in SILAC medium for at least 6 populations doublings. Serum ESCs were grown in normal medium and 2i ESCs in SILAC medium supplemented with heavy aminoacids (13C615N4 L-arginine and 13C615N2 L-lysine) . For subcellular fractionation, cells were harvested using trypsin and an equal number of cells was pooled. The resulting cell pellet was first exposed to a hypotonic salt concentration and the nuclei separated from the cytoplasm using mechanical douncing. Next the nuclei were incubated in hypertonic salt concentration to isolate the nucleoplasm. The remaining chromatin pellet was resuspended in 4 volumes of RIPA buffer and sonicated to solubilize the pellet. The entire procedure is described in Dignam et al, 1983. We used Filter Aided Sample Preparation and StageTips to prepare protein mixtures for LC-MS (as described in Rappsilber et al, 2007). Trypsin-digested peptide mixtures were measured using a 4 hour gradient on a LTQ-Orbitrap Q-exactive (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 with default parameters with the following modifications: multiplicity was set to 2 , for the heavy labels heavy lysine (K8) and arginine (R10) were selected and match between runs and requantify were switched on. Potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered using Perseus. Significant proteins were determined using the Significance B feature in Perseus. Protein that were significant in both replicates were considered as differential.

### Publication Abstract
The ground state of pluripotency is defined as a minimal unrestricted epigenetic state as present in the Inner Cell Mass. Mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) grown in a defined serum-free medium with two kinase inhibitors ("2i ESCs") have been postulated to reflect ground-state pluripotency, whereas ESCs grown in the presence of serum ("serum ESCs") share more similarities with post-implantation epiblast cells. Pluripotency results from an intricate interplay between cytoplasmic, nuclear and chromatin-associated proteins. Here, we perform quantitative subcellular proteomics to gain insight in the molecular mechanisms sustaining the pluripotent states reflected by 2i and serum ESCs. We describe a full SILAC workflow and quality controls for proteomic comparison of 2i and serum ESCs, allowing subcellular proteomics of the cytoplasm, nucleoplasm and chromatin. The obtained quantitative information revealed increased levels of na&#xef;ve pluripotency factors on the chromatin of 2i ESCs. Surprisingly, the cytoplasmic proteome suggests that 2i and serum ESCs utilize distinct metabolic programs, which include upregulation of free radical buffering by the glutathione pathway in 2i ESCs. Through induction of intracellular radicals, we show that the altered metabolic environment renders 2i ESCs less sensitive to oxidative stress. Altogether, this work provides novel insights into the proteomic landscape underlying ground state pluripotency.

### Keywords
Naïve pluripotency, Silac, Embryonic stem cells, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Radboud University
Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Guido van Mierlo

### Lab Head
Dr Hendrik Marks
Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, the Netherlands


