### Accession
PXD009449

### Title
Systematic characterization of 21 post-translational modification using synthetic peptides

### Description
The data presented in this study in the - context of the ProteoemTools project - is based on the synthesis of about 5000 synthetic peptides carrying 21 different post-translational modifications to systematically characterize their chromatographic and mass spectrometric properties using multimodal LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
For every modification, 115 to 200 peptides were selected from in-house data or public databases. Modified peptides and their unmodified counterpart peptides were generated using Fmoc-based SPOT synthesis protocols. Peptides were subjected to multimodal LC-MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion ETD mass spectrometer. Modifications compise: Lysine acetylation, biotinylation, butyrylation, crotonylation, dimethylation, formylation, glutarylation, hydroxyisobutyrylation, malonylation, methylation, propionylation, succinylation, trimethylation and glyglycylation (ubiquitination). Arginine citrullination, dimethyalation (symmetric/asymmetric), methylation. Hydroxyproline. Tyrosine nitration, phosphorylation

### Data Protocol
Identification of tandem MS data was performed using MaxQuant v 1.5.3.30 searching against a database of concatenated peptide sequences. Raw spectra were extracted from the instrument files using ThermoRAWFileReader. Characterization of chromatrographic (retention time) and mass spectrometric properties (charges, scores, fragmentation behaviour, diagnostic ions/immonium ions, neutral losses) were performed using custom python and R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of the post-translational modification (PTM) state of proteins using mass spectrometry-based bottom-up proteomic workflows has evolved into a powerful tool for the study of cellular regulatory events that are not directly encoded at the genome level. Besides frequently detected modifications such as phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination, many low abundant or less frequently detected PTMs are known or postulated to serve important regulatory functions. To more broadly understand the LC-MS/MS characteristics of PTMs, we synthesized and analyzed &#x223c;5,000 peptides representing 21 different naturally occurring modifications of lysine, arginine, proline and tyrosine side chains and their unmodified counterparts. The analysis identified changes in retention times, shifts of precursor charge states and differences in search engine scores between modifications. PTM-dependent changes in the fragmentation behavior were evaluated using eleven different fragmentation modes or collision energies. We also systematically investigated the formation of diagnostic ions or neutral losses for all PTMs, confirming 10 known and identifying 5 novel diagnostic ions for lysine modifications. To demonstrate the value of including diagnostic ions in database searching, we reprocessed a public data set of lysine crotonylation and showed that considering the diagnostic ions increases confidence in the identification of the modified peptides. To our knowledge, this constitutes the first broad and systematic analysis of the LC-MS/MS properties of common and rare PTMs using synthetic peptides, leading to direct applicable utility for bottom-up proteomic experiments.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Diagnostic ion, Immonium ion, Synthetic standard, Phosphorylation, Ptm, Proteometools, Synthetic peptides, Acetylation, Neutral loss

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Daniel Zolg

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


