### Accession
PXD019823

### Title
PARP-1 activation after oxidative insult promotes energy stress-dependent phosphorylation of YAP1 and reduces cell viability

### Description
Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is a nuclear enzyme that catalyse the transfer of ADP-ribose units from NAD+ to several target proteins involved in cellular stress responses. Using the cell line WRL68, we have previously shown that the activation of PARP-1 induced by oxidative stress after H2O2 treatment lead to depletion of cellular NAD+ and ATP, which promote cell death. In this work, we used LC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomics to show that the oxidative damage induced by H2O2 treatment modified the phosphorylation of several proteins in WRL68 cells, most of them related to transcription process. Interestingly, genetic or pharmacological inhibition of PARP-1 reduced the phosphorylation of YAP1, a transcriptional coactivator involved in cell survival, in WRL68 cells after H2O2 treatment. Inhibition of PARP-1 increased cell viability after oxidative treatment and diminished the degradation of YAP1; the elimination of YAP1 by gene silencing abrogated the protective effect of PARP-1 inhibition, indicating that YAP1 is important for the survival of WRL68 cells after oxidative damage. In the same way, the supplementation of NAD+, substrate of PARP-1, on WRL68 cells suffering oxidative damage reduced the phosphorylation of YAP1, suggesting that the loss of cellular NAD+ caused by PARP-1 activation after oxidative treatment is responsible for the phosphorylation of YAP1. Finally, PARP-1 silencing after oxidative treatment diminished the activation of AMPK, a master regulator of cell metabolism implicated in the restoration of energy balance during metabolic stress. Since NAD+ supplementation reduced the phosphorylation of some AMPK substrates in WRL68 cells after oxidative treatment, we hypothesize that the loss of cellular NAD+ after PARP-1 activation may induce a metabolic stress that activates AMPK. In summary, we showed a new crucial role of PARP-1 in the response to oxidative stress in WRL68 cells; PARP-1 activation reduces the cell viability by promoting the phosphorylation and degradation of YAP1, which is mediated by the energy stress caused by PARP-1 activation.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomics studies were performed using liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). WRL68 cells were treated with H2O2 for 30 min post-incubated in fresh medium for 2 h and processed for phosphoproteomics analysis following the protocol described in (PMID: 29626197 and PMID: 31494107). In the assays using PJ34 inhibitor or NAD+ supplementation, cells from four independent experiments were lysed in urea buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors and 500 µg of extracted proteins were digested using trypsin as described in (PMID: 31494107). In siRNA experiments, cells from four independent experiments were lysed in urea buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors and 80 µg of extracted proteins were digested using trypsin as described in (PMID: 31494107). Following the digestion, the samples were subjected to desalting and phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 as described in (PMID: 31494107). In the case of siRNA samples, the desalting was performed using C18 + GC carbon tips (TopTip with Filter C18 + Carbon 10-200µl, cat # TF2MC18.96,Glygen) as described in  (PMID: 30458137) with the exception of the elution step that was done with 1M Glycolic Acid in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA),Then, the enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed as in (PMID: 31494107).  Finally, dried phosphopeptides pellets were resuspended in reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µl enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and loaded in an LC-MS platform consisting in a DionexUltiMate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer with an Easy Spray ionization system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The phosphopeptides were first trapped in a trapping column for 3 min with a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min (LC AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 C18 LC 300µm x 5mm, Thermo Scientific) and then, separated using a 3% to 23% B gradient for 90 min with a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min in a analytic column (Easy Spray RSLC C18 2 µm 50 cm x 75 µm, Thermo Scientific). Samples were run in the LC-MS/MS system in a randomized manner by shuffling samples before loading (Samples were run twice for assays using PJ34 inhibitor or NAD+, and once for siRNA assays). Acquisition of full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) was followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning. A 30 s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with an exclusion list with 10 ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Demon was used to automate the identification of phosphopeptides. Thus, Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.0) was used to generate the peak lists that were loaded into the Mascot Search Engine (v2.5). Searches were performed against the Swiss-Prot Human database (uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta) considering 2 trypsin missed cleavages, a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans. Carbamidomethyl Cys was set as a fixed modification while PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln, oxidation of Met and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr were considered as variable modifications (PMID: 10612281). Pescal software was used for the label free quantification of phosphopeptides (PMID: 29626197). XICs for all the peptides identified were constructed across all samples with ±7 ppm and ±2 min mass and retention time windows, respectively. Peak areas from all XICs were calculated. Undetectable data-points for a certain peptide were given the intensity value of 1/10 of minimal intensity detected for that peptide across all the samples. For each sample, intensity values were normalized to the sum of all peptide intensities derived from that sample. To determine phosphorylation changes induced by treatments, the normalized signals from treated cells were divided by those of the reference sample (control or H2O2 treatment) and given as Log2 of Fold Changes.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is a nuclear enzyme that catalyze the transfer of ADP-ribose units from NAD+ to several target proteins involved in cellular stress responses. Using WRL68 (HeLa derivate) cells, we previously showed that PARP-1 activation induced by oxidative stress after H2O2 treatment lead to depletion of cellular NAD+ and ATP, which promoted cell death. In this work, LC-MS/MS-based phosphoproteomics in WRL68 cells showed that the oxidative damage induced by H2O2 increased the phosphorylation of YAP1, a transcriptional co-activator involved in cell survival, and modified the phosphorylation of other proteins involved in transcription. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of PARP-1 in H2O2-treated cells reduced YAP1 phosphorylation and degradation and increased cell viability. YAP1 silencing abrogated the protective effect of PARP-1 inhibition, indicating that YAP1 is important for the survival of WRL68 cells exposed to oxidative damage. Supplementation of NAD+ also reduced YAP1 phosphorylation, suggesting that the loss of cellular NAD+ caused by PARP-1 activation after oxidative treatment is responsible for the phosphorylation of YAP1. Finally, PARP-1 silencing after oxidative treatment diminished the activation of the metabolic sensor AMPK. Since NAD+ supplementation reduced the phosphorylation of some AMPK substrates, we hypothesized that the loss of cellular NAD+ after PARP-1 activation may induce an energy stress that activates AMPK. In summary, we showed a new crucial role of PARP-1 in the response to oxidative stress in which PARP-1 activation reduced cell viability by promoting the phosphorylation and degradation of YAP1 through a mechanism that involves the depletion of NAD+.

### Keywords
Yap1, Oxidative stress, Phosphorylation, Cell survival, Parp-1, Energy stress, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London


