### Accession
PXD011373

### Title
The effect of aqueous extract Gynura procumbens on fertility of diabetes induced male rats using proteomic approach

### Description
Medicinal plants or herbs have been long used in traditional practice and considered as an alternative treatment for diseases. Gynura procumbens is one of the herbs that showed high potential for treating various diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cancer and fertility. Previous study demonstrated G. procumbens potential as anti-hyperglycaemic agent by lowering the blood glucose level of diabetic-induced male rats (Hassan et al. 2010). G. procumbens is claimed to emulate the mechanism of action in insulin, by increasing the glucose intake in the skeletal muscle (Hassan et al. 2010). Another study made by Kamaruzaman & Mat Noor (2017) showed that G. procumbens extract has the ability to improve fertility of diabetes-induced male rats. Diabetes mellitus has caused deleterious effect on male reproductive system due to disruption in spermatogenesis, testicular impairment as well as erectile and ejaculation dysfunction (Alves et al. 2013). Testicular impairment in diabetic rats leads to low sperm quality. Hence, proteomic analysis was performed to identify the differential expressions of total sperm protein after treatment of G. procumbens extract.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Design  Fresh leaves of G. procumbens were used in this study. The leaves were collected from Plant House, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Selangor. Aqueous extract preparation started with drying of the leaves in the oven for 72 hours at 40oC and powdered, then powdered herb was mixed with distilled water for three hours at 60oC. The extract later was filtered and freeze-dried (Büchi Rotovapor® R-200/205). The extract was kept refrigerated to maintain its freshness.  Male Sprague-Dawley rats aged 8 weeks (120-200g) were randomly divided into four groups. One group will served as normal untreated group (N); three of the groups were induced with STZ (50 mg/kg); one group was treated with G. procumbens aqueous extract with the dose of 450 mg/kg. Two of the groups will be served as positive (M) and negative (DM) control of this study. Each group will be given treatment for 14 consecutive days via oral gavage method. At the end of the experimental period, the rats were euthanized using general anaesthesia with diethyl ether for sperm proteomic analysis.    Total Protein Extraction  Sperm samples were collected from the caudal epididymis of the rats. The caudal epididymis were minced and suspended in Biggers – Whitten - Whittingham medium (Biggers et al. 1971). The sample were incubated in 5% CO2 incubator for 30 minutes at 37oC to allow the sperm to swim up. Sperm samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 15 minutes, and supernatants were removed. The pellet was then mixed with lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4 % 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl)-dimethyl-ammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 0.8 % Immobilized pH Gradient (IPG) buffer, 1 mM phenylmethane sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)). The samples were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and added with 60 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and kept in ­80 °C until processing for 1D SDS-PAGE.  Protein concentration was determined using BioRad protein assay reagents with BSA as standards. Equal amount of protein were transferred onto 12.5 % SDS-PAGE gels. Protein visualization was performed by staining the gel both in CBB staining and silver staining. After staining, the gel was observed under densitometer.   Sample preparation  Protein digestion was carried out on 100 µg of protein samples. 1D SDS-PAGE was performed up until all protein bands reached to first molecular weight, 250 kDA. Protein bands were then excised from the stained gel and treated with DTT for one hour at 57 °C to reduce the disulfide bridges, followed by Iodoacetamide for another hour at room temperature in the dark for alkylation purposes, as described in NUS (2011). Gels were rehydrated with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with acetonitrile for three times, respectively. Enzymatic digestion was performed by incubating samples with trypsin for 30 minutes at 4 °C in a 1: 50 (w/w) ratio. The digestion products were then incubated with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for overnight at 37 °C. Later, the digested samples were then collected after overnight incubation and desalted using C18 ZipTip. The samples were concentrated and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptide samples were submitted into an LC system (Dionex 3000 Ultimate RSLCnano) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). 1 µL of digested samples were injected into a reverse phase column (15 cm × 75 µm internal diameter, particle size of 2 µm, 100 A0, C18 PepMap column) and eluted with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The elution mobile phase composition was 0.1 % formic acid in water (phase A) and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile (phase B). The elution process was programmed at 5-40 % in 91 minutes, 2 minutes to 95 % in B, 6 minutes at 95 % in B and back to 5 % in B for 2 minutes. Data were acquired in data dependent mode. Full scan spectra were performed at the range of 310-1800 m/z, using resolving power of 120,000. The AGC targeted at 4.0 e5 with maximum injection times of 50 ms. The method consisted of 3 seconds top speed mode where precursors were selected for a maximum 3 second cycle. Precursors with an assigned monoisotopic m/z and charged 2-7 were further analyzed. All precursors were filtered using 20 second dynamic exclusion window with intensity treshold of 5000. The MS/MS spectra analysis were performed by using rapid scan rate, CID NCE 30 % and HCD NCE 28 % with 1.6 m/z isolation window, AGC targeted 1.0 e2 and maximum injection time of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Peak View Analysis Data processing was followed according to Iovinella (2015). Raw files for each biological replicates were analyzed together using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). The derived peak list was searched with the Andromeda search engine. The database that was used for this analysis was the protein of Rattus norvegicus obtained from Uniprot database. The Maxquant parameters were set as enzyme trypsin and allowed up to two miss cleavages. The peptide length was set minimally up to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cystein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Since no labelling was performed, multiplicity was set to 1. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein identification were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discover rate (FDR) of 1 %. The second peptide feature was enabled. The label-free quantification (LFQ) of protein was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm intergrated into MaxQuant. Other Maxquant setting was set as default. All the information was reported in the “proteinGroups” output file, contained the full list of identified and quantified protein.  Data was further analyzed by using Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1). The “proteinGroups” output file produced by MaxQuant was analyzed. The hits to the reverse database, contaminants and protein identified with modified peptides were eliminated. Then the LFQ intensity ratios were transformed by log2. Missing values were imputed by drawing random numbers from a normal distribution to stimulate signals from low abundant protein, using the default parameters. The value of log2 (LFQ ratios) for each sample were averaged.   Statistical Analysis The LFQ ratio values of proteins were analyzed using Perseus software version 1.5.4.1. One way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted with the value of p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Gynura procumbens</i> (GP) is a medicinal herb that has long been known as anti-inflammatory and antihyperglycaemic. Recently, this herbal extract has been associated with a profertility effect, suggesting its applicability in treating both diabetes and male infertility. In this study, the effects of GP aqueous extract (GPAE) on diabetic rats were investigated through evaluating testes histology and androgen hormone levels as well as the implantation sites of female rats on copulation with the treated male rats. Three dosages of GPAE were used (150, 300, and 450&#x2009;mg/kg), and there were three control groups [normal, diabetic, and metformin-treated diabetic]. Testes histology, androgen hormone levels, and number of implantation sites of the GPAE-treated groups matched those of the normal group in contrast to the diabetic and metformin-treated diabetic controls. Sperm proteomics analysis identified 666 proteins, but only 88 were consistently found in all the control and 450-mg/kg GPAE-treated groups. Four proteins, including cysteine-rich secretory protein 1, carboxylesterase 5A, zona pellucida binding protein, and phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein 1, were significantly upregulated with GPAE treatment compared with the diabetic control, matching the protein levels of the normal group. These proteins were mainly involved in sperm maturation, sperm capacitation, and sperm-egg interaction, suggesting that GP treatment was able to restore the fertility of male diabetic rats at molecular protein level. In conclusion, GP treatment effectively treats infertility of male diabetic rats, possibly through the upregulation of proteins related to sperm maturation and sperm-egg interaction.

### Keywords
Gynura procumbens, Fertility, Diabetes mellitus, Proteomic

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 UKM, Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia

### Submitter
Wan Aizat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Wan Mohd Aizat
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 UKM, Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia


