### Accession
PXD008459

### Title
Extensive identification and in-depth validation of importin 13 cargoes

### Description
Importin 13 is a bidirectional transport receptor that mediates both nuclear import and export of proteins. To expand the range of human importin 13 cargoes, we performed importin 13 binding experiments in combination with quantitative stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and mass spectrometry. Apart from known importin 13 interaction partners, such as Ubc9 and eIF1A, more than 300 potential importin 13 cargoes were identified, several of which could be validated using cellular and biochemical assays.

### Sample Protocol
For the SILAC experiments 2 to 4 (three replicates, with one label swap), an HZZ-importin 13 affinity matrix was incubated with unlabeled or isotopically labeled (4,4,5,5-D4-L-Lysine 2HCl, 13C6-L-arginine HCl, 13C615N2-L-lysine HCl, 13C615N4-L-arginine HCl) HeLa cell extract together with either RanQ69L-GTP, Ubc9 or TPB buffer alone. For SILAC experiment 1 (no replicate), protein binding to the HZZ-importin 13-matrix was compared to unspecific binding to the HZZ-matrix. Prior to elution, beads were pooled. Eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested and analyzed by LC-MS. LC-MS analysis for protein identification and SILAC-based protein quantification was performed with an Orbitrap Velos Pro Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.0, Cox and Mann, 2008) and searched against a human protein database derived from Uniprot (Proteome ID: UP000005640, 20,243 entries, download August 2017). Search parameters were set as follows: trypsin/P digestion mode (tryptic specificity with no proline restriction) with maximum of two missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Arg6 and Lys4 were defined as medium peptide labels and Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy peptide labels. The mass tolerance for peptide precursors was set to 4.5 ppm and for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Fourier transform-based mass spectrometer (FTMS) requantification and FTMS recalibration were enabled. Protein quantification was performed with a minimum ratio count of two, and unique plus razor peptides were considered. False discovery rates were calculated with MaxQuant, using the revert-decoy mode and the filter for valid peptide sequence matches was set to 0.01. MaxQuant output data was further processed using Perseus software 1.5.0.15 (Tyanova et al., 2016).  Cox, J. and Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol, 2008, 26, pp 1367-72.  Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M., Geiger, T., Mann, M. and Cox, J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods, 2016.

### Publication Abstract
Importin 13 is a member of the importin &#x3b2; family of transport receptors. Unlike most family members, importin 13 mediates both, nuclear protein import and export. To search for novel importin 13 cargoes, we used stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and mass spectrometry. Using stringent criteria, we identified 255 importin 13 substrates, including the known cargoes Ubc9, Mago and eIF1A, and validate many of them as transport cargoes by extensive biochemical and cell biological characterization. Several novel cargoes can also be transported by the export receptor CRM1, demonstrating a clear redundancy in receptor choice. Using importin 13 mutants, we show that many of the novel substrates contact regions on the transport receptor that are not used by Ubc9, Mago or eIF1A. Together, this study significantly expands the repertoire of importin 13 cargoes and sets the basis for a more detailed characterization of this extremely versatile transport receptor.

### Keywords
Human, Nuclear transport receptor, Importin 13, Silac, Nucleocytoplasmic transport

### Affiliations
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
University Medical Center Göttingen, Department of Molecular Biology, Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph H. Kehlenbach
University Medical Center Göttingen, Department of Molecular Biology, Germany


