### Accession
PXD036265

### Title
(Full Proteome) Kinase Suppressor of RAS 1 (KSR1) maintains the transformed phenotype of  BRAFV600E mutant human melanoma cells

### Description
KSR1 is a scaffolding protein for the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, which is one of the most frequently altered pathways in human cancers. Previous results have shown that KSR1 has a critical role in mutant RAS mediated transformation. Here, we examined the role of KSR1 in mutant BRAF transformation. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to knock out KSR1 in a BRAFV600E transformed melanoma cell line. KSR1 loss produced a complex phenotype characterized by impaired proliferation, cell cycle defects, decreased transformation, decreased invasive migration, increased cellular senescence, and increased apoptosis. To decipher this phenotype, we used a combination of proteomic ERK substrate profiling, global protein expression profiling, and biochemical validation assays. The results suggest that KSR1 directs ERK to phosphorylate substrates that have a critical role in ensuring cell survival. The results furtherindicate that KSR1 loss induces the activation of p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) and subsequent cell cycle aberrations and senescence. In summary, KSR1 function plays a key role in oncogenic BRAF transformation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Sample Preparation. Cell pellets were resuspended in 100µl 8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, supplemented with cOmplete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Cat#11836170001), and phosphatase inhibitorcocktail (PhosSTOP, Roche Diagnostics, Cat# 4906837001). Samples were sonicated for 2 x 9 seconds at a power setting of 15% to disrupt cell pellets (Syclon Ultrasonic Homogenizer). Samples were reduced by adding 8mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 minutes and subsequently carboxylated using 20mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark while mixing (Thermomixer 1,200rpm, 30°C). The solution was diluted with 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2M. Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega Cat# V5111) was resuspended in 50mM tris-HCL at a concentration of 0.5ug/µl and added at a 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio. Samples were digested overnight with gentle shaking (thermomixer 850rpm, 37°C). The tryptic digest was terminated by adding formic acid to 1% final concentration and samples were desalted using C18 HyperSep™ SpinTips (ThermoFisher, Cat# 60109-412). Mass Spectrometry:Full proteome samples were analysed using a Bruker timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer connected to a Bruker nanoElute nano-lc chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen) (58). Desalted tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was directly injected onto an Aurora nanoflow UHPLC column (Ionopticks, Cat# AUR2-257506595) and was separated with an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 90 minutes.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.15s (59).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis. The mass spectrometer raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) using the search engine Maxquant (60). In brief, specific parameters were used(Type: TIMS DDA, Fixed mods; Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable mods; Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Maxquant parameters, i.e., only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were accepted from the Maxquant database search. The normalized protein intensity of each identified protein was used for label-free quantitation (LFQ) and was further analysed using the proteomic data analysis software Perseus (20).

### Publication Abstract
Kinase Suppressor of RAS 1 (KSR1) is a scaffolding protein for the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, which is one of the most frequently altered pathways in human cancers. Previous results have shown that KSR1 has a critical role in mutant RAS-mediated transformation. Here, we examined the role of KSR1 in mutant BRAF transformation. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to knock out KSR1 in a BRAFV600E-transformed melanoma cell line. KSR1 loss produced a complex phenotype characterised by impaired proliferation, cell cycle defects, decreased transformation, decreased invasive migration, increased cellular senescence, and increased apoptosis. To decipher this phenotype, we used a combination of proteomic ERK substrate profiling, global protein expression profiling, and biochemical validation assays. The results suggest that KSR1 directs ERK to phosphorylate substrates that have a critical role in ensuring cell survival. The results further indicate that KSR1 loss induces the activation of p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) and subsequent cell cycle aberrations and senescence. In summary, KSR1 function plays a key role in oncogenic BRAF transformation.

### Keywords
Proteomics., Ras-raf-mek-erk pathway, Ksr1, Cancer

### Affiliations
Director Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine, University College Dublin.
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Walter Kolch
Director Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine, University College Dublin.


