### Accession
PXD001612

### Title
Roles of proteome dynamics and cytokinin signaling in root-to-hypocotyl ratio changes induced by shading roots of Arabidopsis seedlings

### Description
Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia (Col-0) were surface-sterilized (using 75 % ethanol) and sown on Murashige and Skoog medium (pH 5.7) supplemented with 3 mM morpholinoethane sulfonic acid, solidified with 1% (w/v) agar and stratified at 4 °C for 48 h. Petri dishes were covered by a layer of black stretch shrink wrap film (black foil) and aluminum foil and incubated at 21°C/19°C day/night temperatures, with a 16 h photoperiod (photosynthetic photon fluence rate of 20 μmol m-2 s-1 over the waveband 400-700 nm) for 7 d in an AR-36L growth chamber

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed using a gel-free shotgun protocol based on nano-HPLC and MS/MS. Briefly, for each biological replicate 20 independently grown replicates, each consisting of 10 Arabidopsis seedlings cultivated as described above, were pooled and extracted. Proteins were extracted by a combination of acetone/TCA and phenol extraction then digested in solution with endoproteinase Lys-C and immobilized trypsin beads (Promega). The resulting peptides were desalted, dried and dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, then analyzed online by nanoflow C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 15 cm Ascentis Express Column (0.1 mm inner diameter; Sigma-Aldrich) and a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system (Thermo) directly coupled to a nanoESI source CaptiveSpray (Bruker) and an UHR maXis impact q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were eluted with a 70-min, 4% to 99% acetonitrile gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from the MS analysis were processed by Data Analysis 4.1 (lockmass calibration - 1221.9906; intensity threshold - 1000; fragments qualified by Amion Acids). Peptide spectra were searched against the TAIR10 Arabidopsis database using the Mascot algorithm and Bruker’s ProteinScape inbuilt percolator algorithm (target FDR<1%).

### Publication Abstract
In nature, root systems of most terrestrial plants are protected from light exposure by growing in a dark soil environment. Hence, in vitro cultivation in transparent Petri dishes leads to physiological perturbations, but the mechanisms underlying root-mediated light perception and responses have not been fully elucidated. Thus, we compared Arabidopsis thaliana seedling development in transparent and darkened Petri dishes at low light intensity (20 &#xb5;mol m(-2) s(-1)), allowing us to follow (inter alia) hypocotyl elongation, which is an excellent process for studying interactions of signals involved in the regulation of growth and developmental responses. To obtain insights into molecular events underlying differences in seedling growth under these two conditions, we employed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) shotgun proteomics (available via the PRIDE deposit PXD001612). In total, we quantified the relative abundances of peptides representing 1,209 proteins detected in all sample replicates of LC-MS analyses. Comparison of MS spectra after manual validation revealed 48 differentially expressed proteins. Functional classification, analysis of available gene expression data and literature searches revealed alterations associated with root illumination (inter alia) in autotrophic CO2 fixation, C compound and carbohydrate metabolism, and nitrogen metabolism. The results also indicate a previously unreported role for cytokinin plant hormones in the escape-tropism response to root illumination. We complemented these results with reverse transcription followed by quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), chlorophyll fluorescence and detailed cytokinin signaling analyses, detecting in the latter a significant increase in the activity of the cytokinin two-component signaling cascade in roots and implicating the cytokinin receptor AHK3 as the major mediator of root to hypocotyl signaling in responses to root illumination.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Light, Hypocotyl elongation, Proteome, Shaded root, Cytokinin

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


