### Accession
PXD002690

### Title
Large scale profiling of the physiological impact of a potent anti-cancer agent inhibiting early protein maturation

### Description
Fumagillin and its derivatives are therapeutically-useful compounds for their capacity to reduce cancer progression. Fumagillin exerts a specific proliferation inhibition on endothelial cell lines and on several tumor lines. The specific molecular target of fumagillin is MetAP2, one of the two cytosolic MetAPs. MetAPs are in charge of N-terminal Methionine Excision, an essential pathway of cotranslational protein maturation. Why the inhibition of MetAP2 causes cell growth arrest in a subset class of cells is yet unknown. Here, we focus on a global large scale characterization of the N-terminal Methionine Excision pathway and the inhibition of one of its enzymes by fumagillin in a number of lines including cancer cell lines. N-termini profiling of responsive and unresponsive cells to fumagillin treatment was conducted using large scale proteomics approach

### Sample Protocol
For the various cell lysates prepared, 1 mg of proteins was first denaturated before protein reduction/alkylation using iodoacetamide. Proteins were acetone precipitated and the resulting pellet was the subject of N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide treatment to acetylate free amino groups. The sample was acetone cold precipitated before trypsin digestion using TPCK treated bovine trypsin. Peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak solid phase extraction as recommended by the supplier. The retained material was eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by evaporation to dryness. The peptide mixture was separated on SCX-LC using a gradient of increasing KCl. Fractions were collected every 2 min for 50 min followed by evaporation to dryness and stored at -20°C before further analysis. Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography were analysed by LC-MS/MS. We used an easy Nano-LC II (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific) for the analysis of the samples. The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS with 20 seconds exclusion time for the selected precursor. For more details, please look at the associated article.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Ver. 1.4) using standard parameters and submitted to Mascot 2.4 using the Homo sapiens reference proteome available at the UniProtKB web site (December 2014). Trypsin/P rule with up to 8 missed cleavages was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.6 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, N-term myristoylation, protein N-term acetyl and d3-acetyl, phosphorylation (S/T) and K+ peptide cationisation (D/E) were considered as variable modifications. For more details, please look at the associated article.

### Publication Abstract
Fumagillin and its derivatives are therapeutically useful because they can decrease cancer progression. The specific molecular target of fumagillin is methionine aminopeptidase 2 (MetAP2), one of the two MetAPs present in the cytosol. MetAPs catalyze N-terminal methionine excision (NME), an essential pathway of cotranslational protein maturation. To date, it remains unclear the respective contribution of MetAP1 and MetAP2 to the NME process in vivo and why MetAP2 inhibition causes cell cycle arrest only in a subset of cells. Here, we performed a global characterization of the N-terminal methionine excision pathway and the inhibition of MetAP2 by fumagillin in a number of lines, including cancer cell lines. Large-scale N-terminus profiling in cells responsive and unresponsive to fumagillin treatment revealed that both MetAPs were required in vivo for M[VT]X-targets and, possibly, for lower-level M[G]X-targets. Interestingly, we found that the responsiveness of the cell lines to fumagillin was correlated with the ability of the cells to modulate their glutathione homeostasis. Indeed, alterations to glutathione status were observed in fumagillin-sensitive cells but not in cells unresponsive to this agent. Proteo-transcriptomic analyses revealed that both MetAP1 and MetAP2 accumulated in a cell-specific manner and that cell sensitivity to fumagillin was related to the levels of these MetAPs, particularly MetAP1. We suggest that MetAP1 levels could be routinely checked in several types of tumor and used as a prognostic marker for predicting the response to treatments inhibiting MetAP2.

### Keywords
Co-translational modifications; n-terminal processing; methionine aminopeptidase; n-α-acetyltransferase; n-myristoyltransferase; drug evaluation;

### Affiliations
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC),  CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud,  Avenue de la Terrasse,  F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex,  France
CNRS

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy V Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC),  CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud,  Avenue de la Terrasse,  F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex,  France


