### Accession
PXD012238

### Title
Deep proteome profiling of hippocampus in 5xFAD mouse model

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease and characterized by the deposition of extracellular amyloid plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles. Although extensive research was performed for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease and characterized by the deposition of extracellular amyloid plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles. Although extensive research was performed for decades, the exact mechanisms and pathological causes of the disease still remain unknown. In order to perform comprehensive and integrative characterization of AD brain, assessment of global proteomic dynamics is required. We performed hippocampal proteome analysis to compare differentially expressed proteins in wild-type and 5XFAD model mice by label-free LC-MS. decades, the exact mechanisms and pathological causes of the disease still remain unknown. In order to perform comprehensive and integrative characterization of AD brain, assessment of global proteomic dynamics is required. We performed hippocampal proteome analysis to compare differentially expressed proteins in wild-type and 5XFAD model mice by label-free LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and tissues lysis were performed at room temperature in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 1mM TCEP, 0.1M Tris-Cl, pH 7.4) with 1 min of proved-tip sonication. The lysates were boiled in water bath, then centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min followed by passing through 0.22um filter (Costar Spin-X filter, NY, USA) to remove remnants of tissue lysate. Concentration of proteins on the supernatant was determined with absorbance at 526 nm and estimated from bovine serum albumin standard curve. For preparation of tissue samples, we performed acetone precipitation with 300ug of the lysate. Briefly, chilly acetone was added in the lysate to five folds of volume of the protein, and incubated for 2 hr. We removed the supernatant after 10min of centrifugation at 15,000rpm followed by washing with flash acetone. The protein pellet was dissolved in 50ul of reduction buffer (4% SDS, 0.1mM DTT, 0.1M Tris-Cl, pH 7.4). The reduction buffer was also added in cell lysate to final concentration of 50% v/v. Reduced proteins were digested by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as described with some modification. Briefly, the proteins loaded onto a 30K spin filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Buffer was exchanged with UA solution (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-Cl, pH 8.5) by centrifugation. After triple UA exchanging, the reduced cysteines were alkylated with 0.05 M iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA solution for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. We exchanged UA buffer to 40mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by digestion with trypsin (enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100) at for 16 hours. The digested peptides were acidified by trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned up using house-made C18 stagetips as described. We separated the desalted peptides into high-pH reverse phase six fractionations.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed in Maxquant software built in peptide identification algorithm, Andromeda search engine, to search spectra against the UniprotKB FASTA database (82,074 entries included two human genes, APP and PSEN1, version from October 2014). MS/MS searches were performed with the following parameters: Peptides had to have a minimum length of six amino acids to be considered for identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing up to two miscleavages. Main and first search tolerance were set 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) for all proteins and peptides of 1% was applied. Retention time of all analyzed samples were linearized in Maxquant by match between runs allowing transfer of identified peptide in absence of sequencing with retention time window of 2 min. All proteins were filtered for common contaminants such as keratins.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD), which is the most common type of dementia, is characterized by the deposition of extracellular amyloid plaques. To understand the pathophysiology of the AD brain, the assessment of global proteomic dynamics is required. Since the hippocampus is a major region affected in the AD brain, we performed hippocampal analysis and identified proteins that are differentially expressed between wild-type and 5XFAD model mice via LC-MS methods. To reveal the relationship between proteomic changes and the progression of amyloid plaque deposition in the hippocampus, we analyzed the hippocampal proteome at two ages (5 and 10 months). We identified 9,313 total proteins and 1411 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in 5- and 10-month-old wild-type and 5XFAD mice. We designated a group of proteins showing the same pattern of changes as amyloid beta (A&#x3b2;) as the A&#x3b2;-responsive proteome. In addition, we examined potential biomarkers by investigating secretory proteins from the A&#x3b2;-responsive proteome. Consequently, we identified vitamin K-dependent protein S (PROS1) as a novel microglia-derived biomarker candidate in the hippocampus of 5XFAD mice. Moreover, we confirmed that the PROS1 level in the serum of 5XFAD mice increases as the disease progresses. An increase in PROS1 is also observed in the sera of AD patients and shows a close correlation with AD neuroimaging markers in humans. Therefore, our quantitative proteome data obtained from 5XFAD model mice successfully predicted AD-related biological alterations and suggested a novel protein biomarker for AD.

### Keywords
5xfad, Hippocampus, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


