### Accession
PXD010679

### Title
Sirtilin protease specificity -  Sirtilins - the new old members of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factor family

### Description
Here we describe an additional member of the Vitamin K-dependent protease family comprising the Gla-EGF1-EGF2-SP domain architecture. These proteases were found in different vertebrate classes including jawless fish, cartilaginous fish, bony fish, reptiles, birds and marsupials but not in other mammals. We have investigated for the first time the homolog of the garter snake Thamnophis sirtalis and thus called these proteases ‘sirtilins’.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by legumain/tryptic digest of E.coli K12 lysates as described. The peptide library was split in two aliquots that were treated with/without the corresponding protease. Peptides were duplex stable isotope labelled by reductive dimethylation. Isotopically light formaldehyde (CH2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was used to label control samples and heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) were used to label samples with protease addition. Dimethylation was performed for 2h at RT and quenched by addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 1h. Subsequently samples were mixed, desalted and purified by C18 StageTips. 1 µg peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC system coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker). Peptides were eluted with a binary gradient from 5-32% B for 90 minutes with a total runtime of 2 h per sample. Line-mode MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 200-1750 m/z at an acquisition rate of 4 Hz. For each MS spectrum, the Top17 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from the acquired MS spectra using the MaxQuant software package, v1.6.0.16 and a UniProt E.coli K12 proteome library (downloaded Nov 2015, 4313 entries). Legumain/trypsin were set as digestion enzymes for semi-specific searches (e.g. only one side of the peptide was required to match the legumain/trypsin specificity). Label multiplicity was set to two, considering light dimethylation (+28.0313 Da) and heavy dimethylation (+34.0631 Da) as peptide N-terminal and lysine labels. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 Da) was considered as variable modifications. PSM false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Identified peptides that showed at least a fourfold increase in intensity after protease treatment compared to the control treatment or were exclusively present in the protease-treated condition were considered as putative cleavage products. An in-house developed Perl script was used to remove putative library peptides (legumain/trypsin specificity on both sides of the identified peptide) and to reconstruct the full cleavage windows from the identified cleavage products as described. Aligned validated cleavage windows were visualized as iceLogos, displaying site-specific differential amino acid abundance calculated as per cent difference compared to the E.coli K12 proteome as reference set (p-value 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Essentials Blood coagulation is driven by vitamin K (VK)-dependent proteases. We have identified and characterized 'sirtilin' as an additional VK-dependent protease. Sirtilins emerged early in the evolution of the coagulation system of vertebrates. Ubiquitous occurrence might indicate an important functional role of sirtilins. SUMMARY: Background Vitamin&#xa0;K (VK)-dependent proteases are major players in blood coagulation, including both the initiation and the regulation of the cascade. Five different members of this protease family have been described, comprising the following coagulation factors: factor&#xa0;VII, FIX, FX, protein&#xa0;C (PC), and prothrombin (FII). FVII, FIX, FX and PC share a typical domain architecture, with an N-terminal &#x3b3;-carboxyglutamate (Gla) domain, two epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) domains, and a C-terminal trypsin-like serine protease (SP) domain. Objectives We have identified uncharacterized proteins in snake genomes showing the typical Gla-EGF1-EGF2-SP domain architecture but relatively low sequence conservation compared to known VK-dependent proteases. On the basis of sequence analysis, we hypothesized that these proteins are functional members of the VK-dependent protease family. Methods/results Using phylogenetic analyses, we confirmed the so-called 'sirtilins' as an additional VK-dependent protease class. These proteases were found in several vertebrates, including jawless fish, cartilaginous fish, bony fish, reptiles, birds, and marsupials, but not in other mammals. The recombinant zymogen form of Thamnophis sirtalis sirtilin was produced by in&#xa0;vitro renaturation, and was activated with human activated FXI. The activated form of sirtilin proteolytically cleaved peptide and protein substrates, including prothrombin. Mass spectrometry-based substrate profiling of sirtilin revealed a narrower sequence specificity than those of FIX and FX. Conclusions The ubiquitous occurrence of sirtilins in many vertebrate classes might indicate an important functional role. Understanding the detailed functions of sirtilins might contribute to a deeper understanding of the evolution and function of the vertebrate coagulation system.

### Keywords
Sirtilin pics protease specificity

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


