### Accession
PXD004669

### Title
Human KAT2A/B-acetylome MudPIT

### Description
Comprehensive identification of acetylated proteins targeted by the lysine acetyltransferases KAT2A (GCN5) and KAT2B (PCAF), in human cells. KAT2A/B-dependent acetylated proteins were identified by comparing acetylated proteins in whole cell extract of control cells and cells in which KAT2A and KAT2B were simultaneously knocked down. The identification of acetylated proteins was performed using an enrichment-free approach. In order to do so, while facing the challenge of identifying low abundant acetylated peptides within a complex sample mixture, we have screened acetylated peptides starting from a large amount of material, equivalent to 50ug of protein digest (maximum loading capacity of our analytical chromatographic column). By analysing such a large amount of peptides, the level of acetylated peptides was then increased and thus acetylated peptides became easily detectable by mass spectrometry, without the need for enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell protein extract were urea-denaturated, reduced, alkylated and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C, followed by modified trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a triphasic 100m diameter fused silica microcapillary column, packed with C18 reverse phase and strong cation exchange particles. Loaded microcapillary columns were placed in-line with a Quaternary Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC pump and a LTQ Velos linear ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source. A fully automated 12-steps MudPIT run was performed during which each full MS scan (from 300 to 1700 m/z range) was followed by 20 MS/MS events using data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SEQUEST within Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against a non-redundant protein sequence database for Homo sapiens containing 20276 protein sequences entries (Uniprot release from 2010-09). Cysteine residues were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57 Da statically added), methionine to be oxidized (+16 Da dynamically added) and lysine to be acetylated (+42 Da dynamically added). Three missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 2.5 and 0.8Da on the precursor and fragment ions respectively. Tandem mass spectra were filtered with XCorr values equal to 1,5 (+1), 2.5 (+2), 3.0 (+3) and 3.2 (>+3). Only peptides with a minimum length of 7 residues and maximum DCn values of 0.3 were retained. Tryptic peptides containing C-terminal acetylated lysines were rejected, leading to a false discovery rate below 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a widespread post-translational modification regulating various biological processes. To characterize cellular functions of the human lysine acetyltransferases KAT2A (GCN5) and KAT2B (PCAF), we determined their acetylome by shotgun proteomics. One of the newly identified KAT2A/2B substrate is polo-like kinase 4 (PLK4), a key regulator of centrosome duplication. We demonstrate that KAT2A/2B acetylate the PLK4 kinase domain on residues K45 and K46. Molecular dynamics modelling suggests that K45/K46 acetylation impairs kinase activity by shifting the kinase to an inactive conformation. Accordingly, PLK4 activity is reduced upon in vitro acetylation of its kinase domain. Moreover, the overexpression of the PLK4 K45R/K46R mutant in cells does not lead to centrosome overamplification, as observed with wild-type PLK4. We also find that impairing KAT2A/2B-acetyltransferase activity results in diminished phosphorylation of PLK4 and in excess centrosome numbers in cells. Overall, our study identifies the global human KAT2A/2B acetylome and uncovers that KAT2A/2B acetylation of PLK4 prevents centrosome amplification.

### Keywords
Kat2a(gcn5), Centrosome duplication, Plk4, Kat2b (pcaf), Non-histone targets, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics plateform IGBMC - CNRS UMR 7104 - Inserm U 964
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)- UMR 7104 CNRS, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg (UdS)

### Submitter
Mathilde Joint

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo TORA
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)- UMR 7104 CNRS, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg (UdS)


