### Accession
PXD017477

### Title
The specific localization and function of Cdc42 isoforms

### Description
Cdc42 is a small GTPase protein whose role in polarity is widely studied. However, in vertebrates there exist 2 isoforms arising due to alternative splicing. The function and localization of these have not been studied with respect to cell polarity and cell migration. We therefore perform a mass spec screen to identify interactors of the isoforms to better understand their cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
GFP tagged constructs of both Cdc42 isoforms were expressed using CaPO4 transfection in HEK cells. The cells were lysed after 2 days and insoluble membrane fractions removed by centrifugation. After which the cell supernatant was treated with ChromoTek GFP Trap beads to perform GFP immunoprecipitation. The sample beads were washed with a mass spec suitable buffer comprising of 50mM TRIS base, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA and 2.5 mM MgCl2 and pH adjusted to 7.5. Proteins on beads were then washed two additional times with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and we performed on-beads digestion with 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Prior analyses, digests were reconstituted in 10 µL of 0.3% TFA in 2/98 MeCN/H2O and 5 µL were injected into the LC-MS/MS system consisting of an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) interfaced on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as in Żylicz et al. (Cell, 2019). For identification the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) SwissProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.

### Data Protocol
The resulting files were processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with no missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Isoforms, Golgi, Sub-cellular localization, Cdc42

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


