### Accession
PXD008720

### Title
Species comparison of liver proteomes reveals links to  naked mole-rat longevity and human aging

### Description
Mammals display wide range of variation in their lifespan. Investigating the molecular networks that distinguish long- from short-lived species has proven useful to identify determinants of longevity. Here, we compared the liver of long-lived naked mole-rats (NMRs) and the phylogenetically closely related, shorter-lived, guinea pigs using an integrated omic approach. We found that NMRs livers display a unique expression pattern of mitochondrial proteins that result in distinct metabolic features of their mitochondria. For instance, we observed a generally reduced respiration rate associated with lower protein levels of respiratory chain components, particularly complex I, and increased capacity to utilize fatty acids. Interestingly, we show that the same molecular networks are affected during aging in both NMR and humans, supporting a direct link to the extraordinary longevity of both species. Finally, we identified a novel longevity pathway and validated it experimentally in the nematode C. elegans.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation NMR and GP fresh frozen liver samples for label free cross species comparison Frozen tissue samples of NMR and GP liver samples were homogenized and lysed by bead-beating and sonicating in lysis buffer (80μM Tris pH 8.0, 80 μM DTT and 4% SDS).  Reduction was carried out with boiling the lysates at 95°C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce) adjusted to 10 µg/µL using solubilization buffer. 50 µg protein, was taken for preparation for MS.  Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide.  Sample clean-up and digestion (at 37°C) with LysC (4h) and trypsin (overnight) proceeded following a modified SP3 protocol. [Hughes et al, 2014]. After digestion, peptides were pre-fractioned by high pH reverse phase chromatography, prior to the MS analysis, using an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC System fitted with a Waters XBridge C18 column. The solvent system consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) as mobile phase (A) and 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase (B).  34 fractions were collected along with the LC separation, which were subsequently pooled into 10 fractions.   NMR frozen liver samples for TMT-based comparison of young and old samples For each experimental animal 100 µg processed protein lysate from the bead-beaten stock of tissue described above were taken. Proteins were then precipitated overnight at -20 °C with 4 volumes ice cold acetone. The precipitates were washed twice 80% (v/v) acetone (ice cold), before being dissolved in digestion buffer and digested (37°C) with LysC (4h) and trypsin (overnight).  The digests were acidified and desalted using a Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved HEPES buffer, pH 8.5 for TMT labeling. TMT-6plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) were reconstituted and TMT labeling was performed stepwise.  After checking labeling efficiency, samples were pooled, cleaned once again with Oasis and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to MS analysis. 48 fractions were collected along with the LC separation, which were subsequently pooled into 16 fractions.   Human FFPE liver samples The specimens (5 μm thick sections and mounted on glass slides) were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated in 100% ethanol, then washed sequentially in 96% (v/v), 70% (v/v), 50% (v/v) ethanol and milliQ water. Regions of interest were scraped using a scalpel and transferred to tubes containing lysis buffer (80 μM Tris pH 8.0, 80 μM DTT and 4% SDS) and processed directly. Samples were sonicated and boiled for 1h at 99°C. These steps were performed twice. Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide.  Proteins were then acetone precipitated, digested and desalted as described above for NMR samples (aging comparison); no TMT labeling was performed.  Mass spectrometry data acquisition Label free analysis of NMR and GP liver samples For label free experiments, each fraction from the 4 GP and 4 NMR samples, separated by high pH, were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo). Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping and an analytical column. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to the MS using the Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were separated over 2h and introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter (New Objective). Data were acquired using DDA with full scan MS acquired in the Orbitrap. HCD was performed with collision energy of 35%. MS2 data were acquired in the ion trap, in Rapid scan mode.   TMT analysis of NMR young and old samples For TMT-6plex experiments, the high pH fractions were analyzed using the same LC-MS/MS setup described above, modified for SPS-MS3. The most intense fragments from the MS2 experiment were co-isolated (using Synchronus Precursor Selection = 8) and fragmented using HCD (65%). MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap.  Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) for human FFPE samples Peptides were spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG), and analyzed using the same LC-MS/MS setup described above with modifications. For spectral library generation, a pooled sample was generated by mixing an equal portion of each sample, injecting 6 times, and measuring in DDA mode. The conditions for DDA data acquisition were: Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap.  HCD was performed with collision energy of 30%) MS2 data were acquired in the Orbitrap. For the DIA, the same gradient conditions were applied and the MS conditions were as follows: Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range with a cycle time of 3 seconds. HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Label free cross-species comparison of NMR and GP liver samples The Andromeda search engine, part of MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28) was used to search the data. The data for GP and NMR were searched separately against translated species-specific reference transcripts (see RNA sequencing analysis). A database with a list of common contaminants was appended in both cases. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed), and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide and protein level 1% FDR were applied using a target-decoy strategy. iBAQ (label free quantification) values from the MaxQuant output were used to perform cross-species differential protein expression analysis using scripts written in R (v3.4.1). After removal of reverse and contaminant hits, only protein groups quantified by at least two unique peptides were retained. Common human gene symbols were used to combine iBAQ values for NMR and GP samples. Only protein groups quantified in at least two animals per group were retained when comparing protein abundances between NMR and GP. To reduce technical variation, data were log2 transformed and quantile-normalized using the preprocessCore library. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package. Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t test moderated by the empirical Bayes method. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.  TMT-based analysis of young and old NMR livers TMT-6plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the NMR fasta database using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings:  Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage.  MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable.  Other modifications included the TMT-6plex modification from the quan method used.  The quan method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm).  The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator. Reporter ion intensity values for the filtered PSMs were exported and processed using in-house written R scripts to remove common contaminants and decoy hits.  Additionally, only PSMs having reporter ion intensities above 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were retained for quantitative analysis. Only protein groups quantified by at least two unique peptides were analyzed for differential expression between young and old NMR. Data were analysed using the MSnbase package. Reporter ion intensities were log2-transformed and normalized using the vsn package. Peptide-level data were summarized into their respective protein groups by taking the median value. Differential protein expression was assessed using the limma package, as described above.  DIA analysis of FFPE human samples For library creation, the DDA data was searched using the Andromeda search engine built in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28). The data were searched against a human database (Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB database release 2016_01, 20198 entries) with a list of common contaminants appended, as well as the HRM peptide sequences. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS and MS/MS spectra was set at 20 ppm. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. A spectral library was created from the MaxQuant output of the DDA runs combined using Spectronaut (version 11, Biognosys AG). This library contained 34014 precursors, corresponding to 3295 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. DIA data were then uploaded and searched against this spectral library. Precursor matching, protein inference and quantification were performed in Spectronaut using default settings. Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level, followed by multiple testing correction.  The data were exported from Spectronaut and used for further data analyses

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human aging, Liver, Naked mole-rat, Longevity

### Affiliations
Group leader - Systems Biology of Aging Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Germany
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Group leader - Systems Biology of Aging Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Germany


