### Accession
PXD045567

### Title
The epigenomic landscape of cognitive stimulation in the context of aging in mouse dorsal hippocampus - SWATH

### Description
Aging is a universal biological phenomenon linked to many diseases, such as cancer or neurodegeneration. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying aging, or how lifestyle interventions such as cognitive stimulation can ameliorate this process, are yet to be clarified. Here, we performed a multi-omic profiling, including RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, ChIP-seq, EM-seq, SWATH-MS and single cell Multiome scRNA and scATAC-seq, in the dorsal hippocampus of young and old mouse subjects which were subject to cognitive stimulation using the paradigm of environmental enrichment. In this study we were able to describe the epigenomic landscape of aging and cognitive stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
For sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) proteomic analyses, total protein from fresh-frozen dorsal hippocampi was extracted using a standard RIPA buffer and was precipitated overnight in 80% acetone / 10% TCA. Protein extracts were resuspended in 0.2% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, #186002123) and quantified via the Qubit Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #Q33211). Next, 25 µg of protein were incubated in 4.5 mM DTT for 30 min at 60 ºC and in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT. Subsequently, a trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC in a 1:40 (enzyme:protein) proportion, which was stopped with formic acid. After incorporating SWATH alignment peptides at 40 fmol/μL (Sciex), LC-MS/MS runs were performed with injections of 1 µg of protein on a hybrid mass spectrometer TripleTOF 5600+ System (Sciex) coupled to a NanoLC425 System (Sciex), using the Analyst TF (v1.7) software for equipment control, data acquisition and processing. Each biological sample was run 3 times generating 3 technical replicates.  Peptides were first loaded into a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm id × 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) isocratically in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (v/v) at a flow rate of 3 μL/min for 10 min. Next, elution was performed in a reverse-phase column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm id × 250 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a PicoTip emitter (New Objective, #FS360-20-10-N-20-C12) using a lineal gradient of 2-35% (v/v) of the B solvent in 120 min at 300 nL/min. As A and B solvents, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) were used, respectively. Voltage was set to 2600 V and temperatures maintained at 100 ºC. Gas 1 was selected at 15 psi, gas 2 at 0, curtain gas at 25 psi.  For library preparation, data acquisition was performed via DDA (data-dependent acquisition) using a TOF MS scan between 400-1250 m/z, accumulation time of 250 ms, followed by 50 MS/MS (230-1500 m/z), accumulation time of 65 ms and a total cycle time of 3.54 s. Ten runs were used for spectral library preparation, in which samples were mixed in pairs and injected using the aforementioned DDA method.  For the final SWATH runs, data acquisition used a TOF MS scan of between 400-1250 m/z, accumulation time of 50 ms, followed by a DIA (data-independent acquisition) method with 60m/z windows of variable size (230-1500 m/z) with 60 ms acquisition time and a cycle time of 3.68 s. The gradient used was the same as for the DDA method. Between samples (1 µg of digested protein), a standard control (Pepcalmix, Sciex, #5045759) was used to calibrate the equipment and control sensitivity and chromatographic conditions.   NOTE: the dataset libraries contain some samples which are not part of the study but were profiled in the same batch. See the attached phenodata file: 1_phenodata.csv.

### Data Protocol
Library preparation: The ProteinPilot software (v5.0.1, Sciex) was used for peptide identification in a joint search across the 10 runs. For the Paragon method, the following parameters were used: trypsin enzyme, iodoacetamide as alkylating agent, and the mouse UniProt proteome as reference (17/12/2021) with Sciex’s contaminant database. Proteins were selected under an FDR significance level of 0.01.  Final SWATH runs: the data were preprocessed using PeakView (v2.2, Sciex) with the SWATH 2.0 microapp, generating total area-normalized measurements for each protein.  NOTE: the dataset libraries contain some samples which are not part of the study but were profiled in the same batch. See the attached phenodata file: 1_phenodata.csv.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Rejuvenation, Swath, Aging, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
CSIC
CSIC - Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas

### Submitter
Mario Fraga

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Fernandez Fraga
CSIC - Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas


