### Accession
PXD023775

### Title
Rat Serum Exosome LC-MSMS(Label free)

### Description
LC-MSMS (Label free) was performed to find differential proteins in maternal rat serum exosome between 3 normal pregnant rats and 3 pregnant rats carrying fetuses with spina bifida aperta induced by all-trans retinoic acid (Sigma; 4% [wt/vol] in olive oil; 140 mg/kg body weight by gavage) at pregnant day E18 (vaginal smear found sperm after mating as E0).

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples of maternal rat were obtained via puncture of the apex cordis, which were collected into vacuum tubes (BD Vacutainer® SST™, 5.0 mL·100 mm) for serum sampling. The extracted blood samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h, followed by centrifugation in a high-speed refrigerated centrifuge (SORVALL ST 8R Centrifuge, Thermo Fisher SCIENTIFIC) at 2000 × g, 4°C for 20 min. The supernatant (serum) was collected and filtered through a 0.22-μm filter (MILLEX®GP, Millipore Express® PES Membrane) into a fresh high-speed centrifuge tube.The filtered sample was centrifuged (Micro Ultracentrifuge CS120FNX, Hitachi Koki Co., Ltd.) at 10,000 × g, 4°C for 1 h, following which the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and centrifuged at 100,000 × g, 4°C for 4 h. The pellet (exosomes) was resuspended in PBS and preserved at -80°C. Samples were subjected to TCA/acetone precipitation and SDT lysis , homogenization , and immunoaffinity depletion of high-abundance serum proteins. Samples were quantitated using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio Rad, USA) and stored at -80°C.A total of 20 µg protein for each sample was mixed with 5× loading buffer and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min), and protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R 250 staining.A total of 200 μg protein for each sample was taken, and the volume adjusted to 30 μL with SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT, and other low-molecular weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kDa). Subsequently, 100 μL iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues, and the samples were incubated for 30 min in the dark. The filters were washed 3 times with 100 μL UA buffer and twice with 100 μL 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer in the dark. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37°C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 40 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of a 0.1% (g/L) solution, which is calculated based on the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reversed-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to a C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid), and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/120/240 min (determined by the project proposal). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3E+6, and the maximum injection time to 10 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was 40 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at an m/z of 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at an m/z of 200; the isolation width was 2 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with the peptide recognition mode enabled.The MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
No highly specific and sensitive biomarkers have been identified for early diagnosis of neural tube defects (NTDs). In this study, we used proteomics to identify novel proteins specific for NTDs. Our findings revealed three proteins showing differential expression during fetal development. In a rat model of NTDs, we used western blotting to quantify proteins in maternal serum exosomes on gestational days E18, E16, E14, and E12, in serum on E18 and E12, in neural tubes on E18 and E12, and in fetal neural exosomes on E18. The expression of coronin 1A and dynamin 2 was exosome-specific and associated with spina bifida aperta embryogenesis. Furthermore, coronin 1A and dynamin 2 were significantly downregulated in maternal serum exosomes (E12-E18), neural tubes, and fetal neural exosomes. Although downregulation was also observed in serum, the difference was not significant. Differentially expressed proteins were further analyzed in the serum exosomes of pregnant women during gestational weeks 12-40 using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. The findings revealed that coronin 1A and dynamin 2 showed potential diagnostic efficacy during gestational weeks 12-40, particularly during early gestation (12-18&#xa0;weeks). Therefore, these two targets are used as candidate NTD screening and diagnostic biomarkers during early gestation. KEY MESSAGES: We used proteomics to identify novel proteins specific for NTDs. CORO1A and DNM2 showed exosome-specific expression and were associated with SBA. CORO1A and DNM2 were downregulated in maternal serum exosomes and FNEs. CORO1A and DNM2 showed good diagnostic efficacy for NTDs during early gestation. These two targets may have applications as NTD screening and diagnostic biomarkers.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Serum exosome, Label free

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Health Ministry for Congenital Malformation, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, PR China
Key Laboratory of Health Ministry for Congenital Malformation, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, PR China.

### Submitter
Zhengwei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Zhengwei Yuan
Key Laboratory of Health Ministry for Congenital Malformation, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, PR China.


