### Accession
PXD002194

### Title
The proteome of normal human iris, ciliary body,  retinal pigment epithelium, and choroid

### Description
The iris is a fine structure that controls the amount of light that enters the eye. The ciliary body controls the shape of the lens and produces aqueous humor. The retinal pigment epithelium and choroid (RPE/choroid) are essential in supporting the retina and absorbing light energy that enters the eye. Proteins were extracted from iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid tissues of eyes from five individuals and fractionated using SDS-PAGE. After in-gel digestion, peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. In iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid, we identified 2,959, 2,867, and 2,755 non-redundant proteins with protein false positive rate <1%. There were 43 unambiguous protein isoforms identified in iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid. Four “missing proteins” were found in ciliary body. The MS proteome database of the human iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid may serve as a valuable resource for future investigations of the eye in health and disease. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001424.

### Sample Protocol
Five human donor eyes were obtained from the Lions Eye Institute, Tampa, FL. Right eyes were selected from five adults (4 males, 1 female), age 51-76 y, with no history of eye disease or previous eye surgery. The causes of death were myocardial infarction, end-stage renal disease (2), and cancer, not on chemotherapy (2). Time of death to enucleation was 3-7 h for all subjects. Globes were placed in eye bank vials and refrigerated until received at the Wilmer Eye Institute. Time from enucleation to tissue freezing was 24-36 h for all subjects. A corneal surgeon (S.F.) dissected the globes following a standardized protocol for isolation of human eye tissues [3]. Iris was dissected free from ciliary body at its radial edge, taking great care to divide iris and ciliary body. RPE/choroid was dissected free of retina and vitreous. Iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid samples were immediately snap frozen and stored at –80°C until processing. Iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid samples were suspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 42 mM KCl, ¬¬0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 1× phosphatase inhibitor [Pierce, PI78420], 1× protease inhibitor [Sigma, P8340]), and homogenized using a motorized handheld Eppendorf mortar/pestle until tissue was no longer clumped. Samples were then sonicated three times for ten seconds, storing on ice to prevent overheating between sonications. Sodium dodecyl sulfate was added for a final concentration of 2% (w/v). Samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 min to lyse the cells and extract the proteins. The samples were then spun for 45 min, 14,000 × g, at room temperature. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the Pierce microBCA kit.  Proteins were separated using SDS-PAGE gels. Double distilled H2O was added to the samples to achieve 50 μg of protein in 45 μL volume in a low retention Eppendorf tube. Four mL of 4× lithium dodecyl sulfate SE + 100 mM DDT was added to each tube. Tubes were vortexed, spun briefly, and placed on a 106°C heat block for 10 min to denature the proteins. Tubes were vortexed and spun twice. Fifty μg of sample was run on each lane of a 1D SDS gel using NuPAGE 4-12% BT 1.5, 200V for 35 min. Gels were stained with Coomassie blue (250 mL methanol, 50 mL acetic acid, 200 mL dH2O, 0.5 g Coomassie brilliant blue) on a rotating table at room temperature for 30 min. Gels were destained (50 mL methanol, 75 mL acetic acid, 875 mL dH2O) overnight. Each gel was cut into 12 bands. Gel pieces were placed in separate vials and disrupted with forceps. Gels were destained, dehydrated with acetonitrile, and dried down with a Speedvac concentrator. Samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, washed with ultrapure water, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile, and dried. Samples were digested with trypsin/LysC (Promega, V5073) at 37°C overnight with shaking. Supernatant with peptides was removed, incubated with 100% acetonitrile, and then dried. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water, placed in a desalting column (Pierce Spin-Tip), spun, eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, and then dried. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water and spiked with 5 fmol/μL calibration peptides (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture).   Samples were run LC-MS/MS using a one-hour gradient of 2-30% acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) using an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. EASY-Spray source was run at 35°C using a 25 cm x 50 μm integrated spray tip column. Peptides were trapped at 980 bar on a 2 cm x 75 μm trapping column. The trap was a 3 μm particle, and the column was 2 μm Acclaim PepMap C18. All individual samples were run with two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were batch processed using i3D (Shimadzu and Integrated Analysis), X!Tandem and OMSSA search engines, and the UniProt sequence database. UniProt database included all human sequences, and parameters allowed for 2 missed tryptic cleavages, a fragment ion mass error of 1 Da, and potential protein modifications for carbamidomethylation, oxidation, phosphorylation, deamidation, and carbamylation. Peptide identifications were accepted if they were established at >90.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm [4] with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they were established at ≥95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein Prophet algorithm was used to assign protein probabilities [5] using a false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.1% for peptides and <1.0% for proteins. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
The iris is a fine structure that controls the amount of light that enters the eye. The ciliary body controls the shape of the lens and produces aqueous humor. The retinal pigment epithelium and choroid (RPE/choroid) are essential in supporting the retina and absorbing light energy that enters the eye. Proteins were extracted from iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid tissues of eyes from five individuals and fractionated using SDS-PAGE. After in-gel digestion, peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. In iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid, we identified 2959, 2867, and 2755 nonredundant proteins with peptide and protein false-positive rates of &lt;0.1% and &lt;1%, respectively. Forty-three unambiguous protein isoforms were identified in iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid. Four "missing proteins" were identified in ciliary body based on &#x2265;2 proteotypic peptides. The mass spectrometric proteome database of the human iris, ciliary body, and RPE/choroid may serve as a valuable resource for future investigations of the eye in health and disease. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD001424 and PXD002194.

### Keywords
Eye, Ciliary body, Iris, Choroid, Retinal pigment epithelium

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Pingbo Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Semba
Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


