### Accession
PXD027206

### Title
RNA-mediated nucleosome depletion is required for elimination of transposon-derived DNA

### Description
To study the role of chromatin remodeler during programmed genome reorganization in Paramecium tetraurelia. Paramecium ISWI1 was tagged with 3 FLAG and HA at its C-terminal. The recombinant plasmid was transformed into Paramecium and used for co-immunoprecipitation and Mass spectrometry studies to identify novel interacting partners of Paramecium ISWI1 protein that modulates the elimination of transposable elements.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation Paramecium ISWI1 was tagged with 3X FLAG HA at its C-terminal and microinjected into the vegetative macronucleus of the cell using the standard protocol [1]. Using endogenous promotors, tagged plasmid was expressed at the endogenous protein level, while wild type cells were collected as controls. 4.5X105 of the injected Paramecium cells in two replicates were harvested and cross-linked with 1% Paraformaldehyde by incubating for 10minutes at room temperature. The cells were then quenched with 100μl of 1.25M Glycine and incubated at room temperature for 5min. Cells were washed with PBS and all further steps were carried 4°C. 2ml of lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 1%Triton X100, 1X Protease inhibitor (Roche), 10% glycerol) was added and the cells were sonicated (Branson Digital Sonifier) with 55% amplitude for 15secs. The lysate was then spin for at least 15min at 13’000Xg or until the lysate was clear. 50μl of bead slurry (Anti-HA High Affinity11815016001, clone 3F10, Roche) was used per IP sample and was washed thrice by centrifuging for 2min at 500Xg. After washing the beads, 1ml of the lysate was mixed to the beads and incubated overnight with agitation at 4°C. After the incubation, the beads were washed five times with IP buffer (10mM Tris pH8.0, 150mM NaCl, 0.01% NP-40, 1mM MgCl2, 5% Glycerol) for 2min at 500Xg. NP-40 was added freshly in the buffer. Proteins were then eluted by adding 50μl of the 5X loading buffer (10%SDS, 0.25M Tris ph6.8, 50% Glycerol, 0.25% Bromophenol blue).Samples were run on 1 12% SDS-PAGE gel upto about 1cm and each lane was cut into 10 slices for in-gel digestion. Each slice was processed as described elsewhere [2].  References: 1. Beisson, J., Bétermier, M., Bré, M.-H., Cohen, J., Duharcourt, S., Duret, L., Kung, C., Malinsky, S., Meyer, E., Preer, J.R., et al. (2010). DNA microinjection into the macronucleus of paramecium. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2010, pdb.prot5364.  2. Kehl D, Mallone A, Generali M, Heller M, Uldry AC, Cheng P, Gantenbein B, Hoerstrup SP, Weber B. (2019) Proteomic analysis of human mesenchymal stromal cell secretomes: a systematic comparison of the angiogenic potential. NPJ Regen Med. 4:8. doi: 10.1038/s41536-019-0070-y.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry data was processed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using a Paramecium Tetraurelia protein sequence database (v1.99.20 downloaded from the Centre National de Séquençage website, https://www.cea.fr/)  applying full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages, variable modification on protein N-termini with acetylation and oxidation on methionine, static modification with carbamidomethylation on cysteine, and a mass accuracy of 10 ppm, and 4.5 ppm for precursor ions in the first and second round searches, respectively. Only proteins with at least 2 peptides identified at a 1% FDR on the PSM, peptide and protein level were accepted. Differential protein abundance analysis . The match between run option was activated but interpretation between control and bait pulldowns hindered by adding eleven to the fraction numbering of the mutant pulldown samples. Differential protein abundance analysis was done with the LFQ intensities only on those proteins, which were quantified in all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Small RNAs mediate the silencing of transposable elements and other genomic loci, increasing nucleosome density and preventing undesirable gene expression. The unicellular ciliate Paramecium is a model to study dynamic genome organization in eukaryotic cells, given its unique feature of nuclear dimorphism. Here, the formation of the somatic macronucleus during sexual reproduction requires eliminating thousands of transposon remnants (IESs) and&#x2009;transposable elements scattered throughout the germline micronuclear genome. The elimination process is guided by Piwi-associated small RNAs and leads to precise cleavage at IES boundaries. Here we show that IES recognition and precise excision are facilitated by recruiting ISWI1, a Paramecium homolog of the chromatin remodeler ISWI. ISWI1 knockdown substantially inhibits DNA elimination, quantitatively similar to development-specific sRNA gene knockdowns but with much greater aberrant IES excision at alternative boundaries. We also identify key development-specific sRNA biogenesis and transport proteins, Ptiwi01 and Ptiwi09, as ISWI1 cofactors in our co-immunoprecipitation studies. Nucleosome profiling indicates that increased nucleosome density correlates with the requirement for ISWI1 and other proteins necessary for IES excision. We propose that chromatin remodeling together with small RNAs is essential for efficient and precise DNA elimination in Paramecium.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Paramecium tetraurelia, Nucleosome positioning, Genome reorganization, Epigenetics  project, Transposable elements, Iswi

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mariusz Nowacki
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland


