### Accession
PXD018028

### Title
c-di-GMP-induced conformational dynamics of the c-di-GMP-binding protein A (CdbA) from Myxococcus xanthus

### Description
The second messenger c-di-GMP has important functions in response to changing environmental and cellular cues in bacteria. Here, we report the identification of CdbA, a DNA binding protein of the ribbon-helix-helix family in Myxococcus xanthus, and show that it binds c-di-GMP in vitro. CdbA is essential for viability and its depletion caused defects in chromosome organization and segregation resulting in a block in cell division. CdbA binds multiple sites across the M. xanthus genome with moderate sequence specificity; however, its depletion only caused minor changes in transcription. C-di-GMP binding and DNA binding by CdbA are mutually exclusive and substitutions in the CdbA interfaces important for c-di-GMP binding not only abolished c-di-GMP binding but also DNA binding and rendered the mutant proteins non-functional in vivo. Our data are consistent with a model whereby CdbA functions as a nucleoid associated protein to organize the M. xanthus chromosome and the function of CdbA is modulated by c-di-GMP, thus, for the first time, establishing a link between c-di-GMP and chromosome organization and segregation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for HDX-MS was aided by a two-arm robotic autosampler (LEAP Technologies). CdbA (7.5 µl, 50 µM) with or without 500 µM c-di-GMP (BioLog) was mixed with 67.5 µl D2O-containing SEC buffer (20 mM of HEPES-Na, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl 20 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl). After incubation for 10/30/95/1000/10000 s at 25°C, 55 µl of the HDX reaction were added to 55 µl quench solution (400 mM KH2PO4/H3PO4, 2 M guanidine-HCl, pH 2.2) kept at 1°C and 95 µl of the mixture injected into an ACQUITY UPLC M-class system with HDX technology (Waters). Peptides were generated online using immobilized pepsin at 12°C and 100 µl/min flow rate of water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and the resulting peptic peptides trapped on a C18 column (Waters) kept at 0.5°C. After 3 min, the trap column was placed in line with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 1.7 µm 1.0 × 100 mm column (Waters) and the peptides eluted at 0.5°C using a gradient of water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (eluent A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (eluent B) at 30 µl/min flow rate: 0-7 min/95-65% A, 7-8 min/65-15% A, 8-10 min/15% A, 10-11 min/5% A, 11-16 min/95% A. Undeuterated samples were obtained by similar procedure through dilution in H2O-containing SEC buffer. Mass spectra were recorded in positive ion mode using a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer equipped with an ESI source (Waters) in HDMS (High Definition-MS) or HDMSE (Enhanced High Definition MS) mode for deuterated and undeuterated samples, respectively. [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B standard (Waters) was used for lock mass correction. The pepsin column was washed three times with 80 µl of 4% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.5 M guanidine-HCl during each run and additionally blank runs were performed between each sample to avoid peptide carry-over. All measurements were performed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, Waters) from the non-deuterated samples aquired with HDMSE employing low energy, elevated energy and intensity thresholds of 300, 100 and 1,000 counts, respectively. Peptides were matched using a database containing the amino acid sequences of the respective analyzed proteins, pepsin and their reversed sequences. The search parameters were as follows: Peptide tolerance = automatic; fragment tolerance = automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide = 1; min fragment ion matches per protein = 7; min peptide matches per protein = 3; maximum hits to return = 20; maximum protein mass = 250,000; primary digest reagent = non-specific; missed cleavages = 0; false discovery rate = 100. For quantification of deuterium incorporation with DynamX 3.0 (Waters), peptides had to fulfill the following criteria: minimum intensity of 25,000 count; maximum length of 30 amino acids;minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.05; maximum mass error of 25 ppm; retention time tolerance of 0.5 minutes. After automated data processing by DynamX, all spectra were manually inspected and, if necessary, peptides omitted (e.g. in case of low signal-to-noise ratio or presence of overlapping peptides).

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) is a second messenger that modulates multiple responses to environmental and cellular signals in bacteria. Here we identify CdbA, a DNA-binding protein of the ribbon-helix-helix family that binds c-di-GMP in Myxococcus xanthus. CdbA is essential for viability, and its depletion causes defects in chromosome organization and segregation leading to a block in cell division. The protein binds to the M. xanthus genome at multiple sites, with moderate sequence specificity; however, its depletion causes only modest changes in transcription. The interactions of CdbA with c-di-GMP and DNA appear to be mutually exclusive and residue substitutions in CdbA regions important for c-di-GMP binding abolish binding to both c-di-GMP and DNA, rendering these protein variants non-functional in vivo. We propose that CdbA acts as a nucleoid-associated protein that contributes to chromosome organization and is modulated by c-di-GMP, thus revealing a link between c-di-GMP signaling and chromosome biology.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, C-di-gmp, Dynamx, Plgs

### Affiliations
Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Chemistry & SYNMIKRO, Hans-Meerwein-Straße, 35043 Marburg, GERMANY

### Submitter
Wieland Steinchen

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Bange
Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Chemistry & SYNMIKRO, Hans-Meerwein-Straße, 35043 Marburg, GERMANY


