### Accession
PXD004243

### Title
Automated N-glycopeptide identification in glycoproteomics

### Description
Recent advances in software-driven glycopeptide identification in LC-MS/MS-based N-glycoproteomics have facilitated biochemical studies reporting thousands of intact N-glycopeptides, i.e. N-glycan-conjugated peptides, but the automated identification process remains to be scrutinized. Herein, we explore the efficiency of site-specific glycoprofiling using the PTM-centric search-engine Byonic relative to manual expert annotation. To allow an appropriately deep comparison, the study utilised typical glycoproteomics acquisition and data analysis strategies, but of a single glycoprotein, the uncharacterised N-glycosylated (Asn160, Asn268 and Asn302) human basigin. Detailed site-specific reference glycoprofiles of purified basigin were manually established using ion trap CID-MS/MS and high-resolution Q-Exactive Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS acquisition of tryptic N-glycopeptides and released N-glycans. The basigin N-glycosylation sites, which showed extensive micro- and macro-heterogeneity, were then glycoprofiled using Byonic with or without a background of complex peptides using Q-Exactive Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS data. The glycoprofiling efficiencies were assessed against the site-specific reference glycoprofiles and target and decoy proteome databases. The search criteria and confidence thresholds (Byonic scores) recommended by the vendor provided very high glycoprofiling accuracy and coverage (both >80%) and low peptide FDRs (<1%). The data complexity, search parameters including search space (proteome/glycome size), mass tolerance and peptide modifications, and confidence thresholds affected the glycoprofiling efficiency and analysis time. Automated identification of peptide modifications (methionine oxidation/carbamidomethylation) that coincide with monosaccharide mass differences (Fuc/Hex/HexNAc) and accurately distinguishing isobaric (Hex1NeuAc1-R/Fuc1NeuGc1-R) or near-isobaric (NeuAc1-R/Fuc2-R) monosaccharide sub-compositions remain challenging, arguing particular attention to such “difficult-to-identify” N-glycopeptides. The presented analysis provides valuable insights into automated glycopeptide identification; knowledge that facilitates further developments in FDR-based glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Release and preparation of N-glycans of CD147: N-glycans were released from 5µg of rhCD147 using PNGase F (2.5U). Released N-glycans were reduced and desalted. Digestion and preparation of peptides of CD147: Approximately 10 µg of CD147 was reduced and alkylated and subsequently in-gel trypsin digested at a 1:30 ratio (enzyme/substrate, w/w).   LC-MS/MS-based N-glycomics: Reduced and desalted N-glycan alditols released from CD147 were separated using a porous graphitized carbon (PGC) LC column (5 µm particle size, Hypercarb KAPPA, 100 mm (length) x 200 µm (ID), 250 Å (pore size), Thermo Scientific) on an Agilent (1260 Infinity). LC system connected directly to an ESI-MS/MS ion trap mass spectrometer (LC/MSD Trap XCT Plus Series 1100, Agilent Technologies). Separation was performed for 85 min over a linear gradient of 0-45% (v/v) ACN//10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a flow rate of 2 µL. MS spectra were obtained in negative ion mode with three scan events: a full scan (m/z 400-2,200) at a scan speed of 8,100 m/z/s and data-dependent MS/MS scans after CID fragmentation of the top two most intense precursor ions with an absolute intensity threshold of 30,000 and a relative intensity threshold of 5% relative to the base peak. Two LC-MS/MS technical replicates were performed for the sample. MS/MS of basigin peptides with and without a complex peptide mixture: Basigin peptide mixtures were taken up in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and injected onto LC systems connected to a HCT 3D ion trap (IT) (Bruker Daltonics) or a Q-Exactive (QE) Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometers.For the IT analysis, basigin peptide mixtures were separated on a C18 reversed-phase (RP) column (ProteCol HQ303, 3 µm particle size, 100 mm length, 300 µm inner diameter, 300 Å pore size, SGE, Australia) on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex). The column was heated to 45°C during the separation. Separation was performed using a binary gradient solvent system made up of solvent A (aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN). The flow rate was constant at 5 µl/min during the 95 min gradient: Isocratic 100% solvent A over 8 min, 0-30% solvent B over 60 min; 30-60% solvent B over 7 min; 60-80% solvent B over 1 min; isocratic 80% solvent B over 10 min and isocratic 100% solvent A over 9 min. Basigin peptide mixtures were injected in triplicates (8 pmol/injection) and spectra were recorded in the positive ion mode with four scan events at a scan speed of 8,100 m/z/s: a MS full scan (m/z 300-2,200) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans after isolation and resonance activation CID fragmentation of the three most intense precursor ions with a minimum absolute intensity threshold of 30,000 and a minimum relative intensity threshold of 5% relative to the base peak. Mass axis calibration of the mass spectrometer was performed using a well-defined tune mix (Agilent) prior to acquisition. Tryptic digests of bovine serum albumin were used to ensure high LC-MS/MS performance prior to data acquisition. Differences between observed and theoretical precursor and fragment masses were generally better than 0.2 Da. For the QE Orbitrap analysis, basigin peptides with and without a background of a complex peptide mixture were loaded onto a custom-made C18 RP-LC column packed with Halo C18 resin (2.7 µm particle size, 100 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 160 Å pore size) (Advance Materials Technology, Wilmington, DE). The LC was equipped with a RP trapping column (35 mm length, 100 µm inner diameter) made from the same resin. Separation of peptides was performed using an identical gradient as for the Bruker IT (described above) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Samples were injected in triplicates (1 pmol/injection) and spectra were recorded with a resolution of 35,000 in the positive polarity mode over the range of m/z 350-2,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1 x 106. The ten most intense precursor ions in each full scan were isolated for HCD-MS/MS fragmentation and fragment mass analysis using the following settings: normalised collision energy, 35%; AGC target, 2 x 105; isolation window m/z 3.0, and dynamic exclusion enabled, fragment resolution 17,500. Yeast enolase was used between samples to monitor the LC-MS/MS performance. Differences between observed and theoretical precursor and product (fragment) masses for the QE Orbitrap were generally better than 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of basigin N-glycome: LC-MS/MS raw data of the basigin N-glycome were manually analysed using Data Analysis v4.0 (Bruker Daltonics). Observed monoisotopic masses were used to search for possible glycan monosaccharide compositions using GlycoMod (http://web.expasy.org/glycomod/). The monosaccharide compositions were verified manually by de novo sequencing of the corresponding CID-MS/MS spectra and the absolute and relative PGC-LC retention time. The distribution of the basigin N-glycan monosaccharide compositions was calculated using their relative abundances as measured by their relative peak areas using extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) of all the observed N-glycan charge states. The relative N-glycan distribution was calculated as an average of a duplicate experiment. Establishing basigin site-specific reference N-glycoprofiles by manual data analysis: The identified basigin monosaccharide compositions were used to create lists of theoretical masses of possible tryptic glycopeptides covering the 3 potential N-glycosylation sites of basigin i.e. Asn160, Asn268 and Asn302 using GPMAW v10.0 (Lighthouse, Odense, Denmark). Likely peptide modifications such as Cys (and later also Met) carbamidomethylation, Met oxidation and up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages were included. The theoretical glycopeptide masses were converted to m/z values using the likely charge states (Z = +2 to +5). This served as a guide to match glycopeptide precursor ions to site-specific glycoforms of basigin. For the IT data analysis, glycopeptide-containing CID-MS/MS spectra were identified by the presence of characteristic Hex-HexNAc oxonium ions at m/z 366.1. The site-specific N-glycosylation of basigin was manually determined using 3 features: 1) by ensuring an accurate match (< 0.5 Da) between the observed monoisotopic glycopeptide precursor masses to the monoisotopic theoretical masses, 2) by assigning the corresponding CID-MS/MS spectra to the proposed basigin glycoform to ensure the presence of relevant saccharide oxonium ions and the B/C- and Y/Z-ion series and 3) by ensuring that all glycosylated forms of the basigin glycopeptide clusters eluted within a narrow retention time window (~1-2 min). For each site, the presence of the corresponding non-glycosylated and deamidated peptide was also investigated. The EIC peak areas of all glycopeptides and non-glycosylated/deamidated peptides in all of their observed charged states were obtained to determine the site-specific glycoform distribution and site occupancy. The relative abundances of the individual basigin glycoforms were calculated as a mean ± standard deviation (SD) (n = 3) to determine the site-specific N-glycoprofiles. The site occupancies were calculated from the relative ion intensities. For the QE Orbitrap analysis, the raw data files were converted to mgf using ProteomeDiscoverer v1.4 and the glycopeptide-containing HCD-MS/MS spectra were extracted using an in-house filtering tool isolating specifically oxonium ion-containing fragment spectra (m/z 204.08). These spectra were  viewed using Xcalibur v2.2 and manually interrogated based on the same criteria as for the IT CID-MS/MS, but at higher mass accuracies: specifically, the manual identifications were based on 1) ensuring an accurate match (<10 ppm) between the observed glycopeptide precursor monoisotopic masses to the theoretical monoisotopic values and the correct charge state, 2) by assigning the corresponding HCD-MS/MS spectra to the proposed basigin glycoform to ensure the presence of relevant saccharide oxonium ions (e.g. Hex-HexNAc (m/z 366.140)), the presence of Y1 (and Y1+Fuc for fucose-containing glycoforms) and the b/y-ion series, and finally 3) by ensuring uniform retention times of the related glycopeptides (clusters of ~1-2 min). The site-specific glycoform distribution and site occupancies were determined from the EIC areas as described above. The manual annotations of the IT and QE Orbitrap LC-MS/MS data were averaged to form a combined reference profiles of the basigin N-glycosyation sites that were used for comparisons to the automated glycoprofiling using Byonic.  Software-assisted data analysis of basigin N-glycopeptides: Raw data files from the QE Orbitrap analyses were used directly without any further processing for automated glycopeptide identification using ByonicTM v2.6 (Protein Metrics Inc.). The target proteome and N-glycome were search parameters defining the total search space: “Narrow” approaches involved the specific search against the 4 known basigin isoforms (UniProtKB: BASI_HUMAN, P35613-1 to P35613-4) and the 43 monosaccharide compositions comprising the 35 identified basigin N-glycans and 8 paucimannosidic and chitobiose core structures. “Broad” approaches involved searches against the entire human proteome (Homo sapiens, 20,198 reviewed entries in UniProtKB, release September 2015) and against the common mammalian N-glycome (309 monosaccharide compositions).

### Publication Abstract
Advances in software-driven glycopeptide identification have facilitated N-glycoproteomics studies reporting thousands of intact N-glycopeptides, i.e., N-glycan-conjugated peptides, but the automated identification process remains to be scrutinized. Herein, we compare the site-specific glycoprofiling efficiency of the PTM-centric search engine Byonic relative to manual expert annotation utilizing typical glycoproteomics acquisition and data analysis strategies but with a single glycoprotein, the uncharacterized multiple N-glycosylated human basigin. Detailed site-specific reference glycoprofiles of purified basigin were manually established using ion-trap CID-MS/MS and high-resolution Q-Exactive Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS of tryptic N-glycopeptides and released N-glycans. The micro- and macroheterogeneous basigin N-glycosylation was site-specifically glycoprofiled using Byonic with or without a background of complex peptides using Q-Exactive Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS. The automated glycoprofiling efficiencies were assessed against the site-specific reference glycoprofiles and target/decoy proteome databases. Within the limits of this single glycoprotein analysis, the search criteria and confidence thresholds (Byonic scores) recommended by the vendor provided high glycoprofiling accuracy and coverage (both &gt;80%) and low peptide FDRs (&lt;1%). The data complexity, search parameters including search space (proteome/glycome size), mass tolerance and peptide modifications, and confidence thresholds affected the automated glycoprofiling efficiency and analysis time. Correct identification of ambiguous peptide modifications (methionine oxidation/carbamidomethylation) whose mass differences coincide with several monosaccharide mass differences (Fuc/Hex/HexNAc) and of ambiguous isobaric (Hex<sub>1</sub>NeuAc<sub>1</sub>-R/Fuc<sub>1</sub>NeuGc<sub>1</sub>-R) or near-isobaric (NeuAc<sub>1</sub>-R/Fuc<sub>2</sub>-R) monosaccharide subcompositions remains challenging in automated glycoprofiling, arguing particular attention paid to N-glycopeptides displaying such "difficult-to-identify" features. This study provides valuable insights into the automated glycopeptide identification process, stimulating further developments in FDR-based glycoproteomics.

### Keywords
Basigin, Glycoproteomics, Glycopeptide, Lc-ms/ms, Byonic, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Ling Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Andersen
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia


