### Accession
PXD019077

### Title
Proteomic profile of nucleoid-associated proteins isolated from Mycoplasma gallisepticum in different growth phases

### Description
Mycoplasma gallisepticum (MG) is one of the smallest free-living and self-replicating organisms, it is characterized by lack of cell wall and reduced genome size. As a result of genome reduction, MG has a limited variety of DNA-binding proteins (DBP) and transcription factors. To investigate the dynamic changes of the proteomic profile of MG nucleoid, that may assist in revealing its mechanisms of functioning, regulation of chromosome organization and stress adaptation, a quantitative proteomic study was performed on MG nucleoids obtained from the cell culture in logarithmic and stationary phases of synchronous growth. MG cells were grown in a liquid medium with a 9h starvation period. Nucleoids were obtained from the cell culture at the 26th and the 50th hour (logarithmic and stationary phases respectively) by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, controlled by XCalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For comprehensive peptide library generation one sample from each biological replicate was run in DDA mode. Then, all the sample were run in a single LC-MS DIA run. Identification of DDA files and DIA quantitation was performed with MaxQuant and Skyline software.

### Sample Protocol
Mycoplasma gallisepticum S6 cells were subjected to starvation for 9h in liquid medium containing tryptose 20 g/l, Tris 3 g/l, NaCl 5 g/l, KCl 5 g/l in aerobic conditions at pH 7.4 and 37°C, after that 10% yeast extract, 20% horse serum and 1% glucose were added. The culture was grown further at 37°C. The cells from 30 or 20 ml of culture in logarithmic (26h) or stationary (50h) growth phase respectively were harvested and washed twice by addition of cold washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl and 3mM MgCl2) and centrifugation at 10000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Then the pellets were redispersed in 0.5 ml of Solution A (10% sucrose, 10mM Tris-HCl pH8.2, 100mM NaCl, 20% sucrose and protease inhibitor cocktail). Then, 0.5 ml of Solution B (10mM Tris-HCl, pH8.2, 100mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 10mM spermidine and 2% NP-40) was added. After incubation for 10 min, cell lysate was loaded onto a sucrose gradient (10 ml total gradient volume in 15-ml plastic tubes, using gradients with a linear increase from 20 to 60% sucrose in Solution A). The samples were then centrifuged for 90 min at 10000 g at 5°C. A white nucleoid-containing clots were adhered to the tubes walls near the middle of the gradients and were removed from the tubes as the “isolated nucleoids”. Nucleoids were then washed by addition of 1 ml of washing buffer and mixed gently on rotating tube mixer at 4°C for 20 minutes. Nucleoids were then centrifuged for 10 minutes at 15000 g, 4°C and the supernatant was discarded.  Sample preparation for proteomic analysis was performed as follows: Samples were lysed in a lysis buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (DCNa), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor by ultrasonication with a Branson 1510 sonicator at 4oC within 1 min. Protein concentration was estimated using BCA Assay. Aliquots containing 100 mg of protein material were diluted to 1 mg/ml with the lysis buffer and Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and chloroacetamide were added to the final concentrations of 10 and 30 mM, respectively. Cys reduction and alkylation was achieved by 10 min heating of the sample at 80oC. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 4x volume of acetone and incubation at -20oC overnight. Protein pellet was washed twice with acetone. Then the pellet was dried and resuspended in 50 ml of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 with 0.1% DCNa in a sonication bath. Trypsin was added at a ratio 1:100 w/w to protein amount and incubated at 37oC overnight. Then the second trypsin portion 1:100 w/w was added, and the sample was incubated for 4 h at 37oC. Proteolysis was stopped by addition trifluoroacetic acid to 1%. Precipitated DCNa was removed by centrifugation. LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, controlled by XCalibur software version 4.3.73.11 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Each sample was injected together with a home-made iRT peptide mixture [doi: 10.1002/pmic.201100463]. Samples were loaded to a 20*0.1 mm PepMap C18 5 um trap column (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 ul/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed 300*0.1 mm fused-silica pulled emitter column packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) [PMID: 30373789]. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (solvent A) from 8 to 50% of solvent B in 30 min at 0.5 ul/min flow.  In total for each sample type 5 biological replicates with from 2 to 3 technical sample preparation replicates were analyzed. MS data was collected in DDA mode for spectra library generation and in DIA mode for peptide and protein quantitation.  For comprehensive peptide library generation one sample from each biological replicate was run in DDA mode. The samples were run with 3 slightly different DDA methods for better total peptide identification coverage. MS1 parameters were as follows: 120K resolution, 350-1010 scan range, Standard AGC target and Auto Maximum Injection time. Ions were isolated with 1.6 m/z window targeting the highest intensity peaks of +2 to +7 charge, 5x104 Intensity Threshold. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 7,5K resolution with 30% NCE. Mass range was set to Normal, Scan range to Auto, AGC target to Standard. Max injection time was set to 18 ms. Total cycle time was set to 2 s. The second DDA method used 10 ms dynamic exclusion and the third method used 20 s dynamic exclusion but 15K MS2 resolution and 22 ms Max injection time. All the sample were run in a single LC-MS DIA run. DIA parent ion mass range was from 350 to 1010 m/z/ divided into 48 windows 14 Da wide. MS2 resolution was set 7.5K and Maximum injection time was set to 18 ms. The rest of the parameters were set to default values.

### Data Protocol
Identification of DDA files was performed with MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 Software with default settings against M. gallisepticum S6 Uniprot reference database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000018735). Resulting list of peptides was used to create spectral library in Skyline Software.  Further analysis of DIA files was performed in Skyline software using default DIA protocol. Retention times were aligned using built-in iRT calculator and DDA files from previous part. Same M. gallisepticum S6 Uniprot database was used to create the transition list. Quantitative analysis was also performed using the default quantification protocol. The resulting quantification data was normalized by equalizing the run medians.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycoplasma gallisepticum</i> (MG) is one of the smallest free-living and self-replicating organisms, it is characterized by lack of cell wall and reduced genome size. As a result of genome reduction, MG has a limited variety of DNA-binding proteins and transcription factors. To investigate the dynamic changes of the proteomic profile of MG nucleoid, that may assist in revealing its mechanisms of functioning, regulation of chromosome organization and stress adaptation, a quantitative proteomic study was performed on MG nucleoids obtained from the cell culture in logarithmic and stationary phases of synchronous growth. MG cells were grown on a liquid medium with a 9&#x202f;h starvation period. Nucleoids were obtained from the cell culture at the 26<sup>th</sup> and the 50<sup>th</sup> hour (logarithmic and stationary growth phases respectively) by sucrose density gradient centrifugation. LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, controlled by XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For comprehensive peptide library generation one sample from each biological replicate was run in DDA mode. Then, all the samples were run in a single LC-MS DIA run. Identification of DDA files and DIA quantitation was performed with MaxQuant and Skyline software, correspondingly. All raw data generated from IDA and DDA acquisitions are presented in the PRIDE database with identifier PXD019077.

### Keywords
Nucleoid, Synchronous growth, Nucleoid associated proteins, Dia, Mycoplasma gallisepticum

### Affiliations
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Aleksandr Zubov

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia


