### Accession
PXD027148

### Title
Impacts of Ser/Thr protein kinase Stk1 on proteome, twitching motility and competitive advantage in Pseudomonas aeruginosaImpacts of Ser/Thr protein kinase Stk1 on proteome, twitching motility and competitive advantage in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous Gram-negative bacterium in the environment and a leading cause of nosocomial infections worldwide. Therefore, it is listed by the World Health Organization as one of the human pathogens that urgently need to develop new antibacterial drugs. Recent findings have demonstrated that eukaryote-type Ser/Thr protein kinases play a vital role in regulating various bacterial physiological processes by catalyzing protein phosphorylation. Stk1 has been proved to be a Ser/Thr protein kinase in P. aeruginosa. However, the regulatory roles of Stk1 have not yet been revealed. Thus, we constructed the stk1 knockout mutant (∆stk1) from the P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain and employed a TMT labeling-based quantitative proteomic strategy to characterize proteome-wide changes in response to stk1 knockout. In total, 620 differentially expressed proteins, among which 288 proteins were upregulated and 332 proteins were downregulated, were identified in the ∆stk1 compared with the P. aeruginosa PAO1. Detailed bioinformatics analysis of these differentially expressed proteins were performed, including GO annotation, protein domain profile, the KEGG pathway, subcellular localization as well as enrichment analysis. Notably, downregulation of type Ⅳ pilus-related proteins and upregulation of T6SS-H1-related proteins were found in ∆stk1 strain, and the results were corroborated by quantitative PCR at the mRNA level. Further experiments confirmed that the loss of stk1 weakens the bacterial twitching motility and promotes a growth competition advantage, which is mediated by type Ⅳ pilus related proteins and T6SS-H1 related proteins, respectively. These findings contribute to a better understand the physiological role of Stk1, and the proteomic data will help further investigations of the roles and mechanisms of Stk1 in P. aeruginosa, though the detailed regulation and mechanism of Stk1 need to be further revealed.

### Sample Protocol
The TMT labeling peptide samples were measured by nano LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate RSLCnano 3000 nano-UPLC system (Dionex, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). Briefly, the dried peptides were resuspended in 5 µl of buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% FA in water). After centrifuging at 20,000 g for 4 min, the supernatant was loaded onto an XBridge Shield C18 RP column (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length) (Waters, USA) for the HPLC separations. Gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was employed with a 34 min gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA in water), followed by 2 min of 35% buffer B, then 2 min from 35% to 80% buffer B, and finally maintained at 80% buffer B for 4 min.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant, with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and as many as four missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide and five charges were allowed. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stk1, Competitive advantage, Proteome, Twitching motility, Ser/thr protein kinase, Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

### Affiliations
Micrometer Biotech
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Jianyi Pan
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University


