### Accession
PXD007647

### Title
Global protein expression profiles of laboratory isolated mutants of E. coli K12, MG1655

### Description
Resistance to the antibiotic mecillinam in Escherichia coli can be conferred by mutations in over 100 genes. In this study we compared the global protein expression levels in a number of mecillinam resistant mutants originating from E. coli MG1655 to the levels in the parental strain.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots containing 50 or 100 μg of each sample were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method ((Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62)). Briefly, protein samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred on 10 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, USA), wahed with 8M urea solution and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in 50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 1% sodium deoxycholate at 37°C in two stages: the samples were incubated with 500 or 1000 ng (trypsin:protein ratio 1:100) of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific) for 3h, then 500 or 1000 ng more of trypsin was added and the digestion was performed overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation, labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The labeled samples were mixed, sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The combined labeled sample was fractionated using either strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) or basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC). SCX was performed on the AKTA chromatography system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Sweden) using PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (100x2.1mm, 5µm 300Å, PolyLC Inc., Columbia, USA) at 0.25 ml/min and a gradient from 0 to 20% B in 20 min, to 40% B in 10 min and to 100% B in 10 min; solvent A was 25 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8 and solvent B was 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8.  Eighteen peptide-containing fractions were desalted using PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, the purified eluates were dried on Speedvac, the dried fractions were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for analysis. The bRP-LC was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using the Waters XBridge BEH C18 column (3.0x150 mm, 3.5µm, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) and the gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min, from 40% to 100% B over 5 min, 100% B for 5 min, all at the flowrate of 0.4 ml/min; solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate in water at pH 10.00, solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate in water at pH 10.00. The initial 20 fraction were combined into 8 pooled fractions in the order 5+13, 6+14, 7+15 etc. The pooled fractions were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 or version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The SCX data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using the Swissprot database (November 2014) with Escherichia coli taxonomy filter. Mascot 2.3.2 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.2 Da. No missed cleavages were accepted, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. The target-decoy approach was used for the filtering of the identifications, with the target false discovery rate of 1% as a threshold to filter confident peptide IDs. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS2 spectra at 0.02 Da mass tolerance. The resulting ratios were normalized in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 on the median protein value of 1.0 in each sample. The bRP-LC data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using Swissprot database for Escherichia coli K12 (May 2016), supplemented with the mutant sequences and common proteomic contaminants. Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. One missed cleavage was accepted, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results, target false discovery rate of 1% was used as a threshold to filter confident peptide identifications. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra at 0.003 Da mass tolerance. The resulting ratios were normalized in the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 on the median protein value of 1.0 in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Mecillinam (amdinocillin) is a &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotic that inhibits the essential penicillin-binding protein 2 (PBP2). In clinical isolates of <i>Escherichia coli</i> from urinary tract infections, inactivation of the <i>cysB</i> gene (which encodes the main regulator of cysteine biosynthesis, CysB) is the major cause of resistance. How a nonfunctional CysB protein confers resistance is unknown, however, and in this study we wanted to examine the mechanism of resistance. Results show that <i>cysB</i> mutations cause a gene regulatory response that changes the expression of &#x223c;450 genes. Among the proteins that show increased levels are the PBP1B, LpoB, and FtsZ proteins, which are known to be involved in peptidoglycan biosynthesis. Artificial overexpression of either PBP1B or LpoB in a wild-type <i>E. coli</i> strain conferred mecillinam resistance; conversely, inactivation of either the <i>mrcB</i> gene (which encodes PBP1B) or the <i>lpoB</i> gene (which encodes the PBP1B activator LpoB) made <i>cysB</i> mutants susceptible. These results show that expression of the proteins PBP1B and LpoB is both necessary and sufficient to confer mecillinam resistance. The addition of reducing agents to a <i>cysB</i> mutant converted it to full susceptibility, with associated downregulation of PBP1B, LpoB, and FtsZ. We propose a model in which <i>cysB</i> mutants confer mecillinam resistance by inducing a response that causes upregulation of the PBP1B and LpoB proteins. The higher levels of these two proteins can then rescue cells with mecillinam-inhibited PBP2. Our results also show how resistance can be modulated by external conditions such as reducing agents.

### Keywords
Q exactive, Microbiology, Escherichia coli, Tandem mass tag, Antibiotic resistance, Tmt, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Box 582, 75123, Uppsala, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Dan I Andersson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Box 582, 75123, Uppsala, Sweden


