### Accession
PXD013322

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Broccoli Nuclei

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from individual fractions of ion exchange or size exclusion fractionations of native nuclear extract made from broccoli florets (Brassica oleracea var. italica).  Ion exchange chromatography was on a concatenated WAX-WAX-CAT column series.

### Sample Protocol
Buffers and methods are generally according to the CelLytic PN nuclear isolation kit.  Tender florets were shaved from fresh grocery store broccoli and ground on ice in buffer followed by brief treatment with a BioSpec Tissue Tearor to disrupt cells.  After crude filtration the extract was brought to 1% TX-100 to lyse chloroplasts.  Nuclei were isolated by manufacturer's methods for "semipure" nuclei and extracted twice with Nuclear Extraction Buffer from the kit.  For size exclusion chromatography (BioSep SEC s4000, Phenomenex) 1.3 mg of clarified filtered nuclear extract was loaded.  For Ion Exchange chromatography the extract was first diluted 6-fold and reconcentrated using Vivaspin Turbo 4 3k MWCO ultrafiltration before loading 0.95 mg for fractionation on a PolyWAX LP-PolyWAX LP-PolyCAT A column series (PolyLC Inc.).  Fractions were prepped for mass spec by buffer exchange in an AcroPrep Advance 96 filter plate, Omega 3k MWCO (Pall) followed by reduction/alkylation, and overnight digestion with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using Lab-in-a-plate C18 (Glygen Corp.) and LC-MS/MS data collected using an Orbirap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer and a 75 min topspeed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enale inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brassica oleracea var. italica, Size exclusion, Broccoli, Ion exchange, Nuclei, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


