### Accession
PXD020248

### Title
Comparison of LFQ and TMT-based quantitative proteomics towards toxicology research

### Description
Here, we aimed to compare two of the most commonly used global proteomics strategies, label-free quantification (LFQ) and tandem mass tag-based quantification (TMT) to identify the most suitable tool for toxicology research questions on the systemic level. Using a biological case study of HepG2 exposure to benzo[a]pyrene (BaP), we uncovered the advantages and limitations of the two strategies from the view of proteome coverage, fold changes, significant numbers of proteins, and pathway alterations.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with 9 M urea/20mM HEPES/2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate/1 mM β–glycerol-phosphate. 25 µg protein was used for SP3-aided sample preparation (Hughes et al. 2019). TMT labelling (TMT 6-plex) was done according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For both, TMT- and LFQ-based quantification approaches, two fractions were collected for further mass spectrometry analysis. The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the SwissProt human reference database (20352 entries) (Dec 29, 2019) and a contaminant protein lists (246 entries, included in MaxQuant) using MaxQuant (v1.6.2.10). The default settings were applied. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. Match between run (MBR) was only used for LFQ data.

### Publication Abstract
The application of quantitative proteomics provides a new and promising tool for standardized toxicological research. However, choosing a suitable quantitative method still puzzles many researchers because the optimal method needs to be determined. In this study, we investigated the advantages and limitations of two of the most commonly used global quantitative proteomics methods, namely label-free quantitation (LFQ) and tandem mass tags (TMT). As a case study, we exposed hepatocytes (HepG2) to the environmental contaminant benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) using a concentration of 2 &#x3bc;M. Our results revealed that both methods yield a similar proteome coverage, in which for LFQ a wider range of fold changes was observed but with less significant p-values compared to TMT. We detected 37 and 47 significantly enriched pathways by LFQ and TMT, respectively, with 17 overlapping pathways. To define the minimally required effort in proteomics as a benchmark, we artificially reduced the LFQ, and TMT data sets stepwise and compared the pathway enrichment. Thereby, we found that fewer proteins are necessary for detecting significant enrichment of pathways in TMT compared to LFQ, which might be explained by the higher reproducibility of the TMT data that was observed. In summary, we showed that the TMT approach is the preferable one when investigating toxicological questions because it offers a high reproducibility and sufficient proteome coverage in a comparably short time.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag (tmt), Hepg2, Benzo[a]pyrene, Toxicoproteomics, Label free-quantification (lfq)

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research 
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH – UFZ, 04318 Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Zhipeng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH – UFZ, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


