### Accession
PXD001656

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of Burkholderia pseudomallei Bsa Type III secretion system effectors using hyper-secreting mutants

### Description
Burkholderia pseudomallei is an intracellular pathogen and the causative agent of melioidosis, a severe disease of humans and animals. One of the virulence factors critical for early stages of infection is the Burkholderia secretion apparatus (Bsa) Type 3 Secretion System (T3SS), a molecular syringe that injects bacterial proteins, called effectors, into eukaryotic cells where they subvert cellular functions to the benefit of the bacteria. While the Bsa T3SS itself is known to be important for invasion, intracellular replication, and virulence, only a few genuine effector proteins have been identified and the complete repertoire of proteins secreted by the system has not yet been fully characterised. We constructed a mutant lacking bsaP, a homologue of the T3SS gatekeeper family of proteins that exert control over the timing and magnitude of effector protein secretion. Mutants lacking BsaP, or the T3SS translocon protein BipD, were observed to hyper-secrete the known Bsa effector protein BopE, providing evidence of their role in post-translational control of the Bsa T3SS and representing key reagents for the identification of its secreted substrates. Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantification (iTRAQ), a gel-free quantitative proteomics technique, was used to compare the secreted protein profiles of the Bsa T3SS hyper-secreting mutants of B. pseudomallei with the isogenic parent strain and a bsaZ mutant incapable of effector protein secretion. Our study provides one of the most comprehensive core secretomes of B. pseudomallei described to date and identified 26 putative Bsa-dependent secreted proteins that may be considered candidate effectors. Two of these proteins, BprD and BapA, were validated as novel effector proteins secreted by the Bsa T3SS of B. pseudomallei.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ experimental design Bacterial culture supernatants of B. pseudomallei 10276 WT, 10276 bsaZ::pDM4, 10276 bipD::pDM4, and 10276 bsaP were generated in three independent experiments. Equal amounts of protein from each replicate were combined creating a single pooled sample for each strain. These samples were enzymatically digested, peptides were labelled using iTRAQ reagents, and then pooled and submitted to LC MS/MS in three technical replicates as follows:  (i) Protein Digestion and Peptide Fractionation  Following protein quantification, samples were reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated in 50 mM Iodoacetamide prior to heating in Laemmli buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4-12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight at 37oC. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by formic acid (1%) and acetonitile, lyophilized in a speedvac and resuspended in 1% formic acid. (ii)   Peptide concentration To determine the concentration of the peptides, the dried samples were re-suspended in 100mM TEAB 1M ACN. To determine the volume of sample needed for an even protein load across all samples, 1l was injected onto an LTQ Velos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and the TIC trace was used.  (iii) iTRAQ labelling Samples were labelled according to the manufacturers instructions using an iTRAQ Reagents Multiplex kit - 4 plex (AB Sciex UK Ltd., Warrington, UK). To each vial of labelling reagent (labels- 114, 115, 116 & 117), 70l ethanol was added, after which they were vortexed and centrifuged. A single vial of label was added to a single vial of sample and mixed. The samples used with each label were: 10276 bsaZ::pDM4-114, 10276 WT-115, 10276 bipD::pDM4-116, and 10276 bsaP-117. Samples were incubated with shaking at room temperature for 1 hour, after which 100l of water was added and incubated for a further hour. The 4 vials of labels/samples were pooled into one vial and then dried under vacuum. Samples were desalted using a standard method.  (iv) SCX fractionation - salt cuts To a Millipore (Watford, UK) C18 ziptip, 10l Poros HS resin (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) was added and washed with 3 x 25l Buffer A (35% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA)). Samples were re-suspended in Buffer A and loaded onto the resin, washed with 3 x 25l Buffer A, and eluted with 2 x 25l of each of 11 salt cuts ranging from 5mM to 800mM NaCl. A final elution was performed using 2 x 25l 50% isopropanol, 0.4% ammonium hydroxide. Samples were centrifuged and speed vacuumed until dry. Samples were re-suspended in 1% FA and pooled as six samples containing the salt cuts as follows: JS-1 (5mM, 10mM, 20mM), JS-2 (50mM), JS-3 (100mM), JS-4 (150mM), JS-5 (200mM), JS-6 (250mM, 300mM, 400mM, 800mM).  Mass spectrometry Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoflow LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). With a constant flow of 5l/min, 15l of sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 m inner-diameter, 2cm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18 column (75 m, 15 cm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with a linear gradient of 245% solvent B (80% ACN with 0.08% FA) over 125 min with a constant flow of 300nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The spray voltage was set to 1.2kV and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250C. Full-scan MS survey spectra (m/z 3351800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented sequentially by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (two-step (6%) normalised collision energy (NCE), 40%; and activation time, 0.1 ms) prior to analysis in the Orbitrap after accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 500 ms for the full scans and 200 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each experiment were collated into a single dataset using Proteome Discoverer version 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and the Mascot search engine version 2.4 (www.matrixscience.com) using a translated B. pseudomallei K96243 genome as a reference for protein identification. Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other parameters used were: (i) variable modifications, methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, gln  pyro-glu; (ii) fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (iii) database: B_pseudomallei_ K96243_20120601 (compiled 01/06/2012, containing 5728 proteins); (iv) iTRAQ labels: standard iTRAQ 4-plex quant method with labels 114-117; (v) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10ppm, FTMS/MS- 0.06Da; (vi) minimum peptide length, 6; (vii) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (viii) false discovery rate, 1%. Peptide ratios were calculated for samples using the 10276 bsaZ::pDM4-114 label as the denominator. Protein ratios were normalised using the overall median ratio for all quantified proteins in each sample based on the assumption that the abundance of the majority of secreted proteins was identical in each condition. Proteins were selected as potential T3SS effector protein candidates if they had at least 2 unique peptides used in quantification with a MASCOT peptide score 21 (which corresponds to the threshold value for a 95% confidence level, a 1 in 20 chance that the match is random), and a high iTRAQ ratio in at least one strain, which we defined as a value greater than 1.5 X IQR. IQR is defined as Q_3=(3(n+1)/4)^th term-Q_1=(((n+1))/4)^th term; where n= complete set of ratios over 10276 bsaZ::pDM4 for all quantified proteins in a given sample.

### Publication Abstract
Burkholderia pseudomallei is an intracellular pathogen and the causative agent of melioidosis, a severe disease of humans and animals. One of the virulence factors critical for early stages of infection is the Burkholderia secretion apparatus (Bsa) Type 3 Secretion System (T3SS), a molecular syringe that injects bacterial proteins, called effectors, into eukaryotic cells where they subvert cellular functions to the benefit of the bacteria. Although the Bsa T3SS itself is known to be important for invasion, intracellular replication, and virulence, only a few genuine effector proteins have been identified and the complete repertoire of proteins secreted by the system has not yet been fully characterized. We constructed a mutant lacking bsaP, a homolog of the T3SS "gatekeeper" family of proteins that exert control over the timing and magnitude of effector protein secretion. Mutants lacking BsaP, or the T3SS translocon protein BipD, were observed to hypersecrete the known Bsa effector protein BopE, providing evidence of their role in post-translational control of the Bsa T3SS and representing key reagents for the identification of its secreted substrates. Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantification (iTRAQ), a gel-free quantitative proteomics technique, was used to compare the secreted protein profiles of the Bsa T3SS hypersecreting mutants of B. pseudomallei with the isogenic parent strain and a bsaZ mutant incapable of effector protein secretion. Our study provides one of the most comprehensive core secretomes of B. pseudomallei described to date and identified 26 putative Bsa-dependent secreted proteins that may be considered candidate effectors. Two of these proteins, BprD and BapA, were validated as novel effector proteins secreted by the Bsa T3SS of B. pseudomallei.

### Keywords
Melioidosis, Type iii secretion system, T3ss, Burkholderia pseudomallei, Itraq, Effector

### Affiliations
Division of Infection and Immunity, Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, UK
Roslin Institute

### Submitter
Charles Vander Broek

### Lab Head
Dr Jo M. Stevens
Division of Infection and Immunity, Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, UK


