### Accession
PXD019953

### Title
(p)ppGpp controls stringent factors by exploiting antagonistic allosteric coupling between catalytic domains

### Description
Escherichia coli RelA is a ribosomal factor with strong (p)ppGpp synthesis activity that is dramatically activated in the presence of deacylated tRNA in the ribosomal A-site. RelA is a unique enzyme in that it is directly positively regulated by its product, alarmone nucleotide (p)ppGpp. Using HDX-MS, mulecular docking, biochemsitry, and microbiology approaches, we localise the (p)ppGpp binding site of E. coli RelA and uncover the molecular mechanism of RelA regulation by the alarmone.

### Sample Protocol
Experiment: 22 µM E. coli RelANTD in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 0.3 M KCl, 5 mM MgCl and 0.5 mM BME was used either in its apo form or supplemented with i) 200 µM GDP+APCPP, ii) 200 µM GDP+APCPP followed by the addition of 150 µM pppGpp, iii) 300 µM ppGpp alone and i) 200 µM pppGpp alone. Two experimental replicates were run for each condition. The HDX-MS analysis was performed using automated sample preparation on a LEAP H/D-X PAL™ platform interfaced to an LC-MS analysis system, comprising an Ultimate 3000 micro-LC coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus MS. 5 µL samples were diluted either with 25 µl pure 25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 0.3M KCl, 5 mM MgCl and 0.5 mM BME or HDX labelling buffer of the same composition prepared in D2O pH 7.1 The HDX reactions were carried out for t = 0, 30, 300, 3,000 and 9,000 seconds at 20 °C. The labelling was quenched by addition of 1% TFA, 0.2M TCEP, 4 M urea, pH 2.5 at 1 °C and 50 µl of quenched sample was directly injected and subjected to online pepsin digestion at 4 °C (Life Technogies, pepsin column, 2.1 x 30 mm). The online digestion and trapping was performed for three minutes using a flow of 50 µl/min 0.1 % formic acid, pH 2.5. The peptides generated by pepsin digestion were subjected to on-line SPE on a PepMap300 C18 trap column (1 mm x 15 mm) and washed with 0.1% FA for 60 seconds. Thereafter, the trap column was switched in-line with a reversed-phase analytical column, Hypersil GOLD, particle size 1.9 µm, 1 x 50 mm, and separation was performed at 1 °C using a gradient of 5-40% B over 13 minutes, the mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% acetonitrile / 10% water / 0.1% formic acid (B). Following the separation, the trap and column were washed using a saw tooth gradient of 5-90% B, 1 min followed by 1 min of equilibration at the highest and lowest organic content. The needle port and sample loop were cleaned between injections with mobile phase B followed by mobile phase A. Between each sample injection the Pepsin column washed by injecting 90 µl of wash solution 1% FA /4 M urea / 5% MeOH. In order to minimize carry-over a full blank was run between each sample injection. Separated peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive Plus MS, equipped with a HESI source operated at a capillary temperature of 250 °C. For undeuterated samples (t = 0 seconds) data dependent MS/MS HCD spectra of resulting peptides were acquired. For HDX analysis (labelled samples) MS full scan spectra at a resolution setting of 70K were collected. The deposited HDX data-set constitutes 289 peptides (98.4% sequence coverage), with an average length of 11.6, std. dev 5.6 and average redundancy of 8.8 AA, in depth information can be found in the attached csv files.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio 8.5 Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (BSI, Waterloo, Canada) was used for peptide identification after pepsin digestion of undeuterated samples (i.e. 0 seconds timepoint). The search was done on a FASTA file with only ReIA, Search criteria was a mass error tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. Peptides identified by PEAKS with a peptide score value of log P > 25 and no modifications were used to generate a peptide lists for the HDX analysis. HDX data analysis and visualization was performed using HDExaminer, version 2.5 (Sierra Analytics). The spectra for all timepoints were manually inspected; low scoring peptides, outliers and peptides were retention time correction could not be made consistent were removed. Due to the comparative nature of the measurements, the deuterium incorporation levels for the peptic peptides were directly derived from the observed mass difference between the deuterated and non-deuterated peptides without back-exchange correction using a fully deuterated sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Escherichia coli / stringent response / rela / (p)ppgpp

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology Umeå University SE-901 87 Umeå Sweden
BioMS - Swedish National Infrastructure for Biological Mass Spectrometry, Lund University, BMC D1330, 221 84 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Simon Ekström

### Lab Head
Dr Vasili Hauryliuk
Department of Molecular Biology Umeå University SE-901 87 Umeå Sweden


