### Accession
PXD001090

### Title
Interactors associated to Sas3-dependent NuA3 histone acetyltransferase complex

### Description
The aim of the study is to improve the knowledge on the functionality and dynamic interactions of Sas3 as related to the presence of Gcn5.

### Sample Protocol
Samples 1 and 2 are individual bands, samples 3,4 and 5 correspond to the whole slide (without bands 1 and 2) of gel fractionated into three pieces. Samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko A, Jensen ON, Podtelejnikov AV, Sagliocco F, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mortensen P, Boucherie H, Mann M. Linking genome and proteome by mass spectrometry: large-scale identification of yeast proteins from two dimensional gels. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996; 93:14440-14445). The digestion mixture was dried in a vacuum centrifuge, suspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (samples 1 and 2 in 10 µL; samples 4,5,6 in 10 µL). 5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 75umx15cm ; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 2µl/min during  10 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ  C18-CL, 75umx25cm, Eksigen) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 40% B in 30 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.05-s product ion scans from 100–1500 m/z on the 50 most intense 2-5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS information was sent to MASCOT v 2.3.02 or to PARAGON via the Protein Pilot v 4.5 (ABSciex). Samples 3,4 and 5 were searched combined for customer convenience.  The MGF was generated by Protein Pilot (ABsciex) v 4.5. Database search was performed by MASCOT (Matrix Science) v2.4.1 on Swiss-Prot. Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing one missed cleavage and a tolerance on the mass measurement of 50 ppm in MS mode and 0.6 Da for MS/MS ions. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn and Gln as variable modifications. The taxonomy was fixed to Saccharomyces Cerevisiae.

### Publication Abstract
Histone acetylation affects several aspects of gene regulation, from chromatin remodelling to gene expression, by modulating the interplay between chromatin and key transcriptional regulators. The exact molecular mechanism underlying acetylation patterns and crosstalk with other epigenetic modifications requires further investigation. In budding yeast, these epigenetic markers are produced partly by histone acetyltransferase enzymes, which act as multi-protein complexes. The Sas3-dependent NuA3 complex has received less attention than other histone acetyltransferases (HAT), such as Gcn5-dependent complexes. Here, we report our analysis of Sas3p-interacting proteins using tandem affinity purification (TAP), coupled with mass spectrometry. This analysis revealed Pdp3p, a recently described component of NuA3, to be one of the most abundant Sas3p-interacting proteins. The PDP3 gene, was TAP-tagged and protein complex purification confirmed that Pdp3p co-purified with the NuA3 protein complex, histones, and several transcription-related and chromatin remodelling proteins. Our results also revealed that the protein complexes associated with Sas3p presented HAT activity even in the absence of Gcn5p and vice versa. We also provide evidence that Sas3p cannot substitute Gcn5p in acetylation of lysine 9 in histone H3 in vivo. Genome-wide occupancy of Sas3p using ChIP-on-chip tiled microarrays showed that Sas3p was located preferentially within the 5'-half of the coding regions of target genes, indicating its probable involvement in the transcriptional elongation process. Hence, this work further characterises the function and regulation of the NuA3 complex by identifying novel post-translational modifications in Pdp3p, additional Pdp3p-co-purifying chromatin regulatory proteins involved in chromatin-modifying complex dynamics and gene regulation, and a subset of genes whose transcriptional elongation is controlled by this complex.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Nanolcmsms, Yeast, Sas3, Histone acetyltransferase

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular  Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Mercè Pamblanco Rodríguez
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular  Universitat de Valencia


