### Accession
PXD039613

### Title
Multi-omics profiling of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy reveals altered mechanisms in mitochondrial dynamics and excitation-contraction coupling

### Description
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the most common inherited cardiomyopathies, and a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young adults. Despite profound insights into the genetics, there is imperfect correlation between mutation and clinical prognosis, suggesting complex molecular cascades driving pathogenesis. To investigate this, we performed an integrated quantitative multi-omics (proteomic, phosphoproteomic, metabolomic) analysis to illuminate the early and direct consequences of mutations in myosin heavy chain in engineered human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes relative to late-stage disease using patient myectomies. We captured hundreds of differential features which map to distinct molecular mechanisms modulating mitochondrial homeostasis at the earliest stages of pathobiology as well as stage-specific metabolic and excitation-coupling maladaptation. Collectively, this study fills in gaps from previous studies by expanding knowledge of the initial responses to mutations that protect cells against the early stress prior to contractile dysfunction and overt disease.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples were placed in lysis buffer. All samples were sonicated on ice (Branson). Protein quantity was assessed by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad), followed by digestion overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade Trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, w/w, ThermoFisher). After adding trifluoroacetic acid to 0.1% v/v, peptide digests were de-salted using a C18 Sep-Pak (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, resuspended in 100mM TEAB, and quantified by Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce) prior to TMT labeling.For each sample, 100 µg of peptide digest (adjusted to 100 µL with 100mM TEAB) was mixed with a unique amine-reactive isotope-coded isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT-14-plex) reagent (ThermoFisher) prior to sample multiplexing and precise quantification by LC/MS. After pooling, labeled peptide was desalted, dried, and suspended in 300 µL buffer containing 0.1% ammonium hydroxide, 2% acetonitrile (ACN). The pooled sample mixture was pre-fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC on a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 3.5μm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm, Waters) using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system Peptides were eluted using a gradient of mobile phase A (0.1% NH4OH -2% ACN) to B (0.1% NH4OH -98% ACN) over 48 min, and collected as 12 pooled fractions. For phosphoproteomics, the bulk (95%) of each sample was subject to phospho-peptide enrichment using FeO2 metal-chelate resin (PureCube Fe-NTA MagBeads, Cube Biotech)[24], while the remaining (5%) portions were analyzed directly by nanoflow LC/MS as bulk proteome measurements (a total of 24 injections, 12 for proteomics and 12 for phosphoproteomics).Isotope-labeled peptides were reconstituted in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) prior to LC/MS analysis on a Thermo-Fisher Exploris 480 hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer interfaced with Thermo-Fisher FAIMS Pro with integrated Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 system. After loading onto a C18 reverse-phase pre-column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, 3μm, 100Å, ThermoScientific), peptides were gradient separated on an EASY-Spray C18 nanocolumn (75μm i.d. × 50 cm, 2μm, 100Å; ES803A, ThermoScientific) using 2-35% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN) over 120 min (proteome) or 180 min (phosphoproteome), and electro-sprayed at ~250 nL/min into the Exploris instrument operated in positive ion mode (capillary temperature 275°C, 2100 V potential). Data-dependent spectra were acquired automatically via high resolution (60,000) precursor ion scan (350-1500 m/z range) to select the 12-most intense peptides for MS/MS fragmentation by high energy dissociation (normalized collision energy of 33 @ 45,000 resolution).

### Data Protocol
The resulting RAW files were searched by MaxQuant (1.6.7.0) using default settings against the human proteome (SwissProt Taxonomy ID: 9606, downloaded September, 2021) allowing for two missed cleavage sites and variable modifications (Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation, N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-labels as a fixed modification. Peptide and protein-level matches were filtered to high confidence (1% FDR), with a minimum phosphosite localization probability of 0.7. TMT quantification involved label correction (lot values provided by ThermoFisher).  Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R (language and environment for Statistical Computing; http://www.R-project.org). Peptide feature intensities were log transformed and quantile normalized. LIMMA R package was used for differential analysis (moderated Student t-tests), and to generate ranked lists for subsequent enrichment analysis using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction[25,115]. Statistical enrichment analysis was performed using fgsea R package[28,68]. Volcano plots were created with the EnhancedVolcano R package [116]. All figures were created with BioRender.com.

### Publication Abstract
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the most common inherited cardiomyopathies and a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young adults. Despite profound insights into the genetics, there is imperfect correlation between mutation and clinical prognosis, suggesting complex molecular cascades driving pathogenesis. To investigate this, we performed an integrated quantitative multi-omics (proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and metabolomic) analysis to illuminate the early and direct consequences of mutations in myosin heavy chain in engineered human induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes relative to late-stage disease using patient myectomies. We captured hundreds of differential features, which map to distinct molecular mechanisms modulating mitochondrial homeostasis at the earliest stages of pathobiology, as well as stage-specific metabolic and excitation-coupling maladaptation. Collectively, this study fills in gaps from previous studies by expanding knowledge of the initial responses to mutations that protect cells against the early stress prior to contractile dysfunction and overt disease.

### Keywords
Hcm, Hipsc-cm, Myectomy

### Affiliations
Center for Network Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Jarrod Moore

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Center for Network Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA


