### Accession
PXD027877

### Title
Combinatorial high throughput drug screening identifies a synergistic drug interaction that sensitizes mesenchymal pancreatic cancer to immune checkpoint blockade

### Description
KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly immunosuppressive and resistant to targeted therapies, immune checkpoint blockade and engineered T cells. Here, we performed a systematic high throughput combinatorial drug screen and identified a synergistic interaction between the MEK inhibitor trametinib and the multi-kinase inhibitor nintedanib. This interaction targets KRAS-directed oncogenic signaling in the aggressive and therapy resistant non-glandular mesenchymal subtype of PDAC, driven by an allelic imbalance, increased gene-dosage and expression of oncogenic KRAS. Mechanistically, the combinatorial treatment induces cell cycle arrest and cell death and initiates an interferon response. Using single cell RNA sequencing and immunophenotyping, we show that the combination therapy reprograms the immunosuppressive microenvironment and primes cytotoxic and memory T cells to infiltrate the tumors, thereby sensitizing mesenchymal PDAC to PD-L1 inhibition. This work opens new avenues to target the therapy refractory mesenchymal PDAC subtype.

### Sample Protocol
Concentrated cell supernatants were reduced and alkylated, digested with Trypsin/ LysC and desalted using in house made SDB-RPS StageTips. Detailed protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) and analysed using Perseus and R. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly immunosuppressive and resistant to targeted and immunotherapies. Among the different PDAC subtypes, basal-like mesenchymal PDAC, which is driven by allelic imbalance, increased gene dosage and subsequent high expression levels of oncogenic KRAS, shows the most aggressive phenotype and strongest therapy resistance. In the present study, we performed a systematic high-throughput combination drug screen and identified a synergistic interaction between the MEK inhibitor trametinib and the multi-kinase inhibitor nintedanib, which targets KRAS-directed oncogenic signaling in mesenchymal PDAC. This combination treatment induces cell-cycle arrest and cell death, and initiates a context-dependent remodeling of the immunosuppressive cancer cell secretome. Using a combination of single-cell RNA-sequencing, CRISPR screens and immunophenotyping, we show that this combination therapy promotes intratumor infiltration of cytotoxic and effector T cells, which sensitizes mesenchymal PDAC to PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibition. Overall, our results open new avenues to target this aggressive and therapy-refractory mesenchymal PDAC subtype.

### Keywords
Immune checkpoint inhibition, Pancreatic cancer, Proteomics, Combination therapy, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics
University of Bonn, Institute of Innate of Innate Immunity, department for systems immunology & proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meißner
University of Bonn, Institute of Innate of Innate Immunity, department for systems immunology & proteomics


