### Accession
PXD018559

### Title
A comprehensive enhancer screen identifies TRAM2 as a key mediator of YAP oncogenesis

### Description
Frequent activation of the co-transcriptional factor YAP is observed in a large number of solid tumors. Activated-YAP associates with enhancer loci via TEAD4-DNA-binding protein, and stimulates cancer aggressiveness. Although thousands of YAP/TEAD4 binding-sites were annotated, their functional importance is unknow. Here, we implemented a genetic approach to uncover functions of YAP/TEAD4-associated enhancers, demonstrated its robustness, and used it to reveal a network of enhancers required for YAP-mediated proliferation. We focused on Enhancer TRAM2, as its target gene TRAM2 showed the strongest expression-correlation with YAP in nearly all tumor types. Interestingly, TRAM2 phenocopied YAP-induced cell proliferation, migration and invasion phenotypes, and correlated with poor patient survival. Mechanistically, we identified FSTL-1 as a major direct client of TRAM2 that is involved in these phenotypes. Thus, TRAM2 is a key novel mediator of YAP-induced oncogenic proliferation and cellular invasiveness.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, cells pellets were lysed in boiling guanidine lysis buffer as described by Jersie-Christensen et al (89). Protein concentrations were determined with a Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako, enzyme/protein ratio 1:100) for 2h at 37°C, after which samples were diluted to 2M GuHCl and digested overnight with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, enzyme:protein = 1:50). Digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 1% final concentration) and peptide samples were desalted on  Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). After elution, aliquots were collected for proteome analysis. All samples were dried using a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid or Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer equipped with an EASY-nNLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. For single-shot proteome analysis, a 3h gradient (Q Exactive) or 4h gradient (Orbitrap Fusion) was employed containing a gradual, non-linear increase from 7% B to 60% B and finishing with a 15-min wash.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data (RAW files) were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific) using using Percolator and standard settings. MS/MS data were searched against the human Swissprot database (20,417 entries, release 2019_02) with Sequest HT. The maximum allowed precursor mass tolerance was 50 ppm and 0.06 Da for fragment ion masses in the case of Q Exactive data and 50 ppm/0.6 Da for Orbitrap Fusion data. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and deamidation (NQ) were used as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enhancer, Gene regulation, Migration, Lc-ms/ms, Yap, Proteome, Breast cancer, Proliferation, Tram2, Invasion

### Affiliations
Head of NKI Proteomics Facility
The Netherlands Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Head of NKI Proteomics Facility


