### Accession
PXD015982

### Title
Alterations in Extracellular Matrix Composition during Aging and Photoaging of the Skin

### Description
Human skin is composed of the cell-rich epidermis, the extracellular matrix (ECM) rich dermis, and the hypodermis. Within the dermis, a dense network of ECM proteins provides structural support to the skin and regulates a wide variety of signaling pathways which govern cell proliferation and other critical processes. Both intrinsic aging, which occurs steadily over time, and extrinsic aging (photoaging), which occurs as a result of external insults such as UV radiation, cause alterations to the dermal ECM. In this study, we utilized both quantitative and global proteomics, alongside single harmonic generation (SHG) and two-photon autofluorescence (TPAF) imaging, to assess changes in dermal composition during intrinsic and extrinsic aging. We find that both intrinsic and extrinsic aging result in significant decreases in structural ECM integrity, evidenced by decreasing collagen abundance and increasing fibril fragmentation, and ECM-supporting proteoglycans. Intrinsic aging also produces changes distinct from those produced by photoaging, including reductions in elastic fiber and crosslinking enzyme abundance. In contrast, photoaging is primarily defined by increases in elastic fiber-associated protein and pro-inflammatory proteases. Changes induced by photoaging are evident even in comparisons of young underarm and forearm skin, indicating that photoexposure experienced by an individual’s mid-20s is sufficient for large-scale proteomic alterations and that molecular-level changes due to photoaging are evident well before clinical indications are present. GO term enrichment revealed that both intrinsic aging and photoaging share common features of chronic inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, fresh frozen samples were milled in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. Approximately 5 mg of each sample was processed by a step-wise extraction resulting in cellular (extracted with 3M NaCl and 0.25% CHAPS), soluble ECM (extracted with 6M Gnd-HCl), and insoluble ECM (extracted using CNBr digest) fractions for each sample. 3mm glass beads were used to mechanically agitate samples in a NextAdvance Bullet Blender prior to all cellular and sECM extraction steps. Protein concentration of each fraction for each sample was carried out by A660 Protein Assay (Pierce™). Proteolytic digestion was carried out according to the FASP protocol with 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters. Global proteomics was carried out (n=3 per group) on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent nanoLC-2D system through a nanoelectrospray LC − MS interface. Peptides were desalted on a trapping column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, dimensions 5x0.3 mm, 5 μm) and washed with 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 5 min, prior to loading onto the analytical column. The analytical column was then switched on-line at 600 nl/min over an in house-made 100 μm i.d. × 150 mm fused silica capillary packed with 3.6 μm Aeris C18 resin (Phenomex; Torrance, CA). After 10 min of sample loading, the flow rate was adjusted to 350 nL/min, and each sample was run on a 120-min linear gradient of 2–40% ACN with 0.1% formic acid to separate the peptides. LC mobile phase solvents consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Buffer B, Optima™ LC/MS, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Each survey scan of m/z 400–2,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS of the twenty most intense precursor ions. Singly charged ions were excluded from CID selection. Normalized collision energies of 35 eV were employed using helium as the collision gas.

### Data Protocol
For global LC-MS/MS, raw files were directly loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the SwissProt database using an in-house Mascot™ server (Version 2.5, Matrix Science). Mass tolerances were +/- 15ppm for MS peaks, and +/- 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. Trypsin specific cleavage was used in searches for cellular and sECM fractions, while CNBr/Trypsin specificity was used for iECM fractions, both allowing for 1 missed cleavage. For all samples, methionine oxidation, proline hydroxylation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were allowed as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Methionine to homoserine and homoserine lactone were included as variable modifications for iECM searches. Label Free Quantification was performed using the Minora Feature detector for precursor peak intensity-based abundance. A pProtein threshold of 1% FDR was used to filter for high confidence identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human skin proteomics lc-msms aging ecm

### Affiliations
Hansen Lab, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, USA
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Kirk  Hansen

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk Hansen
Hansen Lab, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, USA


