### Accession
PXD013656

### Title
Proteomics of Gammarus pulex individual males sampled from the wild

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of Gammarus pulex males for characterizing the potential proteome divergence induced in one site by natural bioavailable mono-metallic contamination (cadmium) compared to a non-contaminated site.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
High-throughput proteomics can be performed on animal sentinels for discovering key molecular biomarkers signing the physiological response and adaptation of organisms. Ecotoxicoproteomics is today amenable by means of proteogenomics to small arthropods such as Gammarids which are well known sentinels of aquatic environments. Here, we analysed two regional Gammarus pulex populations to characterize the potential proteome divergence induced in one site by natural bioavailable mono-metallic contamination (cadmium) compared to a non-contaminated site. Two RNAseq-derived protein sequence databases were established previously on male and female individuals sampled from the reference site. Here, individual proteomes were acquired on 10 male and 10 female paired organisms sampled from each site. Proteins involved in protein lipidation, carbohydrate metabolism, proteolysis, innate immunity, oxidative stress response and lipid transport were found more abundant in animals exposed to cadmium, while hemocyanins were found in lower abundance. The intrapopulation proteome variability of long-term exposed G. pulex was inflated relatively to the non-contaminated population. These results show that, while remaining a challenge for such organisms with not yet sequenced genomes, taking into account intrapopulation variability is important to better define the molecular players induced by toxic stress in a comparative field proteomics approach.

### Keywords
Cadmium, Sentinel, Ecotoxicoproteomics, Variability, Population, Shotgun proteomics, Gammarids, Toxic stress

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


