### Accession
PXD006323

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics on Nicotiana benthamiana plasmodesmal proteome following viral infection

### Description
We analyzed the PD-enriched fraction from Turnip mosaic virus (TuMV)-infected Nicotiana benthmiana (N. benthamiana) by using label-free quantitative proteomics of which 100 and 48 were significantly increased and decreased respectively when compared with mock plants.

### Sample Protocol
N. benthamiana plants were grown in a greenhouse at 23 °C with 16 h of light and 8 h of dark cycle. The newly developed leaves of mock- and TuMV-inoculated N. benthamiana plants were ground in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle and homogenized with 2 ml/g tissue of ice-cold buffer A (100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.45 M d-mannitol, and 10 % glycerol, pH 8.0) containing one tablet of EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostic) per 50 ml. The homogenate was filtered through a 16 µm nylon cloth and the cell wall fraction on the nylon filter was collected. The cell wall fraction was homogenized with 2 ml/g tissue of ice-cold buffer B (10 mM  Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, and 10 % glycerol, pH 8.0) containing the protease inhibitor tablet as buffer A. The homogenate was re-filtered through a 5 µm nylon cloth and then resuspended in ice-cold buffer B as above. The cell wall fraction was sonicated for 10 cycles of 30 seconds ON and 60 seconds OFF at a power 8 using a Sonic Dismembrator (Model 100, Fisher Scientific) in an ice bath. The cell wall fraction was centrifuged at 10,000g for 2 min at 4 °C and the pellet was resuspended with ice-cold buffer B containing the protease inhibitor tablet as above. Sonication and resuspension of the pellet was repeated additional four or five times as above until the supernatant was no longer a greenish color. The pellet was resuspended in two volume of buffer B and filtered through a 5 µm nylon cloth and the cell wall fraction on the nylon filter was centrifuged at 10,000g for 1 min. The cell wall fraction was washed with excess volume of digestion buffer (10 mM 2-(N-morpholino)-ethane sulfonic acid (MES), pH 5.5 and 240 mM d-mannitol) without protease inhibitor and centrifuged for 5 min at 400g at 4 °C. The digestion buffer was mixed with Cellulase R10 (Karlan) and warmed to 55 °C for 5 min, and filtered through a 0.2 µm filter. The washed pellet was resuspended in the cellulase solution (0.7 % w/v) containing the protease inhibitor tablet as above and incubated in a rotary shaker (100 rpm) at 37 °C for 1.5 h. The undigested cell wall fragments were removed by centrifugation at 5,850g for 5 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 110,000g for 40 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded and the compacted pellet (PD proteome) was stored at – 80 °C. The PD pellet was dissolved in 0.1 % Rapigest (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The dissolved samples were heated to 99 °C for 5 min and allowed samples to cool to room temperature for 3 min. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratory, Hercules, CA, USA). Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was performed as the standard for the calibration curve. The samples were reduced with DTT (5 mM) at 37 °C for 1h, alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mM) in dark at room temperature for 40 min, and proteolysed with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 16 h at a 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The samples were mixed with HCl (200 mM) and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min, and centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was purified using OMIX C18 tips (Varian Inc., Santa Clara, USA).

### Data Protocol
The N. benthamiana database used for protein identification was obtained from the Sol Genomics Network. With default settings, the peak list files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.4.08. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) of proteins was analyzed as described previously

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Potyvirus, Plasmodesmata, Label-free

### Affiliations
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, London Research and Development Centre

### Submitter
Justin Renaud

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Renaud
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, London Research and Development Centre


