### Accession
PXD010554

### Title
System-wide identification of enzyme substrates by thermal analysis (SIESTA)

### Description
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of general and unbiased tools for identifying the molecular components participating in these reactions on a cellular level. Here we developed a universal method called System-wide Identification of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that post-translational modification of the substrate protein changes its thermal stability, and applies the concept of specificity to reveal the potential substrates. For selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, SIESTA confirmed several known protein substrates and suggested novel candidates. For poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10, SIESTA revealed a number of PARP10 putative substrates, which were confirmed by targeted mass spectrometry and functional assays. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, and facilitate drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in 175 cm2 flasks, and were then trypsinized, washed twice with PBS, counted, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA (for TrxR1) or in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl and 4 mM MgCl2 (for PARP10), both with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The cells were then freeze-thawed 5 times. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 21000 g for 20 min and the soluble fraction was collected. The protein concentration in the lysate was measured using Pierce BCA assay (Thermo) and equally distributed into 8 aliquots (1 mL each). For TrxR1, each pair of samples were incubated with vehicle, 1 mM NADPH, 1 µM TrxR1, or with TrxR1+NADPH at 37 °C for 30 min. For PARP10, each pair of samples were incubated with vehicle, 100 µM NAD, 400 nM PARP10, or with PARP10+NAD at 37 °C for 1 h. Each replicate was then aliquoted into 10 PCR microtubes and incubated for 3 min in SimpliAmp Thermal Cycler (Thermo) at temperature points of 37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, and 67 °C. The samples were cooled for 3 min at room temperature and afterwards kept on ice. The samples were then transferred into polycarbonate thickwall tubes and centrifuged at 100,000 g and 4 °C for 20 min.  The soluble protein fraction was carefully transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. Protein concentration was measured in the samples treated at lowest temperature points (37 and 41° C ) using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo), the same volume corresponding to 50 µg of protein at lowest temperature points was transferred from each sample to new tubes and urea was added to a final concentration of 4M. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and samples were incubated in room temperature for 1 h in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding an additional 10 mM of DTT. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. The dry protein pellet was dissolved in 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS (pH=8.5) and diluted to 4M urea. LysC was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio at room temperature overnight. Urea was diluted to 1M and trypsin was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio and the samples were incubated for 6 h at room temperature. ACN was added to a final concentration of 20% and TMT reagents were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-PaK cartridges (Waters) and dried using DNA 120 SpeedVac™ Concentrator (Thermo). Samples were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and fractionated into 8 fractions using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo).  Samples dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) were loaded onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to the EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo) and eluted with a buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) gradient from 5% to 38% of at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the data-dependent acquisition mode at a nominal resolution of 60,000, with the m/z range from 400 to 1600. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with excitation set at 40%.  For analysis of ADP-ribosylation, recombinant proteins were incubated with PARP10 and then reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Afterwards, 1 mM urea was added to the samples and LysC (overnight) and Trypsin (6 h) were added sequentially at 1 : 100 w/w to protein. After acidification, samples were cleaned using StageTips. Samples were dissolved in 0.1% FA and 1 µg of each samples was analyzed with LC-MS usinag a 1 h gradient.  The chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved using a 50 cm Easy C18 column connected to an Easy1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 1000 nL/min, and then eluted at 300 nL/min for 50 min with a linear gradient from 4% to 26% AcN/0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization analyzed  by an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The survey mass spectrum was acquired at the resolution of 120,000 in the m/z range of 300-1750. The first MS/MS event data were obtained with a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 32% excitation for ions isolated in the quadrupole with a m/z width of 1.6 at a resolution of 30,000. Mass trigger filters targeting adenine (m/z 136.0623), adenosine (m/z 250.094) and AMP (m/z 348.0709) ions were used to initiate a second MS/MS event using ETD MS/MS with HCD supplementary activation at 30% collision energy and with a 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.6.5. The Andromeda search engine searched MS/MS data against the International Protein Index (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification. Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. After removing all the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset.  STRING version 10.5 (http://string-db.org) protein network analysis tool was used. Medium confidence threshold (0.4) was used to define protein-protein interactions. In-built gene set enrichment analysis with the whole genome as a background was used to identify enriched gene ontology terms and pathways. For analysis of ADP-ribosylation, spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using in-house written RAWtoMGF v. 2.1.3. The MGFs files were then searched against the UniProtKB human database (v. 201806), which included 71434 sequences. Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) was used for peptide sequence identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing up to two missed cleavages. C, D, E, K, N, R and S residues were set as variable ADP-ribose acceptor sites. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on C and oxidation as a variable modification on M.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of general and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins that are modified by the enzyme on the structural level. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomics method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that the enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins is likely to change their thermal stability. In our proof-of-concept studies, SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, opening opportunities to investigate the effect of post-translational modifications on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Substrate, Marylation, Target, Poly-(adp-ribose) polymerase-10, Artd10, Trxr1, Thermal stability, Parp10, Thioredoxin reductase 1

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


