### Accession
PXD016635

### Title
The effect of silibinin on protein expression profile in white adipose tissue of obese rats

### Description
According to different feeding and treatment conditions, 36 C57BL/6JC rats were randomly divided into normal diet group (WC group), high fat diet group (WF group) and high fat diet + silibinin group (WS group). TMT combined with LC-MS/MS were used to study the expression of WAT in epididymis of HFD-induced obese rats and normal diet rats. Gene Ontology, InterPro and KEGG databases were used to analyze the cellular processes, the biological processes, the corresponding molecular functions and the network molecular mechanisms involved

### Sample Protocol
All rats fasted overnight. After weighing, the rats were anesthetized intraperitoneally with 1% pentobarbital sodium (60mg/kg) and blood was taken from the eyeball. The blood was then coagulated for 30 min at 4°C and centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 20 min. The serum supernatant was collected and stored at -80 °C. After taking blood from the eyeball, the adipose tissue of the epididymis was removed by laparotomy and quickly placed in liquid nitrogen, followed by cryopreservation at -80 °C.The epididymal adipose tissue of rats was grinded with liquid nitrogen, added in lysate (8M urea, 1% protease inhibitor and 2mm EDTA) and ultrasonication 10 times for 10 seconds once, following centrifuged at 1200g at 4°C for 10 minutes. The supernatant was added with a final concentration of 5mmol/LDTT and reduced at 56℃ for 30 min. LAA with a final concentration of 11mmol/L was added and incubated at room temperature in dark for 15 min. Samples were then digested using 40 μL of 0.05 g/L Trypsin (Bruker, Beijing, China) at 37°C for 14 to 16 hours. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.Dissolved the desalted peptides in a buffer containing 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid before separation by high pH on Q ExactiveTM HF-X using a Zorbax C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 20 mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN to 20 mM ammonium formate, 90% ACN at 0.2 mL/ min. The 95 fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions and dried down. Each fraction was analysed by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry using the Shimadzu Prominence nano HPLC system [Shimadzu] coupled to a 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer [Sciex]. Samples were loaded onto an Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C18, 3.5 μm [Agilent Technologies] and separated with a linear gradient of water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v). Fourteen percent of the labeled sample was loaded on the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were extracted, analyzed, for the removal of isotopes and resolved by the Mascot Distiller software suite from Matrix Science, Boston, MA (version 2.6). Mass spectral data was retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). At the same time, all mass spectrometry results were evaluated using a reverse database search method to estimate the false positive rate (FDR) of data caused by random matches. The FDR of proteins and peptides is <1%. GO and InterProScan software were used to preliminarily analyze the cellular processes of the differential proteins, the biological processes involved and the corresponding molecular functions. InterPro database and InterProScan software were used to annotate the protein domain of the identified protein. KEGG was used to annotate protein pathways and classify these pathways according to the KEGG website pathway hierarchy classification method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epididymal adipose tissue, Silibinin, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Obese rats

### Affiliations
Hebei Medical University
HeBeiMedical Unviersity

### Submitter
wang  fei 

### Lab Head
Dr Fei Wang
HeBeiMedical Unviersity


