### Accession
PXD012439

### Title
Host-symbiont interactions in the chemosynthetic Riftia model symbiosis

### Description
The deep-sea tubeworm Riftia pachyptila is a model system for a mutualistic association: The adult worm has no digestive system, but completely relies on one phylotype of endosymbiotic chemosynthetic bacteria for nutrition. The bacteria, in turn, are provisioned by the host. Metabolism and physiology of this symbiosis, particularly of the uncultured symbiont, have been subject to various studies. Yet, how both partners interact on the molecular level remains largely unknown. To study these host-symbiont interactions in detail, we sequenced the R. pachyptila host transcriptome de novo, and conducted comprehensive metaproteomic comparisons of symbiont-containing and symbiont-free R. pachyptila tissues under energy-rich and energy-limiting conditions. Our results demonstrate that R. pachyptila invests a considerable part of its proteome to provision the symbionts with inorganic compounds. It acquires symbiont-derived biomass primarily by digesting parts of the symbiont population. The R. pachyptila immune system apparently not only protects the holobiont from pathogens, but is also involved in symbiont population control. The symbiont expresses a repertoire of proteins dedicated to communication with the host, including eukaryote-like proteins that may counteract phagocytosis. During energy limitation, i.e., when reduced sulfur compounds are lacking, the host apparently increases symbiont digestion. We show here an intricate network of interaction pathways that shapes the R. pachyptila holobiont. Together with the metabolic flexibility of the association under varying energy conditions, this probably forms the basis for the success of this tight association under the highly challenging deep-sea conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For metaproteomics analysis, we used three biological replicates per tissue (trophosome, vestimentum, plume) and condition (specimens with S-rich and S-depleted trophosomes, respectively). Tissues were disrupted by bead-beating for 45 s at 6.0 m/s with lysing matrix D tubes (MP Biomedicals) in SDT buffer (4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT)), followed by heating to 95 °C for 10 min. Tryptic peptides were generated following the FASP protocol of Wiśniewski et al. (Wiśniewski et al., 2009, Nat. Meth. 6, 359-361) with minor modifications as described in Hamann et al. 2016 (Hamann et al., 2016, Nature 534, 254-258). The tryptic digest was desalted on-line during LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide concentrations were determined with the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For 1D-LC-MS/MS analysis, an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with two ten-port valves in the column oven was used to load peptide samples with loading solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µl min‑1. The pre-column was then switched into line with the analytical column, which was either a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), heated to 45° C, or a 75 cm x 75 μm analytical column with the same packing material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), heated to 60 °C. An Easy-Spray source connected the analytical column to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution and separation of peptides on the analytical column was achieved at a flow rate of 225 nl min-1 using a 260 min gradient going from 98 % eluent A (0.1% formic acid) to 31% eluent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) in 200 min, then to 50 % B in 40 min, to 99 % B in 1 min and ending with 99 % B. Eluting peptides were ionized using electrospray ionization. Data was acquired in the Q Exactive Plus as described by Petersen et al. (2016) (Petersen et al., 2016, Nat. Microbiol. 2, 16195). Samples were analyzed in a randomized block design (Oberg and Vitek, 2009, J Proteome Res. 8, 2144-2156). Samples were run in technical triplicates, aside from one trophosome sample, which was run in technical duplicate due to technical issues. Two technical replicate runs (one for the one trophosome sample) were acquired with a 50 cm analytical column, one with a 75 cm analytical column. For stable isotope fingerprinting (SIF) analysis, a protein standard (human hair) was measured in technical duplicate alongside the R. pachyptila samples in the third replicate run using a 75 cm column.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS/MS spectra of combined technical triplicate runs were searched against the combined host and symbiont database (please refer to the manuscript for database generation details) using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as in (Kleiner et al., 2018, PNAS 115, E5576-E5584). For protein abundance estimates, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs) (Zybailov et al., 2006, J Proteome Res. 5, 2339-2347) were calculated per sample and organism (%orgNSAF) (Mueller et al., 2010, Mol. Syst. Biol. 6, 374). Statistical evaluation was performed based on spectral counts using the edgeR package (Robinson et al., 2010, Bioinformatics 26, 139-140) in R (R Core Team, 2017, R Found. Stat. Comput., http://www.R-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The deep-sea tubeworm <i>Riftia pachyptila</i> lacks a digestive system but completely relies on bacterial endosymbionts for nutrition. Although the symbiont has been studied in detail on the molecular level, such analyses were unavailable for the animal host, because sequence information was lacking. To identify host-symbiont interaction mechanisms, we therefore sequenced the <i>Riftia</i> transcriptome, which served as a basis for comparative metaproteomic analyses of symbiont-containing versus symbiont-free tissues, both under energy-rich and energy-limited conditions. Our results suggest that metabolic interactions include nutrient allocation from symbiont to host by symbiont digestion and substrate transfer to the symbiont by abundant host proteins. We furthermore propose that <i>Riftia</i> maintains its symbiont by protecting the bacteria from oxidative damage while also exerting symbiont population control. Eukaryote-like symbiont proteins might facilitate intracellular symbiont persistence. Energy limitation apparently leads to reduced symbiont biomass and increased symbiont digestion. Our study provides unprecedented insights into host-microbe interactions that shape this highly efficient symbiosis.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> All animals are associated with microorganisms; hence, host-microbe interactions are of fundamental importance for life on earth. However, we know little about the molecular basis of these interactions. Therefore, we studied the deep-sea <i>Riftia pachyptila</i> symbiosis, a model association in which the tubeworm host is associated with only one phylotype of endosymbiotic bacteria and completely depends on this sulfur-oxidizing symbiont for nutrition. Using a metaproteomics approach, we identified both metabolic interaction processes, such as substrate transfer between the two partners, and interactions that serve to maintain the symbiotic balance, e.g., host efforts to control the symbiont population or symbiont strategies to modulate these host efforts. We suggest that these interactions are essential principles of mutualistic animal-microbe associations.

### Keywords
Hydrothermal vents, Deep sea, Metaproteomics, Holobiont, Mutualistic association, Mutualism

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Greifswald Intitute of Marine Biotechnology
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Tjorven Hinzke

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA


