### Accession
PXD008353

### Title
Dynamic changes in proteome and phosphoproteome following glutamate excitotoxicity in cultured primary cortical neurons

### Description
Excitotoxicity caused by over-stimulation of the ionotropic glutamate receptors is a key neuronal cell death process underpinning brain damage in acute and chronic neurological disorders such as ischaemic stroke, traumatic brain injury, and neurodegenerative diseases. Exactly how neurons die in excitotoxicity still remains unclear and is an important area of research in the field of neuroscience. In this current project we wanted to explore the global changes in proteome and phosphoproteome following glutamate excitotoxicity in cultured primary cortical neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from neuronal lysates of the untreated (control) and treated neurons (glutamate treatment for 5m, 15m, 30m, 1h & 4h) were precipitated using freezer-cold acetone (-20°C) and resuspended in 8 M urea solution (in 50 mM TEAB). A BCA protein quantitation assay was performed for the neuronal lysates to take equal amount (200 µg) of control (5 aliquots) and glutamate treated lysates (1 aliquot for each treatment) to start the proteomic experiment. Before in-solution trypsin digestion, these samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 55 mM iodoacetamide, respectively at 37°C. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:40) overnight at 37°C. Digested tryptic peptides were purified by solid phase extraction (SPE) clean-up method and purified peptides were freeze-dried overnight. Dried peptides were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB. At this stage, a micro BCA quantitation assay was carried out to ensure that equal amounts (25 µg) of dissolved digested peptides derived from the control lysates (5 aliquots) and glutamate treated lysates (1 aliquot each) were used for labelling. Formaldehyde (CH2O, light) and deuterated formaldehyde (CD2O, medium) were used to label the control and glutamate-treated peptides, respectively in presence of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) for the labelling reaction to occur for 60 min at room temperature. The reaction was stopped with 1% NH3 followed by acidification with 100% formic acid before equal amount of labelled peptides were mixed (control: treatment = 1:1) together and samples were run on LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer for LC-MS/MS analysis. Phosphopeotides were enriched from the mixed labeled peptides using TiO2 microcolumns before they were run for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) software. Raw data (Xcalibur file format) were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 with Mascot search algorithm against Mouse Swiss-Prot database. All identified peptides were above the identity threshold score, which represents a confidence level of p < 0.05. The inbuilt quantitation node on PD 2.1 allows us to measure the relative abundance of the identified peptides (medium/light ratios) and corresponding protein group based on the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) intensities from the MS1 scans. Phosphosite identification probability was further calculated with the PhosphoRS node in PD 2.1. Results were filtered with high peptide confidence to reflect a maximum of 1% false discovery rate (FDR). For relative protein quantification, peptide ratios (medium/light) were calculated from the isotopic clusters for the identified peptides in both light and medium quantification (quan) channels or from a single isotopic cluster identified in either of the quan channels (light and/or medium) using the accurate mass feature of the mass spectrometer (< 2 ppm) to define the corresponding light or medium labelled peptide. For global proteome analysis peptide ratios with any missing quantification channel were avoided to minimise protein quantitation error, on the other hand for phosphoproteome analysis, missing channel values were replaced with a minimum intensity (maximum and minimum fold change = 100 and 0.01, respectively).

### Publication Abstract
Excitotoxicity, caused by overstimulation or dysregulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs), is a pathological process directing neuronal death in many neurological disorders. The aberrantly stimulated iGluRs direct massive influx of calcium ions into the affected neurons, leading to changes in expression and phosphorylation of specific proteins to modulate their functions and direct their participation in the signalling pathways that induce excitotoxic neuronal death. To define these pathways, we used quantitative proteomic approaches to identify these neuronal proteins (referred to as the changed proteins) and determine how their expression and/or phosphorylation dynamically changed in association with excitotoxic cell death. Our data, available in ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008353, identified over 100 changed proteins exhibiting significant alterations in abundance and/or phosphorylation levels at different time points (5-240&#x2009;min) in neurons after glutamate overstimulation. Bioinformatic analyses predicted that many of them are components of signalling networks directing defective neuronal morphology and functions. Among them, the well-known neuronal survival regulators including mitogen-activated protein kinases Erk1/2, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and microtubule-associated protein (Tau), were selected for validation by biochemical approaches, which confirmed the findings of the proteomic analysis. Bioinformatic analysis predicted Protein Kinase B (Akt), c-Jun kinase (JNK), cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 (Cdk5), MAP kinase kinase (MEK), Casein kinase 2 (CK2), Rho-activated protein kinase (Rock) and Serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) as the potential upstream kinases phosphorylating some of the changed proteins. Further biochemical investigation confirmed the predictions of sustained changes of the activation states of neuronal Akt and CK2 in excitotoxicity. Thus, future investigation to define the signalling pathways directing the dynamic alterations in abundance and phosphorylation of the identified changed neuronal proteins will help elucidate the molecular mechanism of neuronal death in excitotoxicity.

### Keywords
Neuron, Excitotoxicity, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research (SVI)
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute Cell Signalling Research Laboratories The University of Melbourne Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Ashfaqul Hoque

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Heung-Chin Cheng
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute Cell Signalling Research Laboratories The University of Melbourne Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


