### Accession
PXD015729

### Title
Murine hippocampus after radiation LC-MSMS

### Description
The impact of low-dose ionizing radiation (IR) on human brain has recently attracted attention due to increased use of IR for diagnostic purposes. The aim of this study was to investigate low-dose radiation response in hippocampus. Female C57Bl/6 mice were irradiated with 0 (control), 0.063, 0.125 or 0.5 Gy and quantitative label-free proteomic analysis of hippocampus was performed after 24 months. Key pathways were validated by immunoblotting. CREB signaling and CREB-associated pathways were the most affected ones at all doses. The two lower doses seemed to induce CREB pathway, whereas the exposure to 0.5 Gy deactivated CREB. Similarly, the lowest dose (0.063 Gy) was anti-inflammatory reducing the number of activated microglia (IBA1), whilst induction of activated microglia and reactive astroglia (GFAP) was found at 0.5 Gy suggesting increased inflammation and astrogliosis, respectively. Apoptotic markers BAX and cleaved CASP-3 and oxidative stress markers (carbonylation, NRF-2) were increased only at the highest dose. Since activated CREB pathway plays a central role in learning and memory, these data suggest neuroprotection at the lowest dose (0.063 Gy) but neurodegeneration at 0.5 Gy. These effects become significant only in old animals (24 m) and support the hypothesis of radiation-induced accelerated aging in the brain.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection Four mice per dose group were used for isolation of hippocampi that were microdissected from the right hemisphere, gently rinsed in cold PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. All samples were stored at -80° C.  Protein lysis and measurement of protein concentration Frozen tissues were pulverized and suspended in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fischer, Darmstadt, Germany) containing phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). After sonication, lysis and centrifugation protein concentrations were measured using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein lysates were stored at -20 °C.  Mass spectrometry (MS)  Ten µg of protein lysates were digested enzymatically with a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski, et al. 2009). Peptides were stored at -20 °C until the MS measurement that was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a Q Exactive high field mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Darmstadt, Germany). The digested lysates (0.5 μg) were automatically injected and loaded to the online coupled RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher) HPLC system including a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA). The samples were separated by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 1.8 µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40 °C and peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min. A 3 % to 41 % gradient was set over a 105 min time period. The high-resolution (60,000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectra were recorded with a maximum injection time of 50 ms from 300 to 1,500 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3 x 106. The 10 most abundant peptide ions from the MS pre-scan were selected for fragmentation (MS-MS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS-MS spectra were recorded at 15,000 resolution with automatic gain control target set to 1 x 105 and a maximum of 100 ms injection time. Normalized collision energy was set to 28 and all spectra were recorded in profile type.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The acquired spectra were evaluated using Progenesis QI software (Version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics) for label-free quantification as previously described (Grosche, et al. 2016) with the following aberrations: Spectra were searched against the Ensembl mouse database (Release 80, 54,197 sequences). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was allowed as variable modifications, allowing only one missed cleavage site. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. The resulting mean values of normalized abundances of unique peptides (UP) were calculated for every protein separately and then used for the calculation of abundance ratios and statistical analysis, comparing the data between exposed samples and controls. The filtering criteria were as follows: Proteins identified and quantified with 2 UP and fold changes of ≤0.77 or ≥1.3 (q ≤ 0.05) were considered as significantly differentially expressed. Pathway analysis  For the analysis of the pathways predicted to be responding to radiation, the list of significantly deregulated proteins with their accession numbers, fold changes and q-values were imported into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Ionizing radiation, Accelerated aging, Creb signaling, Hippocampus, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Radiation Biology, Radiation Proteomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH (HMGU), 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Soile Tapio
Institute of Radiation Biology, Radiation Proteomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH (HMGU), 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


