### Accession
PXD014153

### Title
The mechanism of infochemicals induced colony formation and flocculation in the microalga Scenedesmus subspicatus

### Description
Daphnia infochemicals can induce defensive responses in microalgae Scenedesmus spp., including colony formation and flocculation. We investigated the phenomenon using a combination of microalgal biology, physiological ecology, and quantitative isobaric tagging (iTRAQ) proteomics. We have discovered that flocculation as a defense response occurs at the early ‘alarm’ phase and requires increased energy resources, with an important role proposed in cysteine synthesis. It appears to be initially stimulated by the production of an extracellular matrix (mainly composed ofby polysaccharides and fatty acids), and later sustained at the ‘acclimation’ stage through Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling cascades. Defensive strategies leading to colony formation required investment into fatty acids metabolism, to ensure the accurate separation of membranes during cell division. Furthermore, higher energy demands were required at the alarm phase which subsequently decreased at the acclimation stage, thus suggesting a trade-off between colony formation and support of floc form.

### Sample Protocol
We harvested algal cells after five days plus either +2h or +20h of exposure, for each control and treatment cultures, and then pelleted them by centrifugation at 3000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Cultures exposed to DW exhibited flocculation, therefore we separated the supernatant (planktonic) fraction from the floc fraction. We washed the algal cell pellets with triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH = 8.0), transferred to a protein low bind tube and centrifuged again at 3000 g for 10 min. We resuspended the pellets in 250 μL of lysis buffer composed by 200 mM TEAB, 10mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and enzymatic plant protease inhibitor. With the use of buffers, detergents, salts and reducing agents, cells were lysed and proteins solubilised; protease inhibitors protected the extracted proteins from degradation or modification by the activities of these enzymes. Reagent based lysis was followed by physical lysis in the form of a combination of liquid nitrogen cracking and bead-beating (Longworth et al., 2016) Unbroken cells and cell debris were pelleted by centrifugation at 18,000 g for five minutes and the supernatants transferred to clean Lo-Bind tubes. We estimated the total protein concentration by the Lowry method (Lowry et al., 1951). We added five µL of 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) to aliquots of samples containing 100 µg protein for reduction and then incubated at 60 °C for 30 min. Then, samples were alkylated by adding 6 µL of 200 mM methyl methane thiosulfonate (MMTS) in Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were then digested with 1:20 trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, REF V5111, Promega Corporation, USA) in TEAB and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Labelling was performed using iTRAQ reagents following the manufacturer's instructions (AB Sciex, Famingham, MA, USA). Labels 113, 114 were used to label biological replicates of S. subpsicatus cells in control conditions, labels 115, 116 were used for S. subpsicatus cells exposed to ASTM, labels 117, 118 for tS. subpsicatus cells exposed to infochemicals and contained in planktonic fraction of and labels 119, 121 for S. subpsicatus cells exposed to infochemicals and belonging to the floc fraction.  These were then incubated at room temperature for two hours, combined in one tube and finally dried overnight in a vacuum centrifuge at 30 °C. The sample was then resuspended in 200 µL Hyper-carb buffer (3% Acetonitrile ACN + 0.1% trichloro acetic acid TA).  iTRAQ labelled peptides were off line fractionated using an Hypercarb™ Porous Graphitic Carbon LC reversed phase Analytical Column (Cat no. 35003-052130, ThermoFisher Scientific, UK), with 3 μm particle size, 50 mm length, 2.1 mm diameter and 250 Å pore size,  and two buffer solutions: a) Buffer A: 3% ACN + 0.1% TA and b) Buffer B: 97% ACN and 0.1% TA. The Hypercarb™ separation performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Autosampler linked to Dionex UltiMate 3000 Flow Manager and Pump system (Thermo Scientific, UK). Buffer A was exchanged with Buffer B with a flow rate of 30 µL/min with the following gradient: 3% B at 0-10 minutes, 10% B at 10-85 minutes, 50% B at 85-86 minutes, 90% B at 86-91 minutes, 3% B at 91-105 minutes. The fractions were collected every two minutes from 20 to 120 minutes, and dried by vacuum centrifugation (Scanvac Labogene, Denmark) ready for reverse-phase LC-MS/MS. Samples were resuspended in 10 µL Buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% FA) before loading onto an Easy-Spray C18 column (75 μm x 50 cm) with a 2-step gradient from 97% Buffer A (0.1%  (v/v) FA in HPLC water) to 10% Buffer B (80 % (v/v) HPLC ACN, 20 % (v/v) HPLC water, 0.1 % (v/v) FA) over five min,  then 10% to 50% Buffer B over 75 min at 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometry was performed using an hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) connected to an UPLC U3000 RSLC nano (Thermo Scientific, UK). We programmed the mass spectrometer for data dependent acquisition using Xcalibur software v 4.0 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany)  with the following settings: resolution 60,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms. The MS mass range was set to be between 100 and 1500 m/z. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans were acquired using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD), 30,000 resolution, AGC target 5e4, maximum IT 120 ms. In total, 15 MS/MS were acquired per MS scan using 621 normalised collision energy (NCE) of 34% and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the data analysis software MaxQuant (version 625 1.5.4.1), the standard for processing Q Exactive HF MS data (Michalski et al., 2011). The settings were as follows: for “type the experimental set” MS2 and 8-plex iTRAQ were selected with reporter mass tolerant 0.01 Da. Enzymatic digestion with trypsin was specified and two missed cleavages were allowed per peptide. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modification and methylthio modification of cysteine was selected as the fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide spectrum match/protein level was set at 1%. Raw data was interrogated against a  .fasta file which was generated using proteomes from green microalgae and cyanobacteria data with a total of 97,523 entries (downloaded from UniProt on June 2017). Isotopic and median corrections were applied using an inhouse automated method as described by Ow et al., 2009. We applied PCA (Principal Components Analysis) to the isotope and median corrected (IC, MC) reporter ions intensities (113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121) to first check on biological groupings (n = 2) and second to formally test whether the treatments are significantly different with respect to the PCA axes, using a permutation-based analysis of variance (Adonis method), using he rda and adonis functions from the R package Vegan (Oksanen, 2017).We used VENN diagrams (BioVenn, Hulsen et al., 2008) to identify shared and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) among and between control and treatments, using their relative fold change abundance variations. The resulting unique DEPs were functionally classified using the KO (KEGG Orthology) and BRITE functional hierarchies obtained using the KAAS - KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (http://www.genome.jp/tools/kaas). We based the hierarchical clustering of the unique DEPs on the fold change expression values and we implemented them in R using the package pheatmap.

### Publication Abstract
Microalgae can respond to natural cues from crustacean grazers, such as <i>Daphnia</i>, by forming colonies and aggregations called flocs. Combining microalgal biology, physiological ecology, and quantitative proteomics, we identified how infochemicals from <i>Daphnia</i> trigger physiological and cellular level changes in the microalga <i>Scenedesmus subspicatus</i>, underpinning colony formation and flocculation. We discovered that flocculation occurs at an energy-demanding 'alarm' phase, with an important role proposed in cysteine synthesis. Flocculation appeared to be initially stimulated by the production of an extracellular matrix where polysaccharides and fatty acids were present, and later sustained at an 'acclimation' stage through mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascades. Colony formation required investment into fatty acid metabolism, likely linked to separation of membranes during cell division. Higher energy demands were required at the alarm phase, which subsequently decreased at the acclimation stage, thus suggesting a trade-off between colony formation and flocculation. From an ecological and evolutionary perspective, our findings represent an improved understanding of the effect of infochemicals on microalgae-grazers interactions, and how they can therefore potentially impact on the structure of aquatic communities. Moreover, the mechanisms revealed are of interest in algal biotechnology, for exploitation in low-cost, sustainable microalgal biomass harvesting.

### Keywords
Daphnia infochemicals, Colony formation itraq proteomics, Flocculation, Scenedesmus, Induced defences, Predation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering  University of Sheffield Mappin Street, Sheffield S1 3JD  United Kingdom
Faculty of Environment, J. E. Purkyne University in Usti-nad-Labem

### Submitter
Sebastiana Roccuzzo

### Lab Head
Dr Jagroop Pandhal
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering  University of Sheffield Mappin Street, Sheffield S1 3JD  United Kingdom


