### Accession
PXD002571

### Title
Tissue and organ matrix arrays for high throughput screening and systems analysis of cell function

### Description
Cell and protein arrays have demonstrated remarkable utility in the high-throughput evaluation of biological responses; however, they lack the complexity of native tissue and organs and cannot replicate the environment of mature normal or diseased tissues. Here, we describe the development of tissue and organ extracellular matrix (ECM) arrays for screening biological outputs and systems analysis.  Tissues and organs were chemically and mechanically processed and then formulated as particles without any enzymatic breakdown.  The tissue ECM particles were spotted as two-dimensional tissue ECM arrays or incorporated with cells to generate three-dimensional cell-ECM microtissue arrays, and these methods were compatible with tissues prepared with varied processing techniques.  The physical and biochemical properties, including the proteomic composition, of the tissue ECM arrays were characterized and compared with native tissues.  The 2D arrays were validated through quantitative analysis of tissue-specific biological outputs of cell matrix production, cell adhesion and proliferation, and cell shape following culture with stem cells, cancer cells, and macrophages.  Tissue-specific stem cell osteogenic differentiation on the arrays was comparable between 2D and 3D ECM environments, and revealed lung as an unexpected promoter of osteogenesis.  Further gene ontology analysis of lung tissue ECM proteomics showed enrichment for families of proteins associated with skeletal development and osteogenesis.  Stem cell biological outputs, along with cancer line adhesion and macrophage shape, were correlated with tissue proteomics, and network analysis identified several protein determinants of cell function.  Our methodology enables broad screening of tissue and organ ECMs to connect tissue-specific composition with biological responses via systems analysis, providing a new resource for research and translation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide, then digested in solution with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C overnight.  Digested peptides were acidified and dried.  The peptides were reconstituted in 40 uL 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid and 6 μL injected (15% of total volume).  Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) analysis of peptides was performed using a Q-Exactive interfaced with a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) or a Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a NanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA).  Peptides were fractionated by reverse-phase HPLC on a 75 um x 12 cm column with a 15-um emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with Magic C18AQ (5 µm, 120 Å, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) using 0-90% ACN/0.1% formic acid gradient over 90 min at 300 nL/min.  Eluting peptides were sprayed directly into the Q-Exactive or Velos at 2.0 kV.  Q-Exactive survey scans were acquired from 350-1800 m/z with up to 15 peptide masses (precursor ions) individually isolated with a 2.0 Da window and fragmented (MS/MS) using a collision energy of 27 and 30s dynamic exclusion.  Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at 70,000 and 17,500 resolution, respectively.  Velos survey scans were acquired from 350-1800 m/z with up to 8 peptide masses (precursor ions) individually isolated with a 1.9 Da window and fragmented (MS/MS) using a collision energy of 35 and 30s dynamic exclusion.  Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at 30,000 and 15,000 resolution, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry derived data was searched against a combined human and porcine RefSeq protein database (Version 65 with common contaminants added) using the SEQUEST HT search algorithm through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, GmbH).  Search parameters included a maximum of one missed trypsin cleavage, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification.  The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da, and the maximum peptide length was specified as 7 amino acids.  Peptides that passed the 1% FDR threshold were used for protein identification.  Protein inference was based on rules of parsimony as employed by Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
Cell and protein arrays have demonstrated remarkable utility in the high-throughput evaluation of biological responses; however, they lack the complexity of native tissue and organs. Here we spotted tissue extracellular matrix (ECM) particles as two-dimensional (2D) arrays or incorporated them with cells to generate three-dimensional (3D) cell-matrix microtissue arrays. We then investigated the responses of human stem, cancer and immune cells to tissue ECM arrays originating from 11 different tissues. We validated the 2D and 3D arrays as representative of the in vivo microenvironment by means of quantitative analysis of tissue-specific cellular responses, including matrix production, adhesion and proliferation, and morphological changes after culture. The biological outputs correlated with tissue proteomics, and network analysis identified several proteins linked to cell function. Our methodology enables broad screening of ECMs to connect tissue-specific composition with biological activity, providing a new resource for biomaterials research and further understanding of regeneration and disease mechanisms.

### Keywords
Matrix, Tissue array, Organ array, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer H. Elisseeff
Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Wilmer Eye Institute and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.


