### Accession
PXD016508

### Title
Tetraspanin Tspan15 is an essential subunit of an ADAM10 scissor complex

### Description
A disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) is essential for embryonic development and impacts on diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer’s and inflammatory diseases.  ADAM10 is a ‘molecular scissor’ that proteolytically cleaves the extracellular region from over 100 substrates, including Notch, amyloid precursor protein, cadherins, growth factors and chemokines.  ADAM10 was recently proposed to function as six distinct scissors with different substrates, depending on its association with one of six regulatory tetraspanins, termed TspanC8s.  However, it remains unclear whether ADAM10 function is critically dependent on a TspanC8 partner.  To address this, we generated the first monoclonal antibodies to Tspan15 as a model TspanC8.  These were used to show that ADAM10 is the principal Tspan15-interacting protein, that Tspan15 expression requires ADAM10 in cell lines and primary cells, and that a synthetic ADAM10/Tspan15 fusion protein is a functional scissor.  Together these findings suggest that ADAM10 exists as an ADAM10/TspanC8 scissor complex.

### Sample Protocol
2 x 108 wild-type or Tspan15-knockout HEK-293T cells were lysed in 1% digitonin lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich).  Lysates were pre-cleared with protein G sepharose prior to immunoprecipitation with Tspan15 mAb 1C12 chemically cross-linked to protein G sepharose with dimethyl pimelimidate (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Five independent immunoprecipitations were carried out for each cell type.  Immunoprecipitation samples in non-reducing Laemmli buffer were subjected to a modified single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol (Hughes et al. 2019).  Briefly, 10 µl of a 4 µg/µl bead slurry of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads A and B (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) were added to the samples.  Protein binding to the magnetic beads was achieved by adding acetonitrile to a final volume of 70% (v/v) and mixing at 1200 rpm at 24 °C for 30 minutes in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).  Magnetic beads were retained in a DynaMag-2 magnetic rack (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the supernatant was discarded.  Disulfide bridges were reduced by adding 20 µl of 30 mM dithiothreitol (Biozol, Eching, Germany) and incubating at 1200 rpm at 37 °C for 30 minutes.  Cysteines were alkylated by adding 25 µl of 80 mM iodoactemamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubating at 1200 rpm at 24 °C for 30 minutes in the dark in a Thermomixer.  The reaction was quenched by adding 3 µl of 200 mM dithiothreitol.  Protein binding to the beads was repeated in 70% (v/v) acetonitrile for 30 minutes.  After removing the solvent, beads were washed twice in 200 µl 70% (v/v) ethanol and twice in 180 µl of 100% (v/v) acetonitrile.  Next, 250 ng of LysC and 250 ng of trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) were added in 20 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich).  The protein digestion was performed for 16 hours at room temperature.  Samples were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) and placed in a magnetic rack.  The supernatants were transferred into fresh 0.5 ml protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf).  A volume of 20 µl of 2% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide was added to the beads and subjected to sonication for 30 seconds in a water bath.  Tubes were placed in the magnetic rack and the supernatants were transferred.  The samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for relative label free protein quantification.  A volume of 10 µl per sample was separated on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) with a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at 50 °C column temperature and a flow rate of 250 nl/minute (gradient: 0 minutes 2.4% B; 2 minutes, 4.8% B; 92 minutes, 24% B; 112 minutes, 35.2% B; 121 minutes, 60% B). The nanoLC was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a PRSO-V2 column oven (Sonation, Biberach an der Riss, Germany) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000.  The top 15 peptide ions were chosen for Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision energy of 26%, automatic gain control 1E+5 ions, intensity threshold 5E+3 ions, maximum ion trapping time 100 ms).  Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000.  A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed by Maxquant software (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.6.0 (Cox et al. 2014).  The MS data was searched against a fasta database of Homo sapiens from UniProt (download: June 12th 2019, 20962 entries).  Trypsin was defined as the protease.  Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search.  The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm.  For the main search, peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification.  Acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications.  The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%.  Label free quantification of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides.  Only unique peptides were used for quantification.  The option “match between runs” was enabled with a matching time of 1 minute.

### Publication Abstract
A disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) is a transmembrane protein essential for embryonic development, and its dysregulation underlies disorders such as cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and inflammation. ADAM10 is a "molecular scissor" that proteolytically cleaves the extracellular region from &gt;100 substrates, including Notch, amyloid precursor protein, cadherins, growth factors, and chemokines. ADAM10 has been recently proposed to function as six distinct scissors with different substrates, depending on its association with one of six regulatory tetraspanins, termed TspanC8s. However, it remains unclear to what degree ADAM10 function critically depends on a TspanC8 partner, and a lack of monoclonal antibodies specific for most TspanC8s has hindered investigation of this question. To address this knowledge gap, here we designed an immunogen to generate the first monoclonal antibodies targeting Tspan15, a model TspanC8. The immunogen was created in an ADAM10-knockout mouse cell line stably overexpressing human Tspan15, because we hypothesized that expression in this cell line would expose epitopes that are normally blocked by ADAM10. Following immunization of mice, this immunogen strategy generated four Tspan15 antibodies. Using these antibodies, we show that endogenous Tspan15 and ADAM10 co-localize on the cell surface, that ADAM10 is the principal Tspan15-interacting protein, that endogenous Tspan15 expression requires ADAM10 in cell lines and primary cells, and that a synthetic ADAM10/Tspan15 fusion protein is a functional scissor. Furthermore, two of the four antibodies impaired ADAM10/Tspan15 activity. These findings suggest that Tspan15 directly interacts with ADAM10 in a functional scissor complex.

### Keywords
Tspan15, Adam10

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


