### Accession
PXD011275

### Title
Bottom-up LC-MS/MS and top-down LC-MS analysis of B-phycoerythrin

### Description
Analysis of fluorescent assembly B-phycoerythrin with a combination of bottom-up and top-down mass spectrometry to reveal heterogeneity of proteoforms and characterize their chromophorylations.

### Sample Protocol
B-phycoerythrin (B-PE) was purchased from Thermo Fischer Scientific. For bottom-up LC-MS/MS analysis B-phycoerythrin was reduced with 20 mM TCEP at room temperature for 30 minutes and alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Digestion of proteins was done overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega Benelux, Leiden, The Netherlands) at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1 (weight/weight). Samples were kept at pH > 7 prior to LC-MS/MS in order to prevent interconversion between phycourobilin and phycoerythrobilin. For top-down LC-MS/MS protein samples were buffer exchanged into 0.1% formic acid by using 3 kDa molecular weight cutoff centrifuge filters (Amicon Ultra, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) and then diluted to 1 µg/µl final concentration.

### Data Protocol
Raw bottom-up LC-MS/MS data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with Byonic nodes (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, USA). Following parameters were used for database search. Protease: Trypsin (full). Variable modifications: Met oxidation; Cys carbamidomethyl; Cys chromophorylations of 586.279 and 590.31 Da. Protein sequence database was generated based on recently published genome of P. purpureum (P. cruentum). Sequence alignment was performed in R with the use of “msa” package35 and MUSCLE algorithm32. Top-down LC-MS raw files were deconvoluted by Sliding Window ReSpect algorithm available in Protein Deconvolution 4.0 software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Zero charged mass distribution profiles were obtained from raw native mass spectra with UniDec.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteoform, Top-down, Bpe, Phycoerythrin, Bilin

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Sem Tamara

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Utrecht University


