### Accession
PXD024342

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of the defense response to Gibberella stalk rot in maize

### Description
Fusarium graminearum is the causal agent of Gibberella stalk rot in maize stem, resulting maize lodging, yield, quality, and mechanical harvesting capacity. To date, little is known about the maize stem defense mechanism in response to invasion of F. graminearum. This study represents a global proteomic approach to document the infection by F. graminearum. A total of 1,894 differentially accumulated proteins (DEPs) were identified after inoculation of maize plants with F. graminearum. Functional categorization analysis indicated that proteins involved in plant-pathogen interaction were inducible at early stages of infection. We also found that the expression of proteins involved in phenylpropanoid, flavonoid, and terpenoid biosynthesis were up-regulated in response to F. graminearum infection, which may reflect a particular contribution of secondary metabolism in protection against the fungal attack in maize stem. Together, our results indicated that the defense response of maize stem to F. graminearum infection was multifaceted and involved the induction of proteins from various innate immunity related pathways, which had directive significance for molecular genetic breeding of maize disease-resistant varieties.

### Sample Protocol
The maize inbred line B73 was grown in the experimental field in Baoding (Hebei Agricultural University, Hebei province, China). Fungal strains (F. gramincarum PH-1) were grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) plates at 28℃ for 6 days. Conidial suspensions were harvested by adding sterile distilled water containing 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 and scraping the plates using a glass spreader. The concentration of conidia was quantified using a hemocytometer and diluted to 1×106 spores/mL for inoculation. Maize plants were inoculated by punching a hole in the stem at the second or third internode above the soil line using a sterile micropipet tip (10 mm hole depth), followed by injection of 20 μL macroconidia suspension. Mock-inoculated maize stalks treated with water served as the control. The plants were kept growing with the wounds being covered by sterile gauze to maintain moisture and avoid contamination from other organisms. The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against maizeGDB (V4) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maize; proteomic; stalk rot; f. graminearum

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Hebei Agricultural University
Hebei Agricultural University

### Submitter
Kang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kang Zhang
College of Life Science, Hebei Agricultural University


