### Accession
PXD008125

### Title
Phosphorylation of Ribosomal Protein RPS6 Integrates Light Signals and Circadian Clock Signals

### Description
The translation of mRNA into protein is tightly regulated by the light environment as well as by the circadian clock. Although changes in translational efficiency have been well documented at the level of mRNA-ribosome loading, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. The reversible phosphorylation of RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN OF THE SMALL SUBUNIT 6 (RPS6) has been known for forty years, but the biochemical significance of this event remains unclear to this day. Here, we confirm using a clock-deficient strain of Arabidopsis thaliana that RPS6 phosphorylation (RPS6-P) is controlled by the diel light-dark cycle with a peak during the day.

### Sample Protocol
Leaf tissue was ground under liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. Ground tissue was suspended in SDS lysis buffer. Proteins were extracted by methanol/water/chloroform precipitation. Pelleted proteins were resuspended in urea. Proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested. Desalted peptides were processed using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit protocol.  All spectra were acquired on a QExactive Plus (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) pump. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 75µm inner diameter column containing 30 cm of Kinetix C18 resin (1.7 µm, 100 Å, Phenomenex) with a gradient consisting of 5-22% (80% CAN, 0.1% FA) over 120 minutes at 200 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
All experimental MS/MS spectra were compared to theoretical tryptic peptide sequences generated from a FASTA database containing the full protein complement of the A. thaliana TAIR 10 database, appended with common contaminant proteins. A decoy database, consisting of the reversed sequences of the target database, was appended to discern the false-discovery rate (FDR). Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using MSFragger algorithm. The MSFragger closed search was configured to derive fully-tryptic peptides with the following parameters: parent mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a static modification (C+57.0214 Da), a dynamic modification corresponding to an oxidation (M+15.9949 Da) of methionine, and a dynamic modification corresponding to potential phosphorylation events (STY+79.9663). The max number of dynamic mods allowed were 3. Post-processing was performed with Peptide and Protein Prophet and data was filtered to a 1% FDR at the peptide-spectrum match, peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The translation of mRNA into protein is tightly regulated by the light environment as well as by the circadian clock. Although changes in translational efficiency have been well documented at the level of mRNA-ribosome loading, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. The reversible phosphorylation of RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN OF THE SMALL SUBUNIT 6 (RPS6) has been known for 40 years, but the biochemical significance of this event remains unclear to this day. Here, we confirm using a clock-deficient strain of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> that RPS6 phosphorylation (RPS6-P) is controlled by the diel light-dark cycle with a peak during the day. Strikingly, when wild-type, clock-enabled, seedlings that have been entrained to a light-dark cycle are placed under free-running conditions, the circadian clock drives a cycle of RPS6-P with an opposite phase, peaking during the subjective night. We show that in wild-type seedlings under a light-dark cycle, the incoherent light and clock signals are integrated by the plant to cause an oscillation in RPS6-P with a reduced amplitude with a peak during the day. Sucrose can stimulate RPS6-P, as seen when sucrose in the medium masks the light response of etiolated seedlings. However, the diel cycles of RPS6-P are observed in the presence of 1% sucrose and in its absence. Sucrose at a high concentration of 3% appears to interfere with the robust integration of light and clock signals at the level of RPS6-P. Finally, we addressed whether RPS6-P occurs uniformly in polysomes, non-polysomal ribosomes and their subunits, and non-ribosomal protein. It is the polysomal RPS6 whose phosphorylation is most highly stimulated by light and repressed by darkness. These data exemplify a striking case of contrasting biochemical regulation between clock signals and light signals. Although the physiological significance of RPS6-P remains unknown, our data provide a mechanistic basis for the future understanding of this enigmatic event.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Plant, Translation, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
Oak Ridge National Laboratory

### Submitter
Paul Abraham

### Lab Head
Dr Paul E.Abraham
Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA


