### Accession
PXD029320

### Title
Real-Time Search Assisted Acquisition on a Tribrid Mass Spectrometer Improves Coverage in Multiplexed Single-Cell Proteomics

### Description
In the young field of single-cell proteomics (scMS), there is a great need for improved global proteome characterization, both in terms of proteins quantified per cell and quantitative performance thereof. The recently introduced real-time search (RTS) on the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer in combination with SPS-MS3 acquisition has been shown to be beneficial for the measurement of samples that are multiplexed using isobaric tags. Multiplexed single-cell proteomics requires high ion injection times and high-resolution spectra to quantify the single-cell signal, however the carrier channel facilitates peptide identification and thus offers the opportunity for fast on-the-fly precursor filtering before committing to the time intensive quantification scan. Here, we compared classical MS2 acquisition against RTS-SPS-MS3, both using the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid MS with the FAIMS Pro ion mobility interface and we present a new acquisition strategy termed RETICLE (RTS Enhanced Quant of Single Cell Spectra) that makes use of fast real-time searched linear ion trap scans to preselect MS1 peptide precursors for quantitative MS2 Orbitrap acquisition. Here we show that classical MS2 acquisition is outperformed by both RTS-SPS-MS3 through increased quantitative accuracy at similar proteome coverage, and RETICLE through higher proteome coverage, with the latter enabling the quantification of over 1000 proteins per cell at a MS2 injection time of 750ms using a 2h gradient.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and FACS Sorting OCI-AML8227 cells were grown in StemSpan SFEM II media, supplemented with growth factors (Miltenyi Biotec, IL-3, IL-6 and G-CSF (10 ng/mL), h-SCF and FLt3-L (50 ng/mL), and TPO (25 ng/mL) to support the hierarchical nature of the leukemia hierarchy captured within the cell culture system. On day 6, cells were harvested (8e6 cells total), washed, counted, and resuspended in fresh StemSpan SFEM II media on ice at a cell density of 5e6 cells/ml. Staining was done for 30 mins on ice, using a CD34 antibody (CD34-APC-Cy7, Biolegend, clone 581) at 1:100 (vol/vol), a CD38 antibody (CD38-PE, BD, clone HB7) at 1:50 (vol/vol). Cells were washed with extra StemSpan SFEM II media, and subsequently underwent three washes with ice cold PBS to remove any remaining growth factors or other contaminants from the growth media. Cells were resuspended for FACS sorting in fresh, ice cold PBS at 2e6 cells/ml and stained with 7-AAD viability dye (1 ug/mL, Invitrogen). Cell sorting was done on a FACSAria III instrument, controlled by the DIVA software package (v.8.0.2) and operating with a 100 μm nozzle. Cells from 3 different gates (CD34+CD38-, CD34+CD38+, CD34-) (Supplementary Fig. 1) were sorted at single-cell resolution into a 384-well Eppendorf LoBind PCR plate (Eppendorf AG) containing 1 μl of lysis buffer (50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, 20% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (TFE)). Directly after sorting, plates were briefly spun, snap-frozen on dry ice, and then boiled at 95 °C in a PCR machine (Applied Biosystems Veriti 384-well) for 5 mins. Plates were again snap-frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until further sample preparation. The same procedure was followed for the carrier plate, but instead of sorting single cells, 500 cells were sorted in four-way purity mode into each well without immunofluorescent preselection.  Sample Preparation of Diluted Standard Peptide concentration of the TMTpro labeled OCI-AML8227 sample that was used to measure the MS3 reference library as previously described7 was determined via Nanodrop and the sample was subsequently diluted to contain 250 pg of peptide in each of the 9 channels per injection. A bulk-sorted OCI-AML8227 carrier was added as a 200-cell equivalent per injection. For the comparison of the close-out options, samples with a 100-cell equivalent carrier were used.  Sample Preparation of Single-Cell Samples After thawing, protein lysates from the single cells were digested with 2 ng of Trypsin (Sigma cat. nr. T6567), dissolved in 1 μl of 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 containing Benzonase (Sigma cat. nr. E1014) diluted 1:5000 (vol/vol) to digest any DNA that would interfere with downstream processing. For the carrier plates, the amount of trypsin was increased to 10 ng in order to digest the protein content of each well containing 500 cells. Plates were kept at 37 °C overnight to complete the protein digestion. All dispensing steps in this protocol were done using the Dispendix I-DOT One instrument. After digestion, peptides were labeled with TMTPro reagents. 6 mM in 1 μl acetonitrile (ACN) of each label was added to the single-cell wells, while the 500-cell carrier plate wells were labeled with 13 mM of TMTPro-126 reagent in each well. Subsequently, plates were kept at RT for 1 h. The labeling reaction was quenched with 1 μl of 1.25% or 2.5% Hydroxylamine for the single-cell and carrier plate respectively for 15 min. Subsequently, the carrier plate was pooled and desalted using a SOLAμ HRP 96-well plate. Eluted and desalted peptides were concentrated to dryness in an Eppendorf Speedvac, after which they were resuspended in A* (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The single-cell samples were then mixed from 14 single cells plus the equivalent of 200 carrier channel cells. To ensure a balanced design, each sample contained 4 cells of CD34- and 5 cells of CD34+CD38- and CD34+CD38+ respectively. This pooling was performed using the Opentrons OT-2 liquid handler. The resulting peptide mix was concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in A* for individual Mass Spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with the built-in TMTPro Reporter ion quantification workflows using the standard settings if not further specified. Spectra were searched using the Sequest search engine using the homo sapiens database obtained from Uniprot (Swiss-Prot with isoforms). Static modifications were TMTpro16plex on Lysine (K) and N-Terminus, and for the diluted standard Carbamidomethyl on Cysteine (C) was set. Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), and Acetyl and Met-loss on protein N-termini. Fixed modifications were set to TMTPro on both peptide N-termini and K residues. Results were re-scored with Percolator and filtered to 1% FDR. For the MS2 and RETICLE methods, reporter ion quantification was performed on FTMS MS2 spectra and the same spectra were also sent to Sequest for identification, where they were searched with fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. For the RTS-MS3 method, reporter ion quantification was performed on FTMS MS3 spectra and LIT MS2 spectra were searched with fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. For the reporter ion quantification in all methods, normalization mode and scaling mode were set to None and average reporter s/n threshold was set to 0. Isotopic error correction was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Single-cell proteomics, Orbitrap eclipse tribrid

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark

Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark

Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, DanStem, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Benjamin Furtwängler

### Lab Head
Dr Erwin M. Schoof
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark


