### Accession
PXD016995

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Proteins Downstream of Autism-Associated Gene DIXDC1

### Description
Dix domain containing 1 (Dixdc1) is an important regulator of neuronal development including cortical neurogenesis, neuronal migration and synaptic connectivity, and sequence variants in the gene have been linked to autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Previous studies indicate that Dixdc1 controls neurogenesis through Wnt signaling, while its regulation of dendrite and synapse development requires Wnt and cytoskeletal signaling. However, the prediction of these signaling pathways is primarily based on the structure of Dixdc1. Given the role of Dixdc1 in neural development and brain disorders, we hypothesized that Dixdc1 may regulate additional signaling pathways in the brain. We performed proteomic analyses of Dixdc1 KO mouse cortices to reveal such alterations.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 150 ug total protein was extracted from each of the ten cerebral cortex samples at P21 (5 WT mice and 5 Dixdc1 KO mice) using 8M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. These protein samples were reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 45 minutes at 37 C, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature, and digested by trypsin (Promega) (1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio) overnight at 37 C. The resulting peptides were desalted with the 10 mg SOLA C18 Plates (Thermo Scientific), dried, labeled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents (Thermo Scientific), before being pooled together.  40 ug of the pooled sample was separated into 36 fractions (2 minutes each) by high pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) using a home-made C18 column (200 µm x 30cm bed volume, Waters BEH 130 5µm resin) running a 70-minute gradient from 11%-32% acenotritile-20mM ammonium formate (pH=10) at flow rate of 5µl/minute. Each fraction was then loaded onto a home-made trap column (200 µm x 5 cm bed volume) packed with POROS 10R2 10µm resin (Applied Biosystems), followed by a home-made analytical column (50µm x 50cm bed volume) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5µm particles (Dr. Maisch) with integrated Picofrit nanospray emitter (New Objective).  LC-MS experiments were performed on a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano UPLC system that ran a 3hr gradient (11%-38% acetonitrile-0.1% formic acid) at 70nl/min, coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. A parent ion scan was performed using a resolving power of 120,000 and then up to the 30 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS (minimum ion counts of 1000 for activation), using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was activated such that MS/MS of the same m/z (within a range of 10ppm; exclusion list size=500) detected twice within 5s were excluded from analysis for 30s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were searched against a UniProt mouse protein database (Ver 2017-06, 25,020 entries) for protein identification and quantification by Protein Discover software (Thermo). From 1,706,328 MS/MS spectra acquired in all 36 fractions, 345,832 peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs), 118,855 unique peptide groups (with Peptide FDR < 0.01), and 9,104 unique proteins (Protein FDR < 0.01) were identified. Among these proteins, 8,826 hits were used for quantification. Protein density was normalized by total density of each group. Fold change for both WT mice and Dixdc1 KO mice was calculated, and the mean value of total density (WT and KO mice) for each hit was calculated as well.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Disdc1, Mouse, Autism spectrum disorder

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University


