### Accession
PXD009452

### Title
Bovine adipose tissue LC-MS/MS

### Description
The aim of this study was to look for differentially abundant proteins and their biological functions in adipose tissue between pre- and post-pubertal Brahman heifers.

### Sample Protocol
6 pre- and 6 post-pubertal adipose tissue were processed separately for protein identification and quantification. Briefly, proteins were diluted, alkylated, precipitated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 Ziptips (Millipore) and analyzed by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometric (LC-ESI-MS/MS) with a TripleTOF 5600 instrument (SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (AB SCIEX), searching UniProt database of Bos taurus reference was utilized to identify peptides. The search in ProteinPilot was done using 4 IDA libraries prepared from 2 randomly chosen pre-pubertal sample and 2 randomly chosen post-pubertal sample with the following parameters: : (1) Sample type: identification; (2) Cysteine alkylation: acrylamide; (3) Digestion: (4) Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; (5) Special Factors: None; (6) Species: Bos taurus; (7) ID focus: biological modifications; (8) Database: Bos taurus database; (9) Search effort: thorough; (10) the false discovery rate (FDR) analysis: Yes; and (11) User modified parameter files: No. The ProteinPilot data (false discovery rate < 1%) were then used as ion libraries for sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) analysis using PeakView v2.1 (SCIEX). Statistical analyses were performed using MSstats (v2.6) in R

### Publication Abstract
The adipose tissue has been recognized as an active endocrine organ which can modulate numerous physiological processes such as metabolism, appetite, immunity, and reproduction. The aim of this study was to look for differentially abundant proteins and their biological functions in the abdominal adipose tissue between pre- and postpubertal Brahman heifers. Twelve Brahman heifers were divided into 2 groups and paired on slaughter day. Prepubertal heifers had never ovulated and postpubertal heifers were slaughtered on the luteal phase of their second estrous cycle. After ensuring the occurrence of puberty in postpubertal heifers, abdominal adipose tissue samples were collected. Mass spectrometry proteomic analysis identified 646 proteins and revealed that 171 proteins showed differential abundance in adipose tissue between the pre- and postpuberty groups (adjusted P-value &lt; 0.05). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009452. Using a list of 51 highly differentially abundant proteins as the target (adjusted P-value &lt; 10-5), we found 14 enriched pathways. The results indicated that gluconeogenesis was enhanced when puberty approached. The metabolism of glucose, lipids, and AA in the adipose tissue mainly participated in oxidation and energy supply for heifers when puberty occurred. Our study also revealed the differentially abundant proteins were enriched for estrogen signaling and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways, which are known integrators of metabolism and reproduction. These results suggest new candidate proteins that may contribute to a better understanding of the signaling mechanisms that relate adipose tissue function to puberty. Protein-protein interaction network analysis identified 4 hub proteins that had the highest degrees of connection: PGK1, ALDH5A1, EEF2, and LDHB. Highly connected proteins are likely to influence the functions of all differentially abundant proteins identified, directly or indirectly.

### Keywords
Puberty, Abdominal adipose tissue, Lc-ms/ms, Bos indicus

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Livestock Genomic Group, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Australia, 4072

### Submitter
Loan Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Marina Fortes
Livestock Genomic Group, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Australia, 4072


