### Accession
PXD035247

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid protein markers indicate neuro-damage in SARS-CoV-2-infected non-human primates

### Description
Neurologic manifestations are among the most frequently reported complications of COVID-19. However, given the paucity of tissue samples and highly infectious nature of the etiologic agent of COVID-19, we have limited information to understand the neuropathogenesis of COVID-19. Therefore to better understand the impact of COVID-19 in brain, we employed mass-spectrometry-based proteomics using data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) to investigate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins collected from two different non-human primates, Rhesus Macaque and African Green Monkeys for the neurologic effects of the infection. These monkeys exhibited minimal to mild pulmonary pathology but moderate to severe CNS pathology. Our results indicate that CSF proteome changes after infection resolution correspond with bronchial virus abundance during early infection and revealed substantial differences between the infected NHPs and their age-matched uninfected controls, suggesting these differences could reflect altered secretion of CNS factors in response to SARS-CoV-2-induced neuropathology. We also observed the infected animals to exhibit much scattered data distributions as compared to the tightly clustered corresponding controls which suggest the heterogeneity of the CSF proteome change and the host response to the viral infection. In addition, dysregulated CSF proteins were preferentially enriched in functional pathways associated with progressive neurodegenerative disorders, hemostasis and innate immune responses that could influence neuroinflammatory responses following COVID-19. Mapping dysregulated proteins to the Human Brain Protein Atlas found that these proteins tended to be enriched in brain regions that exhibit more frequent injury following COVID-19. It therefore appears reasonable to speculate that such CSF protein changes could serve as signatures for neurologic injury, identify important regulatory pathways in this process, and potentially reveal therapeutic targets to prevent or attenuate the development of neurologic injuries following COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
CSF sample preparation was adapted from a previously reported method (Bader et al., 2020). Briefly, 40 ul of CSF sample was mixed with lysis buffer (20% Trifluroethanol, 39.5mM Tris and 5mM Dithiothreitol) and then reduced at 91°C for 10 min in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) and 5 min sonication. This step is followed by alkylation with 25mM (final concentration) Iodoacetamide by incubating for 20 min in the dark. The mixture was dried (SpeedVac, Eppendorf) and the pellet was subsequently reconstituted in 50mM Tris-HCl and digested by trypsin at an enzyme to protein mass ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding, and 20 μg was loaded on double-stacked SDB-RPS discs with an 18-gauge needle and mounted in 200 μL tip as mentioned previously (Dylan J. Harney, 2019). Briefly, each tip was wetted with 50 μL of 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1000g for 1 min. Following wetting, each StageTip was equilibrated with 50 μL of 30% methanol/1% TFA with centrifugation for each at 1000g for 3 min. Each StageTip was then loaded with the equivalent of ∼20 μg tryptic peptides followed by washing with100 µl of 99% propanol and 0.1% TFA for 2 mins. The peptides were eluted with 60 µl of elution buffer (80% acetronitrile, 1% ammonium hydroxide), dried and reconstitute in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and subjected to DIA acquisition mode in LC MS/MS. Additionally, for spectral library generation, the SCX stage was prepared in the similar way as the SDB-RPS tips. The tips were activated with 50 µl acetonitrile and the enriched peptides were loaded followed by their elution in 6 buffers: SCX buffer 1: 50mM ammonium acetate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; SCX buffer 2: 75mM ammonium acetate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; SCX buffer 3: 125mM ammonium acetate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; SCX buffer 4: 200mM ammonium acetate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; SCX buffer 5: 300mM ammonium acetate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid; SCX buffer 6: 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% acetonitrile. All the fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and suspended into 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile before injection.

### Data Protocol
All DDA data were processed and combined into spectral library by FragPipe (v12.1) with MSFragger (2.2) (Kong et al, 2017) against Rhesus macaque (Proteome ID UP000006718) and African green monkey database (Proteome ID UP000029965). The mass tolerances were 20 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for-product ions. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The search engine set cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and Nacetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor ion score charges were limited to +2, +3, and +4. The data were also searched against a decoy database so that protein identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The DIA raw files were first converted to. mzML format by MSConvert software and analyzed by DIA-NN (v1.7.15) using the spectral library generated by Fragpipe. The default settings were used for DIA-NN (Precursor FDR: 1%, Log lev: 1, Mass accuracy: 20 ppm, MS1 accuracy: 10 ppm, Scan window: 30, Implicit protein group: genes, Quantification strategy: robust LC (high accuracy)). Quantification of identified peptides was calculated as the average of chromatographic fragment ion peak areas across all reference spectra libraries.

### Publication Abstract
Neurologic manifestations are among the most frequently reported complications of COVID-19. However, given the paucity of tissue samples and the highly infectious nature of the etiologic agent of COVID-19, we have limited information to understand the neuropathogenesis of COVID-19. Therefore, to better understand the impact of COVID-19 on the brain, we used mass-spectrometry-based proteomics with a data-independent acquisition mode to investigate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins collected from two different nonhuman primates, Rhesus Macaque and African Green Monkeys, for the neurologic effects of the infection. These monkeys exhibited minimal to mild pulmonary pathology but moderate to severe central nervous system (CNS) pathology. Our results indicated that CSF proteome changes after infection resolution corresponded with bronchial virus abundance during early infection and revealed substantial differences between the infected nonhuman primates and their age-matched uninfected controls, suggesting these differences could reflect altered secretion of CNS factors in response to SARS-CoV-2-induced neuropathology. We also observed the infected animals exhibited highly scattered data distributions compared to their corresponding controls indicating the heterogeneity of the CSF proteome change and the host response to the viral infection. Dysregulated CSF proteins were preferentially enriched in functional pathways associated with progressive neurodegenerative disorders, hemostasis, and innate immune responses that could influence neuroinflammatory responses following COVID-19. Mapping these dysregulated proteins to the Human Brain Protein Atlas found that they tended to be enriched in brain regions that exhibit more frequent injury following COVID-19. It, therefore, appears reasonable to speculate that such CSF protein changes could serve as signatures for neurologic injury, identify important regulatory pathways in this process, and potentially reveal therapeutic targets to prevent or attenuate the development of neurologic injuries following COVID-19.

### Keywords
Covid-19, African green monkeys, Neuropathology, Proteomics, Csf, Rhesus macaque, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tulane University

### Submitter
Sudipa Maity

### Lab Head
Dr jia Fan
Tulane University


