### Accession
PXD027357

### Title
Impaired M2 macrophage polarization in aging shifts the lipidome to pro-inflammatory mediators driving chronic inflammation and impairing tissue maintenance

### Description
Inflammation is the natural defensive response of the immune system to an injury or infection and is regulated by small molecule mediators triggering different phases of the inflammatory process. In particular, lipid mediators (LM) and cytokines exhibit crucial regulatory functions in the progression and resolution of inflammation. Macrophages play a central role in this process and can adopt distinct phenotypes with specialized functions depending on their microenvironment: inflammatory M1 macrophages drive inflammation by the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and LMs, like prostaglandins (PG) and leukotrienes (LT), while resolving M2 macrophages promote inflammation resolution and tissue regeneration by production of anti-inflammatory cytokines and specialized pro resolving mediators (SPM). Aging is associated with chronic and unresolved, low-grade inflammation (“inflammaging”) and aging-related dysfunction of macrophages in the resolution of inflammation and tissue maintenance has been reported. Yet, the underlying molecular mechanisms and functional consequences of latter processes remain poorly understood. Here, we show that polarization of peritoneal macrophages (PM) from geriatric mice towards an M2-like phenotype is impaired versus adult mice, resulting in aberrant LM formation and cytokine release. In PMs isolated from adult mice (PM-A) we observed a shift in LM formation from PGs and LTs to SPMs already after 4 h of polarization towards M2 with interleukin (IL) 4. In contrast, PMs from geriatric mice (PM-G) produced mainly LTs and PGs upon polarization. This pattern persists over the course of 48 h of polarization. Proteomic profiling revealed that polarization of PM A towards M2 yields a more distinct phenotype, clearly separated from M1, when compared to PM-G. We observed similar aging-related changes in the lipidome and cytokine profile of spleen, lung and liver tissue from mice. Hence, we hypothesize that during aging macrophage polarization towards M2 is impaired, which in turn drives chronic inflammation and disturbs tissue maintenance. By combining state-of-the art lipidomic and proteomic profiling we aim to uncover new molecular targets for pharmaceutical interventions to improve therapeutic strategies for elderly patients with chronic inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and digestion for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis Peritoneal macrophages (PM) were lysed in 1% Nonident-P40, 1mM Na3VO4, NaF, Sodium pyrophosphate tetrabasic decahydrate, 25mM Glycerophosphate, 5mM EDTA, 10ug/uL Leupeptin, 1mM PMSF. For reduction and alkylation of cysteines, the lysates were incubated at 37°C for 30 min with 10mM DTT and subsequently treated with 15mM iodacetamide (Sigma #I1148) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested for 4h at 37°C using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH #125-05061). Then, samples were diluted to 1.5M Urea with milliQ water and digested with 1:100 (w/w) trypsin (Promega #V5111) for 16h at 37°C. Digested peptide solutions were then acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm (Waters 186001828BA) in the presence of a slow vacuum. In this process, the columns were conditioned with 3x 100µL solvent B (80% acetonitrile from Biosolve #06914143) and equilibrated with 3x 100µL solvent A (0.05% formic acid in milliQ water). Samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100µL solvent A, and eluted into PCR tubes with 50µL solvent B. Eluates were dried with a speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to a peptide concentration of 1μg/μL. 20μL were transferred to an MS vial and 0.25μL of HRM peptides (Biognosys AG #42896) were spiked into each sample prior to analysis by LC-MS.  LC-MS/MS (QEHFX) for DIA Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm).  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Thermo Q-Exactive HFX.  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (approx. 1 µg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A, at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column.  Trapping time was 6 minutes.  Peptides were eluted via a non-linear gradient from 1% to 62.5% B in 131min. Total runtime was 145min, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The RF ion funnel was set to 40%.  The conditions for DDA were as follows:  Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20ms with an AGC target of 3x106 ions. A Top15 method was employed to select precursor ions from the full scan MS for fragmentation, quadrupole isolation (1.6m/z) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15,000 FWHM, fixed first mass 120m/z). The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2x105 ions or after filling time of 25ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). Only multiply charged (2+ -7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 20s. Isotopes were excluded. MS conditions were modified as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FHWM.  The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 x 10e6 ions.  DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FHWM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 x 10e6 ions or after filling time of 40 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing Tune version 2.9 and Xcalibur 4.1 were employ.

### Data Protocol
MS Data analysis  Acquired data were processed using Spectronaut Professional v13 (Biognosys AG). For library creation, the DDA and DIA raw files were searched with Pulsar (Biognosys AG) against the mouse UniProt database (Mus musculus, entry only, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended. For library generation, default BGS factory settings were used. The library contained 87176 precursors, corresponding to 4746 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference.  DIA data were analysed and searched against the specific spectral libraries using Spectronaut v13. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed), and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level. The data (candidate table) and protein quantity data reports were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed using R. Proteins with q<0.05 and absolute log2 fold change >0.58 were considered as significantly affected, unless otherwise stated. Displayed q-values were calculated by Spectronaut and indicated as: *q<0.05, **q<0.01, ***q<0.001, n.s.=not significant, unless otherwise stated.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages adapt distinct pro-inflammatory (M1-like) and pro-resolving (M2-like) phenotypes with specific tasks in the immune response and tissue homeostasis. Altered macrophage responses with age are causative for unresolved inflammation, so-called inflammaging, and lead to higher infection susceptibility with unfavorable progression. Here, we reveal molecular determinants of age-related changes in phenotypic functions of murine peritoneal macrophages (PM) by employing comprehensive mass spectrometry-based proteomics (4746 protein groups) and metabololipidomics (&gt;40 lipid mediators). Divergent expression of various macrophage-specific marker proteins and signaling pathways indicates aberrant PM phenotypes in old mice which detrimentally impact their capabilities to release immunomodulatory chemokines and cytokines. We show that aging strikingly compromises the polarization process of macrophages to adapt either pro-inflammatory or pro-resolving phenotypes, thereby yielding aberrant and afunctional macrophage subtypes that cannot be readily assigned to either a typical M1 or M2 phenotype. In particular, the phenotypic adaptation of the bacteria-challenged metabololipidome in macrophages related to inflammation is severely limited by age, which persists across ex vivo polarization towards M1 and M2a macrophages. Our results establish distinct age-associated PM phenotypes outside of the simplified M1 and M2 dichotomy and challenge the dogma of increased pro-inflammatory macrophage pre-activation due to aging by revealing maladaptive functions throughout all phases of inflammation, including resolution.

### Keywords
Mouse, Aging, Macrophages, Differentiation, Immune system

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany


