### Accession
PXD011230

### Title
Metaproteomes of phototrophic mats from four soda lakes found in the Cariboo Plateau region of British Columbia, Canada

### Description
In this study we used metaproteomics to discern the metabolism and physiology of the microorganisms occurring in the phototrophic mats of four soda lakes in the interior of British Columbia, Canada. Binned and assembled metagenomes were used as the database for protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Cells were disrupted in lysing matrix tubes A (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No. 116910050) for 45 seconds at 6 m/s using a OMNI bead ruptor bead mill (Omni International, https://www.omni-inc.com/) and subsequently incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated overnight in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The four soda lake samples were analyzed in technical quadruplicates by 1D-LC-MS/MS (1x 260 min and 3x 460 min runs for each). Two blank runs were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each 260 min run ~1 µg of peptide and for each 460 min run 2-4 µg of peptide were loaded onto a 2 cm, 75 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with eluent A (0.2% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile) and eluent B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile). The pre-column was connected to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 35° C via the integrated heating module. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus. Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nl/min using either a 260 min (from 0% to 20% B in 200 min, in 40 min to 35% B, ending with 20 min at 100% B) or a 460 min gradient (from 0% to 20% B in 354 min, in 71 min to 35% B, ending with 35 min at 100% B). Eluting peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization and analyzed in the Q Exactive Plus as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences predicted and annotated from assembled metagenomes that were generated using samples from the same soda lakes. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. CD-HIT was used to remove redundant sequences from the database using an identity threshold of 95% (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/), giving preference to sequences that came from metagenome-assembled-genomes. The final database contained 3,103,655 protein sequences and is available in this PRIDE submission. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)) with one small modification. The “FidoCT” node in Proteome Discoverer was used for protein inference instead of the “protein validator” node. Only proteins with greater than 1 protein unique peptide, and greater than 2 unique peptides were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
1d-lc, Metagenomics, Phototrophic, Metaproteomics, Soda lakes, Cyanobacteria, Extremophiles, Biofilm, Haloalkaline, Metaproteome, Microbial mats, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary Ab, Canada
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Jackie Zorz

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary Ab, Canada


