### Accession
PXD012444

### Title
PREDICTIVE MODELING OF THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE TO CHONDROITIN SULFATE/GLUCOSAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE IN KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS

### Description
In the present study we explored potential protein biomarkers useful to predict the therapeutic response of osteoarthritis (OA) patients treated with pharmaceutical grade Chondroitin sulfate/Glucosamine hydrochloride (CS+GH; Droglican, Bioiberica), in order to optimize therapeutic outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample for the analysis was obtained by pooling equal amounts of serum from 5 individuals (a total of 8 pools), in order to reduce the inter-individual variability inherent to this type of samples. Four subgroups of patients were analyzed in this phase: WOMAC 20, WOMAC 70 and OARSI responders and non-responders to Droglican treatment, each of them including ten patients (randomized in 2 pools of 5 patients per group).  The top-14 most abundant serum proteins were removed from the pooled samples by immunoafinity liquid chromatography, using a commercial column (MARS Hu-14, Agilent Technologies). Then, the concentration of proteins in the samples was quantified, and equal amounts (approximately 50 ug) were digested with trypsin. The resultant peptide extracts were differentially labeled using the iTRAQ reagents (Supp1ementary Figure 1), following the manufacturer's instructions (Sciex) and a protocol previously described {Fernandez-Puente, 2011}. Briefly, aliquots of the labeled samples were combined and cleaned with POROS R2 resin. The peptide mixture was resolved first by reversed phase chromatography at a basic pH using a C18 column (Zorbax Extend C18, 100 x 2.1 mm id, 3.5 um, 300 Å, Agilent) in a HP1200 system (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA), with a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. Sixteen fractions were collected from each injection, which were desalted and then loaded onto a reversed phase column C18 (Integrafit C18, Proteopep ™ II, 75 um id, 10.2 cm, 5 um, 300 Å, New Objective, USA) to carry out the separation at a constant flow of 350 nL/min. The microfractions were collected and spotted onto a MALDI plate using a SunCollect MALDI Spotter (SunChrom Wissenschaftliche Geräte GmbH, Germany). The acquisition of mass spectrometry data was performed in positive ion mode using a Proteomics Analyzer MALDI-TOF/TOF analyzer 4800 and 4000 series Explorer program 3.5.1. Mass spectra between m/z 800 and 4000 were acquired for each fraction using 1500 laser shots and processed with internal calibration (Angiotensin 3 fmol/spot with m/z of 1046.50 diluted in the matrix). After mass screening, precursors were automatically selected and fragmented with air in the collision chamber with energy of 1 kV. Those 25 ions with stronger signal with S/N above 80 were selected as precursors for acquiring MS/MS, excluding typical trypsin autolysis peaks and matrix signals. For this process, a higher intensity of laser and 2000 shots per spot was used. The identification of proteins was performed with ProteinPilot v4.5 program (Sciex) and the Paragon algorithm, using trypsin as digestion agent and iodoacetamide as fixed modification of cysteines. Each MS/MS spectrum was searched against the database Uniprot/Swissprot (2015_05 release version) for the species Homo Sapiens. Only proteins identified with at least 95% confidence or a ProtScore above 1.3 were taken into account. The program also provided data relative to the quantification between each of the samples, and changes were considered significant with a ratio ≥ 1.3 or ≤ 0.7 and a p-value ≤ 0.05.

### Data Protocol
In the Discovery phase, statistical tools from the ProteinPilot software version 4.5 were employed for the identification of the proteins and their relative quantification between the conditions that were compared (R vs NR). The ProteinPilot software employs two different algorithms: one to perform protein identification (ParagonTM algorithm) and the other one to determine the minimal set of confident protein identifications (Pro GroupTM algorithm). Once the identity of the protein was confirmed (Detected Protein Threshold >95%, Unused ProtScore >1.3), the ratios of the peak areas of iTRAQ reporter ions were calculated in order to compare the relative abundance of the proteins identified in the samples. Data were normalized for loading error by bias, assuming the samples are combined in 1:1 ratios. Peak areas for the iTRAQ reagent(s) and control were also corrected to remove background ion signal by applying the background correction option. Only those changes with a p value ≤0.05 and a ratio ≥1.2 (or ≤0.8) were considered statistically significant. The Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline (PSPEP) software was used independently to calculate false discovery rates (FDR). In the validation phase, comparisons between the two groups (R and NR) were performed by a Mann-Whitney U-test. Spearman correlation coefficients were used to describe the association between two variables (clinical, analytical and response variables) and X2 to compare proportions. To evaluate the ability of serum proteins to predict drug response, area under curve (AUC) was computed and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were plotted. Thresholds values for predicting variables were calculated by Youden's index.  Optimal cutoff values for ORM2 were also determined by ROC curves. A multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine significant and independent contributions of specific variables recorded at baseline by the MOVES investigation group {Hochberg et al, 2015} to drug response. Multivariate models included all covariates with associations from the univariate models with a Pvalue ≤0.20. All reported P values were two-tailed, with a Pvalue ≤0.05 indicating statistical significance. Data from this study were analyzed using SPSS version 24 and R statistics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Predictive biomarkers, Proteomics, Chondroitin sulfate/glucosamine hydrochloride, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
INIBIC
Grupo de Proteómica-PBR2-ProteoRed/ISCIII-Grupo de Investigación de Reumatología (GIR), Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña (CHUAC), Sergas. Universidade da Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.

### Submitter
valentina calamia

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco J Blanco Garcia
Grupo de Proteómica-PBR2-ProteoRed/ISCIII-Grupo de Investigación de Reumatología (GIR), Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña (CHUAC), Sergas. Universidade da Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.


