### Accession
PXD013501

### Title
Human HEK293T Label-free proteomics

### Description
DDX21 is an RNA helicase protein with a diverse set of biological functions. Abnormal levels of DDX21 protein has been observed in colorectal and breast cancers as well as in schizophrenic patients, making it a potential therapeutic target. DDX21 can bind and unwind guanine-rich four-stranded structures of RNA referred to as guanine-quadruplexes (rG4s) and affect the translation of a reporter construct with an rG4 in its 5’ UTR. However, no biological rG4 targets of DDX1 are currently known. In our current study, we use shotgun proteomics to compare global protein expression of cells with wild type DDX21 and mutant DDX21 with impaired rG4s binding capability to identify potential binding targets of DDX21.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were grown to 80% confluence in 150mm cell culture plates and transfected with empty pcDNA 3.1+ (negative control and knock-down samples) or siRNA resistant wt-DDX21 or m4-DDX21 expressing pcDNA3.1+ with polyethyleneimine. The following day the cells were split 1:9 and reverse transfected using transfectamine siRNA Max with either negative control siRNA (negative control sample) or DDX21 siRNA (Knock down and wild type and m4 recovery samples). 72 hours after reverse transfection the cells were collected in Phosphate Buffered Saline (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and rinsed twice. The remainder were lysed in ice-cold RIPA buffer supplemented with 1x HALT proteinase cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were vortexed and sonicated briefly before pelleting cell debris by centrifugation at 21,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 degrees Celsius. The protein concentration of the soluble portion was determined by Bradford assay and 50 µg of each sample was used for SDS-PAGE. Protein lanes were visualized by Coomassie Blue staining prior to whole-lane excision. Each lane was subsequently cut into 32 equal bands, with each band corresponding to a region of the gel containing proteins of a distinct molecular weight range. Bands were cut into 1mm cubes and collected into 8 wells for in-gel digestion. Gel bits were de-stained using 50% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to dehydration with acetonitrile. Samples were then reduced using 10mM 2-ME in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate before alkylating with 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then subject to in-gel trypsinization (16 hours at room temperature). Digestion was quenched using 1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile in water. Two subsequent extractions were performed (1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile in water, 1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile in water), and collected extractions were concentrated using a vacuum concentrator. Each well was resuspended in 60uL of 0.2% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile made with HPLC grade water. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS using a Thermo Easy nLC-1000 in tandem with a Q-Exactive benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer. 10uL of sample from each well was subject to a 75-minute gradient (5-30% buffer B; buffer A = 0.2%formic acid in 5% acetonitrile, buffer B = 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a 2cm Acclaim 100 PepMap Nanoviper C18 trapping column with a New Objective PicoChip reverse-phase analytical LC column.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files corresponding to samples comprising an entire gel lane were grouped together and searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14’s SEQUEST search algorithm using the reviewed, nonredundant H. sapiens complete proteome retrieved from UniprotKB. Search parameters were as follows: event detector mass precision= 2ppm; spectrum selector minimum precursor mass = 350Da, maximum precursor mass = 5000Da; maximum collision energy = 1000; input data digestion enzyme = trypsin (full) with maximum missed cleavage sites = 2; precursor mass tolerance =10ppm with fragment mass tolerance =0.01Da; dynamic modifications to peptides = oxidation of methionine(+15.995Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984Da); static modifications to peptides = carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da).  During data processing, the “Precursor Ion Area Detector” node of Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14’s SEQUEST workflow editor was implemented to quantify the extracted ion chromatogram for each protein identified from the raw data. Searched results were filtered using a minimum of two medium confidence peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
DDX21 is a newly discovered RNA G-quadruplex (rG4) binding protein with no known biological rG4 targets. In this study we used label-free proteomic MS/MS to identify 26 proteins that are expressed at significantly different levels in cells expressing an rG4-binding deficient DDX21 (M4). MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013501. From this list we validate MAGED2 as a protein that is regulated by DDX21 through rG4 in its 5'-UTR. MAGED2 protein levels, but not mRNA levels, are reduced by half in cells expressing DDX21 M4. MAGED2 has a repressive effect on TRAIL-R2 expression that is relieved under these conditions, resulting in elevated TRAIL-R2 mRNA and protein in MCF-7 cells, rendering them sensitive to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Our work identifies the role of DDX21 in regulation at the translational level through biologically relevant rG4 and shows that MAGED2 protein levels are regulated, at least in part, by the potential to form rG4 in their 5'-UTRs.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Qexactive, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Canada

### Submitter
Ramanaguru Siva Piragasam

### Lab Head
Dr Sean McKenna
Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Canada


