### Accession
PXD047578

### Title
Phenotypic and Proteomic Insights into Differential Cadmium Accumulation in Maize Kenerls

### Description
The contamination of agricultural soil by heavy metal cadmium (Cd) poses a significant environmental challenge, affecting crop growth, development and, human health. Previous studies have established the pivotal role of the ZmHMA3 gene, a P-type ATPase heavy metal transporter, in determining variable Cd accumulation in maize grains among 513 inbred lines. To decipher the molecular mechanism underlying mutation-induced phenotypic differences mediated by ZmHMA3, we conducted a quantitative Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based proteomic analysis of immature maize kernels. This analysis aimed to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in wild-type B73 and zmhma3 null mutant under Cd stress. The findings demonstrated that zhma3 accumulated higher levels of Cd compared to B73 when exposed to varying Cd concentrations in the soil. In comparison to low Cd concentration soil, B73 and zmhma3 exhibited 75 and 142 DEPs, respectively, with 24 common DEPs shared between them. Zmhma3 showed a higher induction of upregulated genes related to Cd stres than B73. Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism were specifically enriched in B73, while phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism, and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism appeared to play a more significant role in zmhma3. This study provides proteomics insights into unraveling the molecular mechanism underlying the differences in Cd accumulation in maize kernel.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was first grinded with liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation.). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added. Then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The contamination of agricultural soil with cadmium (Cd), a heavy metal, poses a significant environmental challenge, affecting crop growth, development, and human health. Previous studies have established the pivotal role of the <i>ZmHMA3</i> gene, a P-type ATPase heavy metal transporter, in determining variable Cd accumulation in maize grains among 513 inbred lines. To decipher the molecular mechanism underlying mutation-induced phenotypic differences mediated by <i>ZmHMA3</i>, we conducted a quantitative tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic analysis of immature maize kernels. This analysis aimed to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in wild-type B73 and <i>ZmHMA3</i> null mutant under Cd stress. The findings demonstrated that <i>ZmHMA3</i> accumulated higher levels of Cd compared to B73 when exposed to varying Cd concentrations in the soil. In comparison to soil with a low Cd concentration, B73 and <i>ZmHMA3</i> exhibited 75 and 142 DEPs, respectively, with 24 common DEPs shared between them. <i>ZmHMA3</i> showed a higher induction of upregulated genes related to Cd stress than B73. Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism was specifically enriched in B73, while phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism, and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism appeared to play a more significant role in <i>ZmHMA3</i>. This study provides proteomics insights into unraveling the molecular mechanism underlying the differences in Cd accumulation in maize kernels.

### Keywords
Maize; cadmium; proteomics; kernel; mutant

### Affiliations
xiangya hospital
Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Su Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Bin Tang
Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences


