### Accession
PXD015093

### Title
Phosphorylation Dependent Assembly of a 14-3-3 Anchored Signaling Complex During Erythrocyte Invasion by Plasmodium falciparum Merozoites

### Description
Red blood cell (RBC) invasion by Plasmodium merozoites requires multiple steps that are regulated by signalling pathways. However, the signalling pathways in merozoites that regulate microneme secretion and RBC invasion are not completely understood. Exposure of P. falciparum merozoites to a low potassium (K+) ionic environment as found in blood plasma has been shown to lead to a rise in cytosolic calcium (Ca2+), which triggers microneme secretion. Here, we present a phosphoproteome analysis of extracellular merozoites revealing 3700 phosphorylation sites of which 1705 were not previously known. Upon investigation of phosphorylation changes in merozoites subjected to different ionic environments (high K+/ low K+) we identified 394 protein phosphorylation sites out of which changes in 143 were Ca2+-dependent.  We observed that the catalytic and regulatory subunits of protein kinase A (PfPKAc and PfPKAr), calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 (PfCDPK1) and scaffold protein Pf14-3-3I form a phosphorylation-dependent multiprotein complex when merozoites are exposed to the low K+ signal. Moreover, disruption of this complex using phospho-peptides, or small molecule inhibitors blocks microneme secretion and RBC invasion. This study sheds light on the regulatory mechanisms used by merozoites to invade RBCs and identifies new targets for development of drugs against malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins isolated from P. falciparum merozoites were digested with trypsin. TMT labeling was used for the quantification of changes in the phosphorylation in different treatment conditions. Strong cation exchange (SCX) or hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) was used for the fractionation of peptides. IMAC and TiO2 enrichment was used for the enrichment of phophopeptides.  LC-MS/MS was carried out using a Nano LC-1000 HPLC nanoflow system (Thermofisher Scientific) and hybrid Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific). Data acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS, MS2. Full-scan MS spectra of intact peptides (m/z 350–1000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Top 20 precursors were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell. Dynamic exclusion was 50 s and a minimum 500 counts for Mz and 200 counts for TMT sets were required for MS2 selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for TMT and label free phosphoproteomic data. All raw files were searched against a Plasmodium falciparum database using Open-MS pipeline containing two search engines Mascot and MSGF+Percolator (Weisser et al., 2016). Search parameters were:  carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and STY phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. TMT experiment, TMT-6plex labeling on lysine and N-termini was searched for protein quantitation. Phosphoscore more than 11 was considered as a significant localization score.   Data was also searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) (with the Andromeda search engine) against a Plasmodium falciparum database. The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and STY phosphorylation was set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. TMT-6plex labeling on Lysine and N-termini was searching for protein quantitation. Phospho-localization probability of more than 75% was considered as significant localization. Quantification from MaxQuant analysis was used for quantification of changes in the phosphorylation. All phospho-spectra of interest were manually validated.                          To determine whether the variation of the quantification of a phosphopeptide is due to a variation in the abundance of the protein itself, or due to a variation in the abundance of its modification, a statistical test was performed to compare the variation in abundance of each phosphopeptide to the abundance of the corresponding protein. To do this for a specific phosphopeptide, we first estimated the average m and standard deviation s of the log2 fold change (FC) of the non-modified peptides of the protein (where FC is equal to either (EC) ̅/(IC) ̅   or (EC-BA) ̅/(IC) ̅, x ̅ being the average intensity observed for a peptide in the condition x). Assuming that the log2(FC) of  the non-modified peptides follow a Normal distribution centered on m and having a standard deviation of s, we deduce a p-value related to the test that the measured log2(FC) for the phosphopeptide is equal to m by 2×P_(N(m,s)) (log2(FC)) if log2(FC)<m and 2×〖(1-P〗_N(m,s)  (log2(FC))) if log2(FC)≥m , where P_(N(m,s)) is the cumulative distribution function of N(m,s). Note that this p-value has been computed only when we have at least 3 non-modified peptides with intensity values for a protein.

### Publication Abstract
Red blood cell (RBC) invasion by <i>Plasmodium</i> merozoites requires multiple steps that are regulated by signaling pathways. Exposure of <i>P. falciparum</i> merozoites to the physiological signal of low K<sup>+</sup>, as found in blood plasma, leads to a rise in cytosolic Ca<sup>2+</sup>, which mediates microneme secretion, motility, and invasion. We have used global phosphoproteomic analysis of merozoites to identify signaling pathways that are activated during invasion. Using quantitative phosphoproteomics, we found 394 protein phosphorylation site changes in merozoites subjected to different ionic environments (high K<sup>+</sup>/low K<sup>+</sup>), 143 of which were Ca<sup>2+</sup> dependent. These included a number of signaling proteins such as catalytic and regulatory subunits of protein kinase A (PfPKAc and PfPKAr) and calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 (PfCDPK1). Proteins of the 14-3-3 family interact with phosphorylated target proteins to assemble signaling complexes. Here, using coimmunoprecipitation and gel filtration chromatography, we demonstrate that Pf14-3-3I binds phosphorylated PfPKAr and PfCDPK1 to mediate the assembly of a multiprotein complex in <i>P. falciparum</i> merozoites. A phospho-peptide, P1, based on the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent phosphosites of PKAr, binds Pf14-3-3I and disrupts assembly of the Pf14-3-3I-mediated multiprotein complex. Disruption of the multiprotein complex with P1 inhibits microneme secretion and RBC invasion. This study thus identifies a novel signaling complex that plays a key role in merozoite invasion of RBCs. Disruption of this signaling complex could serve as a novel approach to inhibit blood-stage growth of malaria parasites.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Invasion of red blood cells (RBCs) by <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> merozoites is a complex process that is regulated by intricate signaling pathways. Here, we used phosphoproteomic profiling to identify the key proteins involved in signaling events during invasion. We found changes in the phosphorylation of various merozoite proteins, including multiple kinases previously implicated in the process of invasion. We also found that a phosphorylation-dependent multiprotein complex including signaling kinases assembles during the process of invasion. Disruption of this multiprotein complex impairs merozoite invasion of RBCs, providing a novel approach for the development of inhibitors to block the growth of blood-stage malaria parasites.

### Keywords
Malaria, Lc ms-ms, Rbc invasion

### Affiliations
Malaria Parasite Biology and Vaccines, Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institute Pastuer, 25-28 Rue du Docteur Roux 75015, Paris France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Chetan Chitnis
Malaria Parasite Biology and Vaccines, Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institute Pastuer, 25-28 Rue du Docteur Roux 75015, Paris France


