### Accession
PXD015825

### Title
Discovery of a potent and selective covalent inhibitor and activity-based probe for UCHL1, with anti-fibrotic activity

### Description
Ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCHL1) is a deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) that is very highly expressed in human brain. UCHL1 has been proposed as a potential therapeutic target in neurodegeneration, cancer, and liver and lung fibrosis, however bona fide molecular functions of UCHL1 are yet to be elucidated. Herein we characterize a potent and selective inhibitor and activity-based probe (IMP-1710) for UCHL1 based on a covalent inhibitor scaffold, and its application to identify and quantify target proteins in intact human cells. IMP-1710 stereoselectively labels the catalytic cysteine of UCHL1 at low nanomolar concentration, and we show that a previously claimed UCHL1 inhibitor (LDN-57444) fails to engage UCHL1 in cells. We further demonstrate that potent UCHL1 inhibitors selectively block pro-fibrotic responses in a cellular model of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), supporting a potential therapeutic role for UCHL1 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics samples were prepared in LoBind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf®) and in a dust-free area. All buffer solutions were prepared fresh and filtered with a 0.22 µm syringe filter. NeutrAvidin® Agarose Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dimethylated prior to the enrichment procedure and washed twice with 0.2% SDS in PBS before use.  Protein lysates (400 µg, in biological triplicates) were ligated with AzRB capture reagent via CuAAC click chemistry, followed by protein precipitation and re-suspension as described. The protein solution (in 0.2% SDS in PBS) was cleared by centrifugation (17,000 g, 10 min, room temperature) and incubated with dimethylated NeutrAvidin Agarose Beads (60 µL beads per starting 1 mg protein) for 2 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation (3,000 g, 2 min) and the protein immobilised beads were sequentially washed three times with 1% SDS in PBS (0.5 mL) and three times with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 (0.5 mL). After the last wash, the beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 before addition of 0.4 μg Lysyl endopeptidase®/ LysC (FUJIFILM Wako) and incubation for 2 h at 37°C. The beads were then pelleted, and the supernatant (containing free peptides released by LysC cleavage) was collected and transferred to a new LoBind tube. 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM chloroacetamide were added to each sample and samples incubated for 10 min at room temperature before addition of 0.2 μg sequence grade trypsin (Promega) and overnight incubation at 37°C. Fully digested peptides were then chemically labelled with 10 plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each peptide sample (40 µL) was labelled with different TMT reagents (0.08 mg, dissolved in 40 µL MeCN) and incubated for 2 h at room temperature with gentle shaking. The reaction was quenched by 1 µL 5% hydroxylamine and the labelled peptides were then pooled together and dried in SpeedVac Concentrator at 45°C. The dried TMT labelled peptides were re-suspended in 150 µL 1% TFA in MilliQ water (v/v) and centrifuged to pellet any particulates and fractionated using three discs of SDB RPS (Styrenedivinylbenzene reverse phase sulfonated) and separated into three fractions as previously reported. The samples were dried in a SpeedVac Concentrator and stored at  80°C. Peptides were re suspended in 2% MeCN and 0.5% TFA in LC MS grade water for analysis by nanoLC MS/MS on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.4.0 using the built-in Andromeda search engine and searched against the human reference with isoforms proteome database (Uniprot, accessed 17 January 2019). For protein quantification, MS2 based quantification was used, selecting the pre/defined TMT 10 plex labelling on, lysine side chains and peptide N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as digestion enzyme, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and minimum 7 residues of peptide length were allowed. Unique and razor peptides were selected for protein identification and quantification. Other parameters were left as default. MaxQuant-processed data was further analysed using Perseus version 1.6.2.3 and GraphPad Prism version 5.03. For the compound modified site identification, the MS raw files were processed in PEAKS (version 8.0) and searched against the same human reference proteome that was used in MaxQuant analysis. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme (cleave site: after K and R), allowing for maximum 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation and peptide compound adducts were used as variable modifications. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Uchl1, Deubiquitination, Activity based-probe profiling, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, London, W12 0BZ, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Nattawadee Panyain

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, London, W12 0BZ, UK


