### Accession
PXD042118

### Title
Bacteroidota assemble a unique type VI secretion system membrane complex

### Description
Microbes have evolved elaborate mechanisms to cope with competitors, including the type VIsecretion system (T6SS) of Gram-negative bacteria. The T6SS inhibits target cells through contact-dependent translocation of toxic effector proteins across two cellular membranes via an inverted phage-like apparatus. Proteobacteria accomplish this feat by passage of theT6SS needle through a megadalton-size membrane complex (MC), which is essential for T6SS function. Remarkably, although the phylum Bacteroidota encodes a T6SS, it lacks homologs of the MC. We identified five novel genes, essential for T6SS function, that encode a candidate unique Bacteroidota T6SSMC. We purified the T6SSiii MC and revealed its dimensions using electron microscopy. We identified an intricate protein protein interaction network underlying the assembly of the MC, the stoichiometry of the five TssNQOPR components., tTheir predicted structures were validated using crosslinking mass-spectrometry and we assessed the structural homology with known proteins. Importantly, we determine the connection between the T6SSiii MC and the otherwise conserved baseplate involving  the hub protein Tss.Finally, phylogenomic analysis of the distribution of T6SSiii MC genes across the phylum Bacteroidota highlights patterns of conservation including the invariant

### Sample Protocol
Purified TssNQOPR complex samples were crosslinked with 100µM DSSH12/D12 in HEPES for 30 min at 600 rpm, 37°C. The reaction was quenched by adding TRIS-HCl (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of 20mM. Further samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with 0.5 µg/µL trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters), and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to detergent removal of remaining interfering solutions of fractions 1 and 2. HPLC-grade H2O was added to the processed samples, and detergent removal was performed using HiPPRTM-detergent removal kit (Thermo Scientific™) with 25µL settled resin in 1:1 ratio with sample.  Liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo ScientificTM). Mass spectrometry data was acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a cycle time of 3s. Samples were measured in technical duplicates.  Full MS scans were obtained via an Orbitrap detector at resolution of 120 000 and scan range of 400-1500 m/z, normalized AGC target of 50% and injection time of 50ms. Precursor selection was obtained by monoisotopic precursor selection with an intensity threshold of 5e3and dynamic exclusion. Charge states of 3-8 were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID) with 35% activation energy. Quadrupole isolation was used with 1.6 m/z window and MS2 scans were obtained by an Ion Trap detector with rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of10 ppm (Leitner, A.; Walzthoeni, T.; Aebersold, R. Nat. Protoc. 2014, 9, 120−37). For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Type vi secretion, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, AG Stengel, University of Konstanz,Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, AG Stengel, University of Konstanz,Germany


