### Accession
PXD010208

### Title
High-throughput Phosphorylation Screening and Validation through Ti(IV)-Nanopolymer Functionalized Reverse Phase PhosphoProtein Array

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most important and widespread molecular regulatory mechanisms that controls almost all aspects of cellular functions in animals and plants. Here, we introduce a novel chemically functionalized Reverse Phase PhosphoProtein Array (RP3A) to capture and measure phosphoproteomes. RP3A uses polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer immobilized with Ti(IV) ions to functionalize nitrocellulose membrane, facilitating specific chelation of phosphoproteins from complex protein samples on the array. Globular, water-soluble Ti(IV)-dendrimer allows the RP3A surface highly accessible by phosphoproteins multi-dimensionally and the captured phosphoproteins were subsequently detected using the same validated antibodies as in regular reverse-phase protein arrays. The novel chemical strategy demonstrated superior specificity (1:10,000), high sensitivity (fg level), and good quantitative nature (R2 =0.99) for measuring phosphoproteins. We further applied quantitative phosphoproteomics followed by RP3A to validate the phosphorylation status of a panel of phosphoproteins in response to environmental stresses in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
The extracted proteins were digested with Lys C for 3 hours and then digested with trypsin for another 12 hours to obtain peptides mixture. Phosphopeptides were enriched using a PolyMAC-Ti kit (Tymora Analytical). Briefly, the digested peptides were resuspended in 200 µL of Loading buffer, and the sample was vortexed. Next, 50 µL of the PolyMAC/Magnetic Capture beads were added to the sample and incubated for 20 min. The solvent was removed using a magnetic separator rack, and the beads were washed with 200 µL of Washing buffer 1 for 5 minutes. The beads were then incubated with 200 µL of Washing buffer 2 for 5 minutes, and the solvent was removed as before. Finally, the beads were incubated twice with 100 µL of Elution buffer for 5 minutes each. The eluents were combined and completely dried in a SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.0) with the Andromeda search engine. The main search peptide mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and ITMS MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and amaximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues were chosen as variable modifications. The spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Arabidopsis Thaliana) with common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. The XIC peak intensity was extracted with a match time window of 1.0 min for “match between runs”. The required false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide and the protein level, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Contaminants, reverse identification and proteins only identified by site were excluded from further data analysis using Perseus software (version 1.5.5.0).

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most important and widespread molecular regulatory mechanisms that controls almost all aspects of cellular functions in animals and plants. Here, we introduce a novel chemically functionalized reverse phase phosphoprotein array (RP3A) to capture and measure phosphoproteomes. RP3A uses polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer immobilized with Ti(IV) ions to functionalize nitrocellulose membrane, facilitating specific chelation of phosphoproteins from complex protein samples on the array. Globular, water-soluble Ti(IV)-dendrimer allows the RP3A surface to be highly accessible to phosphoproteins multidimensionally, and the captured phosphoproteins were subsequently detected using the same validated antibodies as in regular reverse-phase protein arrays. The novel chemical strategy demonstrated superior specificity (1:10&#x202f;000), high sensitivity (fg level), and good quantitative nature ( R<sup>2</sup> = 0.99) for measuring phosphoproteins. We further applied quantitative phosphoproteomics followed by RP3A to validate the phosphorylation status of a panel of phosphoproteins in response to environmental stresses in Arabidopsis.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr W. Andy Tao
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University


