### Accession
PXD007068

### Title
Large scale and significant expression from pseudogenes in Sodalis glossinidius - a facultative endosymbiont C4PR_LIV

### Description
The majority of bacterial genomes have high coding efficiencies, but there are an few genomes of the intracellular bacteria that have low gene density. The genome of the endosymbiont Sodalis glossinidius contains almost 50% pseudogenes containing mutations that putatively silence them at the genomic level. We have applied multiple omic strategies: combining single molecule DNA-sequencing and annotation; stranded RNA-sequencing and proteome analysis to better understand the transcriptional and translational landscape of Sodalis pseudogenes, and potential mechanisms for their control. Between 53% and 74% of the Sodalis transcriptome remains active in cell-free culture. Mean sense transcription from Coding Domain Sequences (CDS) is four-times greater than that from pseudogenes. Core-genome analysis of six Illumina sequenced Sodalis isolates from different host Glossina species shows pseudogenes make up ~40% of the 2,729 genes in the core genome, suggesting are stable and/or Sodalis is a recent introduction across the Glossina genus as a facultative symbiont. These data further shed light on the importance of transcriptional and translational control in deciphering host-microbe interactions, and demonstrate that pseudogenes are more complex than a simple degrading DNA sequence. For this reason, we show that combining genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics represents an important resource for studying prokaryotic genomes with a view to elucidating evolutionary adaptation to novel environmental niches.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid cultures were grown as previously described for early- mid-log and late-stationary growth phase S. glossinidius GMMB4. PBS-washed pellets were suspended in 250 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated, using a Sonics Vibra Cell (Sonics and Materials Inc., Newton, U.S.A.) and 630-0422 probe (250 µl to 10 mL) for a total of 120 joules. The sample was then analysed for protein content, 50 µg was removed, added to 0.0 5% RapiGest™ (Waters, Manchester) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and shaken at 550 rpm for 10 min at 80°C. The sample was then reduced (addition of 10 µL of 60 mM DTT and incubation at 60 °C for 10 minutes) and alkylated (addition of 10 µl of 180 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark). Trypsin (Promega U.K. Ltd., Southampton, proteomics grade) was reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid to a concentration of 0.2 µg/µl and 10 µL added to the sample followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. The digestion was terminated and RapiGest™ removed by acidification (1 µl of TFA and incubation at 37 °C for 45 min) and centrifugation (15,000 x g for 15 min). To check for complete digestion each sample was analysed pre- and post-acidification by SDS-PAGE.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, a 2 µl (1 µg) injection was analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead) coupled to a QExactiveHF™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 4 µl/min with 0.1 % (v/v) FA. The sample was resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 97 % A (0.1 % formic acid) 3 % B (99.9 % ACN 0.1 % formic acid) to 70 % A 30 % B over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The data-dependent program used for data acquisition consisted of a 60,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (AGC set to 3e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms) the 18 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 30,000 resolution scan (AGC set to 1e5 ions with a maximum fill time of 45 ms) with an ion selection window of 1.2 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 28. To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MSMS the program used a 30 second dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification for the MS/MS dataset was performed using an open-source software tool – ProteoAnnotator (69). ProteoAnnotator provides an automated pipeline for various interconnected computational steps required for inferring statistically robust identifications. The tool produces a variety of output files compliant with the data standards developed by Proteomics Standard Initiative (70). Mass spectra in form of a MGF (Mascot Generic format) file were provided as input to the tool, along with the search criteria and protein database as described in the sections below. For the post-processing of results, we applied a threshold of 5 % for both peptide level and protein group level FDRs as described in Ghali et al (2004).   The search parameters for the MS/MS dataset were fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modification of oxidation of methionine. A single missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. The product tolerance was set as ±0.5 Da and the precursor tolerance was set as 10 ppm. The protein search database comprised of the gene model predicted by PROKKA, as previously described, plus a six-frame translation of the SgGMMB4 genome. Six-frame translated sequences with length less than eight were excluded from the search database. Decoy sequences were added to the database with a true:decoy ratio of 1:1 to create a final protein database for performing the MS/MS search.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of bacterial genomes have high coding efficiencies, but there are some genomes of intracellular bacteria that have low gene density. The genome of the endosymbiont <i>Sodalis glossinidius</i> contains almost 50&#x200a;% pseudogenes containing mutations that putatively silence them at the genomic level. We have applied multiple 'omic' strategies, combining Illumina and Pacific Biosciences Single-Molecule Real-Time DNA sequencing and annotation, stranded RNA sequencing and proteome analysis to better understand the transcriptional and translational landscape of <i>Sodalis</i> pseudogenes, and potential mechanisms for their control. Between 53 and 74&#x200a;% of the <i>Sodalis</i> transcriptome remains active in cell-free culture. The mean sense transcription from coding domain sequences (CDSs) is four times greater than that from pseudogenes. Comparative genomic analysis of six Illumina-sequenced <i>Sodalis</i> isolates from different host <i>Glossina</i> species shows pseudogenes make up ~40&#x200a;% of the 2729 genes in the core genome, suggesting that they are stable and/or that <i>Sodalis</i> is a recent introduction across the genus <i>Glossina</i> as a facultative symbiont. These data shed further light on the importance of transcriptional and translational control in deciphering host-microbe interactions. The combination of genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics gives a multidimensional perspective for studying prokaryotic genomes with a view to elucidating evolutionary adaptation to novel environmental niches.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Transcriptomics, Genomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool,L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool,L69 7ZB


