### Accession
PXD021365

### Title
Analysis of Gcn20 pullout samples by mass spectrometry

### Description
Mass spectrometric analysis of Gcn20 pullout samples.

### Sample Protocol
Gel band was destained in 1:1 acetonitrile (ACN):100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) with vortexing, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56oC and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out overnight with 10 ng/µl of dimethylated porcine trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) in 100 mM ABC at 37oC. Peptides were extracted from the gel matrix using bath sonication, followed by 30 min vortexing in 2 volumes of 1:2 5% formic acid (FA): ACN. The organic phase was evaporated in a vacuum-centrifuge, after which the peptides were desalted on in-house made C18 (3M) solid phase extraction tips. Purified peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.1.0) (PMID: 27809316). Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation were set as potential variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Identification was performed against the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) reference proteome database using the tryptic digestion rule. Only identifications with at least 1 peptide ≥ 7 amino acids long (with up to 2 missed cleavages) were accepted. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) (PMID: 21593866) feature of MaxQuant was enabled. This normalizes protein intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides and enables rough intra-sample estimation of protein abundance. Peptide-spectrum match, peptide and protein false discovery rate was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach (PMID: 17327847). All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
The Gcn pathway is conserved in all eukaryotes, including mammals such as humans, where it is a crucial part of the integrated stress response (ISR). Gcn1 serves as an essential effector protein for the kinase Gcn2, which in turn is activated by stalled ribosomes, leading to phosphorylation of eIF2 and a subsequent global repression of translation. The fine-tuning of this adaptive response is performed by the Rbg2/Gir2 complex, a negative regulator of Gcn2. Despite the wealth of available biochemical data, information on structures of Gcn proteins on the ribosome has remained elusive. Here we present a cryo-electron microscopy structure of the yeast Gcn1 protein in complex with stalled and colliding 80S ribosomes. Gcn1 interacts with both 80S ribosomes within the disome, such that the Gcn1 HEAT repeats span from the P-stalk region on the colliding ribosome to the P-stalk and the A-site region of the lead ribosome. The lead ribosome is stalled in a nonrotated state with peptidyl-tRNA in the A-site, uncharged tRNA in the P-site, eIF5A in the E-site, and Rbg2/Gir2 in the A-site factor binding region. By contrast, the colliding ribosome adopts a rotated state with peptidyl-tRNA in a hybrid A/P-site, uncharged-tRNA in the P/E-site, and Mbf1 bound adjacent to the mRNA entry channel on the 40S subunit. Collectively, our findings reveal the interaction mode of the Gcn2-activating protein Gcn1 with colliding ribosomes and provide insight into the regulation of Gcn2 activation. The binding of Gcn1 to a disome has important implications not only for the Gcn2-activated ISR, but also for the general ribosome-associated quality control pathways.

### Keywords
Gcn2, Translation, Ribosome, Gcn20, Gcn1

### Affiliations
University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Hamburg Martin-Luther-King-Platz 6 20146 Hamburg Germany

### Submitter
Sergo Kasvandik

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Daniel Wilson
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Hamburg Martin-Luther-King-Platz 6 20146 Hamburg Germany


