### Accession
PXD043608

### Title
Therapeutic potential of pomegranate juice-derived nanovesicles in nude mouse benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) xenograft model

### Description
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and associated lower urinary tract symptoms affect a large percentage of the male population and places a substantial burden on the world health system. Current therapies include 5-alpha reductase inhibitors and alpha-blockers that are only partially effective and pose a huge economic burden, emphasizing the urgent need for effective, economical therapies. We isolated nanovesicles from pomegranate juice (Punica Granatum) (referred to as ‘POM-NVs’) and report to our knowledge for the first time, that these vesicles possess therapeutic potential against BPH.  Following extensive characterization of POM-NVs, we tested their therapeutic potential in vitro using BPH1 cell line and identified a potential anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effect. We further tested these vesicles using a clinically relevant xenograft mouse BPH model derived from human BPH tissues. Remarkably, POM-NVs could reverse the BPH phenotype conferred by TGF-β mediated signaling and induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) reversal, leading to the restoration of prostate epithelial states in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, these vesicles attenuated bone morphogenic protein 5 (BMP5) signaling, a cardinal alteration that is instrumental in driving BPH. Considering the large incidences of BPH and its associated economic burdens, our study has important implications and can potentially improve the clinical management of BPH.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome protein extraction and digestion for LC-MS analysis  Enriched exosome samples were dried by lyophilization. 100ul freshly made 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 0.1% (w/v) heat-labile RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters) and 10mM dithiothreitol was added into sample tube to resuspend the exosome sample and reduce the disulfide bonds at 60C for 30 minutes. The samples were then alkylated by iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes, followed by digestion for 16 hours using trypsin (Thermo Scientific #90057) at 37C. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the sample tube to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) to stop the digestion. The samples were then incubated at 37C for 40 minutes to cleavage the detergent. The samples were cleaned using C18 spin column (Harvard Apparatus #744101) and then lyophilized.    LC-MS/MS analysis  Digested peptide samples were first reconstituted into 60ul of 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and then analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific).  Six microliters of peptide sample was first trapped on a Pepmap100 C18 peptide trap (Thermo Scientific, 5um, 0.3X5mm) and then washed at 20ul/min using 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 10 minutes. Next the cleaned peptides were washed off the trap and further separated on a Pepman 100 RSLC C18 column (Thermo Scientific, 2.0 um, 75-μm × 150-mm) at 40C using a gradient of between 2% to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 120 min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. LC-MS/MS analysis were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in positive mode with the Orbitrap MS analyzer for precursor scans at 120,000 FWHM from 400 to 1600 m/z using quad isolation and the ion-trap MS analyzer for MS/MS scans at top-speed mode (3-second cycle time). Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used to fragment the precursor peptides with a normalized energy level of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS spectrum for each sample were filtered and processed using the Proteome Discoverer software by Thermo Scientific (v1.4) and then submitted to SequestHT search algorithm against the Uniprot punica granatum database (10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance: 10ppm, product ion mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, static Carbamidomethylation of +57.021 Da for cysteine and dynamic oxidation of +15.995 Da for methionine). Perculator PSM validator algorithm was used for peptide spectrum matching validation and false discovery rate estimation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pomegranate juice derived nanovesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Plant-derived nanovesicles

### Affiliations
Augusta University
Augusta University 

### Submitter
Sharanjot  Saini 

### Lab Head
Dr Sharanjot Saini
Augusta University


