### Accession
PXD043982

### Title
Global Proteomic Profiling of Pediatric AML: A Pilot Study

### Description
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease with several recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities. Despite genomics and transcriptomics profiling efforts to understand AML’s heterogeneity, studies focused on the proteomic profiles associated with pediatric AML cytogenetic features remain limited. Furthermore, the majority of biological functions within cells are operated by proteins (i.e., enzymes) and most drugs target the proteome rather than the genome or transcriptome, thus, highlighting the significance of studying proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The study cohort included bone marrow leukemic blasts obtained at diagnosis from 16 pediatric AML patients treated on the multicenter AML02 clinical trial. The 16 pediatric AML were randomly selected from AML02 patients with bone marrow aspirate available, balancing CBF vs. non-CBF, MRD1 status, and Ara-C LC50 level. Proteomic profiling was performed using an untargeted global approach a with 16-plex isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling reaction, two-dimensional reversed-phase liquid chromatography (LC/LC) fractionation, and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), followed by computational data processing. A complete detail of the TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS procedure has been previously described. Briefly, 20 μg of extracted proteins from bone marrow samples with appropriately 1 million leukemic blasts were digested and labeled with 16 different TMT tags. Samples from 16 channels were then pooled equally into a mixture, and the mixture was fractionated into 60 fractions by basic pH reverse-phase LC. Each fraction was further analyzed by acidic pH reverse phase nanoscale LC and high-resolution mass spectrometry (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed by in-house JUMP software and spectra were searched against the Uniport human database with proteins identified at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). For quantification, preprocessed peptides/proteins were measured by the TMT reporter ions. Data were further normalized and transformed by variance stabilizing transformation (vsn) in order to reduce intragroup variation prior to any downstream analysis. Vsn was observed to perform the best in reducing the intragroup variation compared to other normalization methods including log2, median, mean, and quantile for TMT proteomic quantification normalization. Moreover, the vsn normalization performed a transformation similar to the log transformation and required the input to be untransformed.

### Publication Abstract
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease with several recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities. Despite genomics and transcriptomics profiling efforts to understand AML's heterogeneity, studies focused on the proteomic profiles associated with pediatric AML cytogenetic features remain limited. Furthermore, the majority of biological functions within cells are operated by proteins (i.e., enzymes) and most drugs target the proteome rather than the genome or transcriptome, thus, highlighting the significance of studying proteomics. Here, we present our results from a pilot study investigating global proteomic profiles of leukemic cells obtained at diagnosis from 16 pediatric AML patients using a robust TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS platform. The proteome profiles were compared among patients with or without core binding factor (CBF) translocation indicated by a t(8;21) or inv(16) cytogenetic abnormality, minimal residual disease status at the end of the first cycle of chemotherapy (MRD1), and in vitro chemosensitivity of leukemic cells to cytarabine (Ara-C LC50). Our results established proteomic differences between CBF and non-CBF AML subtypes, providing insights to AML subtypes physiology, and identified potential druggable proteome targets such as <i>THY1 (CD90)</i>, <i>NEBL</i>, <i>CTSF</i>, <i>COL2A1</i>, <i>CAT</i>, <i>MGLL (MAGL)</i>, <i>MACROH2A2</i>, <i>CLIP2</i> (isoform 1 and 2), <i>ANPEP (CD13)</i>, <i>MMP14</i>, and <i>AK5.</i>

### Keywords
Pediatrics acute myeloid leukemia, Transcriptomics, Tandem mass tag, Leukemic cells, Untargeted labeled proteomics

### Affiliations
St Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Haiyan Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St Jude Children's Research Hospital


