### Accession
PXD006573

### Title
Mouse Liver LC-MS/MS LNA miR-676 treated dbdb mice

### Description
Over 40 % of microRNAs are located in introns of coding genes, and many intronic microRNAs are co-regulated with their host genes. In such cases of co-regulation, the products of host genes and their intronic microRNAs can cooperate to coordinately regulate biologically important pathways. Therefore, we screened intronic microRNAs dysregulated in liver of obese mouse models to identify previously uncharacterized coding host genes that may contribute to the pathogenesis of obesity-associated insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Our approach identified that expression of both Ectodysplasin A (Eda), the causal gene of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED; MIM 305100) and its intronic microRNA, miR-676, was strongly increased in liver of obese mouse models. Moreover, hepatic EDA expression is increased in obese human subjects, reduced upon weight loss, and its hepatic expression correlates with systemic insulin resistance. Eda expression in murine liver is controlled via PPARg activation, increases in circulation and promotes JNK activation and inhibitory serine phosphorylation of IRS1 in skeletal muscle. Consistently, bi-directional modulation of hepatic Eda expression in mouse models affects systemic glucose metabolism with alterations of muscle insulin signaling, revealing a novel role of EDA as an obesity-associated hepatokine, which impairs insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Custom-made miRCURY locked nucleic acids (LNA) microRNA inhibitor was designed and synthesized by Exiqon as a fully complementary nucleotide to the mature miR-676 sequence covering the seed: 5’-AACAACCTCAGGACG-3’ (LNA miR-676). The Negative control A with no homology to any known mouse microRNA sequence was used as the control LNA (LNA control). Db/db mice were intraperitoneally administered once per week with 5 mg /kg body weight of LNA dissolved in phosphate buffered saline for 2 weeks starting from 8 weeks of age, and thereafter subjected to liver collection after fasting for 6 hours. The liver was immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Livers from dbdb animals and SILAC mice 1 were crushed to powder using a mortar in liquid nitrogen and resuspended in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0), and then acetone precipitated for clarification. Protein pellet was dissolved in 6M Urea, 2M Thio-Urea in 10mM HEPES pH=8 and protein concentration was determined. 13C Lysine labeled proteins from SILAC mice were spiked in at a 1 to 1 ratio to samples serving as an internal standard. In total, 2 mg protein were reduced by 10 mM Dithiothreitol and alkylated by 55 mM Iodacetamide in the dark. Then Lys-C was added at a ratio of 1 to 100 and incubated at room temperature for at least 2 h. Urea concentration was diluted to 2 M by 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and Lys-C was added at the same ratio as before for overnight digestion. Digestion was stopped by adding acetonitrile (ACN) and TFA to a final concentration of 2.5 % and 0.2 %, respectively. Generated peptides were desalted by C18 Cartridges (Waters) and concentrated in a speec vac. Peptides were dissolved in 1mL of 10 mM Ammonium hydroxide for subsequent high pH fractionation.    High pH Fractionation  Peptides were loaded onto a C18 BEH XBridge column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm, Waters) and a binary buffer system was used for peptide separation: a) 10mM Ammonium hydroxide and b) 10mM Ammonium hydroxide in 90% ACN. Within the 27 min gradient the buffer B content was increased over time in a linear shape to 38 % in 19 min, followed by a ramp to 80 % and a re-equilibration step to 5 % B. Every 12th fraction was pooled and concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness.  Peptide were resuspended in 200 µL of 2.5 % ACN and 2 % formic acid. 3 µL were then used for LC-MS/MS measurement. Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry  Instrumentation consisted out of an Easy nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive Plus instrument. For peptide separation we used a 50 cm in-house packed column (I.D. 75 µm, C18 1.7 µm Dr. Maisch beads) at a controlled temperature of 50°C. The total gradient time was 60 min using an increasing content of acetonitrile as described previously 2. MS level1 spectra were acquired at 70,000 (at 200 m/z) resolution using 3e6 as an AGC target. The instrument operated in a data-dependent mode and subsequently selected the top10 most-intense peaks for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell applying a normalized collision energy of 27. The resolution was set to 17,500 and a maximal injection of 60 ms using an AGC target of 5e5 allowed maximal parallelization of filling and measuring of MS2 events. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis and bioinformatics  All raw files were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 and the implemented Andromeda search engine. MSMS spectra were correlated to the Uniprot Mouse reference proteome (downloaded 2016). Peptide were generated in-silico using 2 miss cleavages, methionine oxidation and n-term acetylation as variable modifications while Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification. Searches were performed using default settings for mass tolerances and the re-quantify as well as the match-between-algorithm were enabled. For SILAC based quantification a minimal ratio count of 1 was required.  ProteinGroups txt file was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits. The SILAC ratios were log2 transformed and subtracted by the median of each experiment assuming that the majority of proteins do not change and to correct for unequal starting material. The log2 ratio was calculated by subtracting the mean of each group from the other experimental group. P values were obtained by performing a two-sided t-test. Gene Ontology annotation were retrieved from Uniprot database implemented in the Perseus software. 1D enrichment was then used to determine significantly changed groups of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Over 40% of microRNAs (miRNAs) are located in introns of protein-coding genes, and many of these intronic miRNAs are co-regulated with their host genes. In such cases of co-regulation, the products of host genes and their intronic miRNAs can cooperate to coordinately regulate biologically important pathways. Therefore, we screened intronic miRNAs dysregulated in the livers of mouse models of obesity to identify previously uncharacterized protein-coding host genes that may contribute to the pathogenesis of obesity-associated insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Our approach revealed that expression of both the gene encoding ectodysplasin A (Eda), the causal gene in X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED), and its intronic miRNA, miR-676, was increased in the livers of obese mice. Moreover, hepatic EDA expression is increased in obese human subjects and reduced upon weight loss, and its hepatic expression correlates with systemic insulin resistance. We also found that reducing miR-676 expression in db/db mice increases the expression of proteins involved in fatty acid oxidation and reduces the expression of inflammatory signaling components in the liver. Further, we found that Eda expression in mouse liver is controlled via PPAR&#x3b3; and RXR-&#x3b1;, increases in circulation under conditions of obesity, and promotes JNK activation and inhibitory serine phosphorylation of IRS1 in skeletal muscle. In accordance with these findings, gain- and loss-of-function approaches reveal that liver-derived EDA regulates systemic glucose metabolism, suggesting that EDA is a hepatokine that can contribute to impaired skeletal muscle insulin sensitivity in obesity.

### Keywords
Dbdb mice, Lc-msms, Mouse, Mir-676, Liver

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, Cologne, Germany


