### Accession
PXD015115

### Title
Spinal Muscular Atrophy Patient iPSC-derived Motor Neurons Display Altered Proteins at Early Stages of Differentiation

### Description
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by low levels of survival motor neuron (SMN) protein and loss of motor neurons (MN); however, the underlying mechanism that links SMN deficiency to selective motor neuronal dysfunction is still largely unknown. We present here, for the first time, a comprehensive quantitative mass spectrometry study that covers the development of iPSC-derived MNs from both healthy individuals and SMA patients. We show an altered proteomic signature in SMA already at early stages during MN differentiation, associated with ER to Golgi transport, mRNA splicing and protein ubiquitination, in line with known SMA phenotypes. These alterations in the SMA proteome increase further towards later stages of MN differentiation. In addition, we find differences in altered protein expression between SMA patients, which however, have similar biological functions. Finally, we highlight several known SMN-binding partners as well as proteins associated with ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis and evaluate their expression changes during MN differentiation. Altogether, our work provides a rich resource of molecular events during early stages of MN differentiation, containing potentially therapeutically interesting protein expression profiles for SMA.

### Sample Protocol
Digested aliquots of ~ 100 µg of each sample were chemically labeled according to instructions outlined in the TMT reagent labeling kit (Thermo Fisher). Each label reagent tag was assigned to samples illustrated in Supplementary Table 4. Peptides were resuspended in 80 µl resuspension buffer containing 50 mM HEPES buffer and 12.5% acetonitrile (ACN, pH 8.5). TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 80 µl anhydrous ACN of which 20 µl was added to the peptides. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was then quenched using 5% hydroxylamine in HEPES buffer for 15 min at room temperature. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled with equal protein ratio, followed by vacuum centrifuge to near dryness and desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges.  Off-line basic pH fractionation Peptides were separated by basic pH Reverse Phase HPLC. Samples were solubilized in buffer A (5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) and subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 45% ACN in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at flow rate of 0.8 ml/min. An Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector was used with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter, and 20 cm length). The peptide mixture was then fractionated into 96 fractions and consolidated into 24 fractions. Samples were acidified with 10% formic acid and vacuum-dried followed by redissolving with 5% formic acid/5% ACN for LC-MS/MS processing.  Mass spectometry analysis Each fraction was analysed by nanoLC ESI MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermos Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were separated on a double frit trap column of 20 mm x 100 µm inner diameter (ReproSil C18, Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). This was followed by a 40 cm x 50 µm inner diameter analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Both columns were packed in house. Trapping was done at 5 µl/min in 0.1 M acetic acid in H2O for 10 min and the analytical separation was done at 100 nl/min for 2 hours by increasing the concentration of 0.1 M acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile (v/v). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap from m/z 350-1500 with a resolution of 60,000 FHMW, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400 000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For the MS/MS analysis, the ten most intense precursors at a threshold above 5,000 were selected for MS/MS with an isolation width of 0.7 Th after accumulation to a target value of 30,000 (maximum injection time was 115 ms). Fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with collision energy of 38% and activation time of 0.1 ms. Fragment ion analysis was performed on Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 FHMW and a low mass cut-off setting of 120 m/z. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
To process MS raw files, we employed Proteome Discover (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Peak list was searched using Swissprot database (version 2017_02) with the search engine Mascot (version 2.3, Matrix Science). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and allowed cleaving N-terminal to proline up to two missed cleavages. Peptides had to have a minimum length of seven amino acids to be considered for identification. Taxonomy was chosen for Homo sapiens and precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm with 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) were set as dynamic modifications, while carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as static modification. For the reporter ion quantification, integration tolerance was set to 20 ppm with the most confident centroid method. The mass analyzer was done with FTMS with MS2 order. Activation type was done with HCD with minimum collision energy of 0 and Maximum of 1000. Results were filtered with a Mascot score of at least 20 and Percolator was used to adjust the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) to a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by loss of motor neurons (MN) in the spinal cord leading to progressive muscle atrophy and weakness. SMA is caused by mutations in the survival motor neuron 1 (<i>SMN1</i>) gene, resulting in reduced levels of survival motor neuron (SMN) protein. The mechanisms that link SMN deficiency to selective motor neuron dysfunction in SMA remain largely unknown. We present here, for the first time, a comprehensive quantitative TMT-10plex proteomics analysis that covers the development of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived MNs from both healthy individuals and SMA patients. We show that the proteomes of SMA samples segregate from controls already at early stages of neuronal differentiation. The altered proteomic signature in SMA MNs is associated with mRNA splicing, ribonucleoprotein biogenesis, organelle organization, cellular biogenesis, and metabolic processes. We highlight several known SMN-binding partners and evaluate their expression changes during MN differentiation. In addition, we compared our study to human and mouse in vivo proteomic studies revealing distinct and similar signatures. Altogether, our work provides a comprehensive resource of molecular events during early stages of MN differentiation, containing potentially therapeutically interesting protein expression profiles for SMA.

### Keywords
Spinal muscular atrophy (sma); ipsc; neuron differentiation; quantitative mass spectrometry; tmt-10plex

### Affiliations
S
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Suzy Varderidou

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Utrecht University


