### Accession
PXD025694

### Title
Proteomics data of extruded germlines from C. elegans upon cey-3 RNAi

### Description
To shed light on how proteostasis defects in the germline influence somatic tissues, we first assessed the intracellular changes induced by PGL-1 aggregation in germline cells. For this purpose, we examined the proteome of isolated germlines from C. elegans following cey-3 knockdown

### Sample Protocol
Extruded germlines of synchronized worms at day 3 of adulthood were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.6) by sonication and cleared using centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 10 min). Supernatants were reduced (1 mM DTT, 30 min), alkylated (5 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min) and digested with trypsin at a 1:100 w/w ratio after diluting urea concentration to 2 M. One day later, samples were cleared (16,000g, 20 min) and the supernatant was acidified. Peptides were cleaned up using stage tip extraction. The liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The content of buffer B was raised from 7% to 23% within 120 min and followed by an increase to 45% within 10 min. Then, within 5 min buffer B fraction was raised to 80% and held for further 5 min after which it was decreased to 5% within 2 min and held there for further 3 min before the next sample was loaded on the column. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.2 kV. The capillary temperature was 275 °C and the S-lens RF level was set to 60. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25 at an isolation window of 2.1 Th. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were 17.500 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
All label-free proteomics data sets were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) (56). We employed the label-free quantitative (LFQ) mode and used MaxQuant default settings for protein identification and LFQ quantification. All downstream analyses were carried out on LFQ values with Perseus (version 1.5.2.4) (57). Statistically significant differences were determined with Perseus software after correction for multiple testing following the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, which calculates false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted P values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Proteostasis, Germline

### Affiliations
University of Cologne
CECAD, University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
CECAD, University of Cologne


