### Accession
PXD001723

### Title
Global proteomics analysis reveals a role for histone variant H3.3 in the response to starvation

### Description
Periodic starvation of animals induces large shifts in metabolism, but may also influence many other cellular systems and can lead to adaption to prolonged starvation conditions. To date, there is limited understanding of how starvation affects gene expression, particularly at the protein level. Here, we have used mass spectrometry‐based quantitative proteomics to identify global changes in the C. elegans proteome due to acute starvation of young adult animals. Measuring changes in abundance of up to 7,000 proteins, we show that acute starvation rapidly alters the levels of hundreds of proteins, many involved in central metabolic pathways, highlighting key regulatory responses. Surprisingly, we also detect changes in the abundance of chromatin‐associated proteins including specific linker histones, histone variants and histone post‐translational modifications associated with the epigenetic control of gene expression. A null mutant for one of these proteins, the histone H3.3 variant HIS‐71, identified a subset of proteins whose abundance no longer varied in response to starvation. This mutant also displayed defects in starvation stress resistance and showed a reduced adult lifespan. To maximise community access to these data, they are presented in an online searchable database, the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics (http://www.peptracker.com/epd/).

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans N2 Bristol strain was used and maintained at 20 °C. For isotopic labelling, C. elegans were grown on NGM‐N plates and monitored every day and L4 larvae and the following generation were picked onto a fresh plate. The SLE1 auxotrophic derivative of E. coli HT115, containing an orn‐1 RNAi feeding construct, was prepared by mixing 100 ml of 10 x M9 salts and 893 ml of deionised water, and autoclaved. After cooling to 55 °C, 5 ml of 40 % (wt/vol) glucose, 1 ml of 1 M MgSO4 and 1 ml of 1 % (wt/vol) thiamine were added. Lysine and Arginine were added to 40 g ml‐1 final concentrations from a 73 mg ml‐1 or 42 mg ml‐1 stock respectively. A single bacterial colony freshly streaked on an LB plate from a frozen stock was used to start a 200 ml culture. Bacteria were incubated at 37°C and concentrated by centrifugation and then plated onto NGM‐N plates. RNA interference experiments were performed according to the feeding method with some modifications. Double‐stranded RNA expression was induced by the addition of IPTG for 3 hours. Bacteria were pelleted and resuspended in 1 ml of worm M9 buffer supplemented with IPTG 1 mM, carbenicillin 1 μg ml‐1 to which ~500 L1 larvae stage worms were added. This mixture was transferred into a 50 ml falcon tube to allow oxygenation, and incubated at 25 °C overnight under gentle agitation. Worms and bacteria were spun down the following day, plated on 9 cm NGM‐N plates and incubated at 20 °C. C. elegans were collected from plates by flushing with PBS and washed three times with PBS, they were then pelleted and resuspended in ice cold PBS containing complete protease inhibitors, PhosStop and 5 mM N‐ethylmaleimide prior to snap‐freezing in liquid nitrogen. For lysis, C. elegans were thawed on ice and sodium dodecyl sulphate was added. TCEP was added to a concentration of 25 mM, the solution was vortexed and then heated to 65°C for 10 min. Nethylmaelimide was added to 50 mM final concentration at room temperature for alkylation of cysteine residues. Zirconia beads were added to make a ~50 % (vol/vol) slurry and the sample was bead‐beated for 1 min at room temperature. The lysate was then centrifuged for 10 min at 17,000 g at room temperature. A BCA assay was performed on the supernatant and for SILAC mixing, equal proportions of protein were combined. The peptides were then desalted 500mg SepPak tC18 cartridges, speedivaced and resuspended in 50 mM borate, pH 9.3. Peptides were separated with an AS24 strong anion exchange column using a Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. The peptide fractions were desalted using Sep‐Pak 10mg tC18 Elution 96‐well plates and then resuspended in 5% formic acid for LC‐MS/MS analysis. The QProteome Cell Compartment fractionation kit was used to fractionate worms according to the manufacturer’s tissue fractionation protocol. Briefly, C. elegans were collected by flushing with PBS and washed three times with PBS. Freshly harvested C. elegans were pelleted and resuspended in ice cold buffer 1 containing Complete protease inhibitors. Zirconia beads were added to make a ~50 % (vol/vol) slurry and the sample was bead‐beated for 5 s at 4 oC and lysis was checked by microscopy. The lysate was then processed for the remaining steps as 6 per the manufacturer’s instructions. A BCA assay was performed on each fraction prior to denaturing gel filtration chromatography of each. Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, subcellular fractions in 6 M guanidine‐HCl were injected onto a mAbPacSEC column equilibrated with 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0.1 M Tris‐HCl pH 7.0. The flow rate was 0.2 ml min‐1 and 16 x 100  fractions were collected using a low protein binding 96‐deep well plate. Trypsin digestions were performed at pH 8.0 by adding three volumes of 0.1 M Tris‐HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2 to each fraction to dilute the urea. 500 ng of trypsin were subsequently added to each well. The plate was sealed with a rubber mat, vortexed and incubated overnight at 37oC. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to 1% (vol/vol) final concentration and peptides were purified using an Oasis HLB 96‐well. Peptide concentrations were determined using the CBQCA assay after 25‐fold dilution of peptide samples in 10 mM sodium borate‐NaOH, pH 9.3 Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano‐trap column. After washing with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 50cm × 75 μm C18 EasySpray reverse phase analytical column with integrated emitter over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 35% acetonitrile over 140 min with a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q‐Exactive mass spectrometer using HCD fragmentation. The data‐dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 10 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant including the Andromeda search engine (26) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.3.0.5). Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target‐decoy based strategy. The databases supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was both the C. elegans and E. coli Uniprot databases (24/10/13) containing 26,147 and 4,311 entries respectively. The mass tolerance was set to 7ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro‐Glu (with N‐term Gln), and acetylation of the protein N‐terminus were set as variable modifications. N‐ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein level data, grouped by protein isoforms. We define a protein group as a set of unique peptides that are either shared between multiple protein isoforms, or belong to a single protein isoform. While this may lead to higher redundancy it enables us to quantify changes in individual protein isoforms very accurately.   The R language (version 2.15.1) was used for data analysis. For all experiments peptide‐level data were aggregated to generate data for each protein group, based on a set of unique peptides that were either shared between multiple protein isoforms, or belonging to a single protein isoform. For the analysis of the starvation time course and the starvation response of wild type versus the his‐71 null mutant, the mean and standard error of the mean were calculated from the SILAC ratios of each peptide corresponding to each protein group under each condition. For the three biological replicates starved for 16 h, the median, standard deviation and p‐value based on a Student’s t‐test (unpaired, two‐tailed, unequal variance) were calculated from the SILAC ratios of each protein group under each condition and negative control protein PRO‐1 that did not change after starvation. For clustering analysis, the SILAC ratios were normalised to a mean log2 value of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. Hierarchical clustering was based on Euclidean distance measurement and a ‘complete’ agglomeration method was used. The output of the clustering analysis has been presented as a heatmap, using the RColorBrewer library. The gene ontology analysis was carried out using the DAVID Functional Annotation Tool (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) for biological processes (27). The full C. elegans proteome, supplied by DAVID, was selected as a background list. These data were then plotted to reduce redundancy using the REVIGO suite (28), using the default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Periodic starvation of animals induces large shifts in metabolism but may also influence many other cellular systems and can lead to adaption to prolonged starvation conditions. To date, there is limited understanding of how starvation affects gene expression, particularly at the protein level. Here, we have used mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to identify global changes in the Caenorhabditis elegans proteome due to acute starvation of young adult animals. Measuring changes in the abundance of over 5,000 proteins, we show that acute starvation rapidly alters the levels of hundreds of proteins, many involved in central metabolic pathways, highlighting key regulatory responses. Surprisingly, we also detect changes in the abundance of chromatin-associated proteins, including specific linker histones, histone variants, and histone posttranslational modifications associated with the epigenetic control of gene expression. To maximize community access to these data, they are presented in an online searchable database, the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics (http://www.peptracker.com/epd/).

### Keywords
C. elegans, Starvation, Histone

### Affiliations
Lab Head
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Lab Head


