### Accession
PXD036539

### Title
Targeted protein degradation reveals BET bromodomains as the cellular target of Hedgehog Pathway Inhibitor-1

### Description
Target deconvolution of small molecule hits from phenotypic screens presents a major challenge. Illustrative of these are the many screens that have been conducted to find inhibitors for the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway – a major developmental pathway with many implications in health and disease - with many hits but very few identified cellular targets. We here present a strategy for target identification based on Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs), combined with label-free quantitative proteomics. We developed a PROTAC based on the downstream Hedgehog Pathway Inhibitor-1 (HPI-1), a phenotypic screen hit with unknown cellular target. Using our Hedgehog Pathway PROTAC (HPP) we identified and validated BET bromodomains to be the cellular targets of HPI-1. Furthermore, we found that HPP-9 has a unique mechanism of action as a long-acting Hh pathway inhibitor through prolonged BET bromodomain degradation. Collectively, we provide a powerful PROTAC-based approach for target deconvolution, that has answered the longstanding question of the cellular target of HPI-1 and yielded the first PROTAC that acts on the Hh pathway.

### Sample Protocol
SHH-GFP cells were treated with HPI-1, HPP-9 or DMSO in serum starvation medium. Cells were washed and collected, and prepared using the phase-transfer surfactant method with minor modifications. Digested peptides were measured using an Easy-nLC 1000 - Orbitrap Fusion System (ThermoFisher Scientific). Each sample was measured in data-indepdent acquistion (DIA) mode. A sample mixture was fractionated using High-pH reversed phase fractionation, and each fraction was measured in data-dependent acquistion (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Database searched was performed for the 8 raw data files obtained from DDA measurement of the HPRP-fractionated unlabeled samples using SpectroMine (Biognosys) with the Uniprot reviewed Mus musculus (taxon 10090) database. A spectral library was generated from the search results using Spectronaut software (Biognosys). Raw data files from DIA measurement were used for extraction of peptide quantities with the generated spectral library and integration of these quantities into protein abundances. FDR was estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 0.01 at both peptide precursor level and protein level. Data filtering parameters for quantification were Q-value percentile fraction 0.5 with global imputing, and cross run normalization with global normalization on the median.

### Publication Abstract
Target deconvolution of small molecule hits from phenotypic screens presents a major challenge. Many screens have been conducted to find inhibitors for the Hedgehog signaling pathway - a developmental pathway with many implications in health and disease - yielding many hits but only few identified cellular targets. We here present a strategy for target identification based on Proteolysis-Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs), combined with label-free quantitative proteomics. We develop a PROTAC based on Hedgehog Pathway Inhibitor-1 (HPI-1), a phenotypic screen hit with unknown cellular target. Using this Hedgehog Pathway PROTAC (HPP) we identify and validate BET bromodomains as the cellular targets of HPI-1. Furthermore, we find that HPP-9 is a long-acting Hedgehog pathway inhibitor through prolonged BET bromodomain degradation. Collectively, we provide a powerful PROTAC-based approach for target deconvolution, that answers the longstanding question of the cellular target of HPI-1 and yields a PROTAC that acts on the Hedgehog pathway.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Protac, Hedgehog pathway

### Affiliations
RIKEN
Facutly of Science, University of Geneva

### Submitter
Midy Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yibo Wu
Facutly of Science, University of Geneva


