### Accession
PXD011377

### Title
A late Middle Pleistocene Denisovan mandible from the Tibetan Plateau

### Description
A dentine sample from a previously unknown hominin specimen deriving from the Tibetan Plateau was analyzed using LC-MS/MS in order to characterize its proteome, protein damage characteristics, and phylogenetic affinities to known Late Pleistocene hominin clades (humans, Neanderthals, Denisovans).

### Sample Protocol
A dentine sample was extracted using subsequently ammonium-bicarbonate buffer extraction and acid-demineralization. Both fractions were digested using trypsin, and analyzed separately in triplicate on a Orbitrap Lumos Fusion with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in HCD mode.

### Data Protocol
.raw files were converted to .mgf files usinge ProteoWizard and searched in PEAKS v.7 using deamidation (NQ), hydroxylation (P), and oxidation (M), as variable modifications against a database composed of the human reference proteome. MS1 tolerance was set at 10 ppm and MS2 tolerance 0.07. Proteins were accepted with a minimum of two unique peptides, with FDR scores of equal to or greater than 0.01. Controls based on protein and peptide degradation were subsequently used to filter contaminating from endogenous dentine proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Denisovans are members of a hominin group who are currently only known directly from fragmentary fossils, the genomes of which have been studied from a single site, Denisova Cave<sup>1-3</sup> in Siberia. They are also known indirectly from their genetic legacy through gene flow into several low-altitude East Asian populations<sup>4,5</sup> and high-altitude modern Tibetans<sup>6</sup>. The lack of morphologically informative Denisovan fossils hinders our ability to connect geographically and temporally dispersed fossil hominins from Asia and to understand in a coherent manner their relation to recent Asian populations. This includes understanding the genetic adaptation of humans to the high-altitude Tibetan Plateau<sup>7,8</sup>, which was inherited from the Denisovans. Here we report a Denisovan mandible, identified by ancient protein analysis<sup>9,10</sup>, found on the Tibetan Plateau in Baishiya Karst Cave, Xiahe, Gansu, China. We determine the mandible to be at least 160&#xa0;thousand years old through U-series dating of an adhering carbonate matrix. The Xiahe specimen provides direct evidence of the Denisovans outside the Altai Mountains and its analysis unique insights into Denisovan mandibular and dental morphology. Our results indicate that archaic hominins occupied the Tibetan Plateau in the Middle Pleistocene epoch and successfully adapted to high-altitude hypoxic environments long before the regional arrival of modern Homo sapiens.

### Keywords
Zooms, Palaeoproteomics, Hominin, Middle pleistocene

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
Department of Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Frido Welker
Department of Human Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology


