### Accession
PXD012897

### Title
Large-scale Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Maize Seedling Leaves During De-etiolation

### Description
De-etiolation consists of a series of developmental and physiological changes that a plant undergoes in response to light. During this process light, an important environmental signal, triggers the inhibition of mesocotyl elongation and the production of photosynthetically active chloroplasts, and etiolated leaves transition from the “sink” stage to the “source” stage. De-etiolation has been extensively studied in maize (Zea mays L). However, little is known about how this transition is regulated. In this study, we describe a quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic atlas of the de-etiolation process in maize. We identified 16,420 proteins and quantified 14,168. In addition, 8,746 phosphorylation sites within 3,110 proteins were identified. From the proteomic and phosphoproteomic data combined, we identified a total of 17,436 proteins, 27.6% of which are annotated protein coding genes in the Zea_mays AGPv3.28 database. Only 6% of proteins significantly changed in abundance during de-etiolation. In contrast, the phosphorylation levels of more than 25% of phosphoproteins significantly changed; these included proteins involved in gene expression and homeostatic pathways and rate-limiting enzymes involved in photosynthesis light and carbon reactions. Based on phosphoproteomic analysis, 34% (1,057) of all phosphoproteins identified in this study contained more than three phosphorylation sites, and 37 proteins contained more than 16 phosphorylation sites, which shows that multi-phosphorylation is ubiquitous during the de-etiolation process. Our results suggest that plants might preferentially regulate the level of PTMs rather than protein abundance for adapting to changing environments. The study of PTMs could thus better reveal the regulation of de-etiolation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Protein extraction of two sets of maize samples (0 h, 1 h, 6 h, and 12 h, ~5 mg each) and trypsin digestion were performed as previously described [50].According to the manufacturer’s instructions, samples were labeled with iTRAQ 4plex reagent (ABSciex, MA, US) and then combined.   Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Chromatography Total iTRAQ-labeled lysate was solubilized in buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4/25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0) and separated on a PolySULFOETHYL A column (4.6 mm ID x 100mm, 5 µm, 300 Å, Poly LC Inc, Columbia, MD) with flow rate of 1 ml/min using a linear gradient of 0% buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4/25% acetonitrile/400 mM KCL, pH 3.0) to 100% buffer B over 40 min. A Gilson system composed of 306 pumps, an 805 manometric module, an 811C dynamic mixer, and a UV/VIS-155 detector was used. The sample fractions were collected every minute and dried.  Basic reverse phase HPLC For general proteomics, the iTRAQ-labeled total lysate or the selected SCX fractions described above were solubilized in 200 µl of buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and separated on an Xbridge column (Waters, C18 3.5 µm 2.1 x 150 mm) using a linear gradient of 1% B/min from 2-45% B (20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) at flow rate of 200 µl/min. Fractions were collected every minute and dried under vacuum. For phosphoproteomics, ammonium formate was switched to ammonium every 6th fraction from fractions 10-45 to generate a total of 6 pooled fractions. The pooled fractions were subsequently dried under vacuum and subjected to phospho-peptide enrichment using the IMAC method or TiO2.  Phosphopeptide enrichment using IMAC  The protocol for IMAC enrichment of phosphopeptides was adapted from Mertins et al. with modifications [99]. Firstly, ion-chelated IMAC beads from Ni-NTA Superflow agarose beads (Qiagen, MA) were prepared. Nickel ion was thenstripped with 50 mM EDTA, and iron was chelated by passing the beads through an aqueous solution of 200 mM FeCl3 followed by three washes with water and one wash with binding buffer (40% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid). The iTRAQ-labeled total lysate or concentrated combined basic RP fractions were solubilized in binding buffer and incubated with IMAC beads for 1 hour. After three washes with binding buffer, the phosphopeptides were eluted with a 2x bead volume of 500 mM potassium hydrogen phosphate, pH 7.0, and the eluate was neutralized with 10% formic acid. The enriched phosphopeptides were further desalted using an Empore 3M C18 (2215) StageTip2 prior to HPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The HPLC-MS/MS data from each experiment were searched in MUDPIT style against a concatenated target and reversed decoy version of Zea mays.AGPv3.28 (FDR<0.01) using the in house version of X!Tandem (SLEDGEHAMMER [2013.09.01], thegpm.org). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and iTRAQ label on lysine and the N-terminus of peptides were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification in the general search parameters. The values +/-10 ppm and 20 ppm were used as the tolerance for precursor and product ions, respectively. The intensities of iTRAQ reporter ions for each spectrum were extracted using an in-house Perl script and corrected for isotope cross-over using values supplied by the manufacturer. The ratio between samples was calculated using reporter ion intensity and normalized to the median ratio of all identified spectra that fit the following criteria: peptide belongs to the Zea mays database, peptide log (e) ≤ -2.0, and peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids. Pairwise median ratios (1 h/0 h, 6 h/0 h and 12 h/0 h) for individual proteins were calculated using the “Doby” package in the R environment using all spectra belonging to a protein that fit the criteria above plus the requirement that the sum of reporter ion intensities of both channels was >20,000. Spectra that had a ratio “Divide 0” was replaced with the number “10”. For proteins identified only in 2D-HPLC-MSMS, the average of the ratios from two biological replicates was used to represent the final fold change at each time point, while for proteins identified only in 3D-HPLC-MSMS or both in 2D and 3D, the 3D ratios were used. The proteins were considered significantly regulated with a fold change ≥1.5 or ≤0.66.  Database searching with the phosphoproteome data The LC-MSMS data were searched in MUDPIT style against the Zea mays database using MASCOT (version 2.3 MatrixScience, UK) or MSAmanda (version 1.4.14.3866 for PD1.4.1.14) [101] in the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) environment. For both search engines, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and iTRAQ label on lysine and the N-terminus of peptides were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The values +/-10 ppm and 20 ppm were used as the tolerance for precursor and product ions, respectively. MASCOT and MSAmanda results were combined for reporting. Percolator was used to validate PTMs. Only top hit peptides with FDR<0.01 (based on PEP score) were included in the final results. Phosphorylation sites were localized using PhosphoRS 3.1 (implemented in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14). The ratio of phospho-peptides between the 0 h control and different time points were calculated using reporter ion intensities and further normalized to general normalization factors determined from the median of high confidence spectra from HPLC-MS/MS results obtained prior to enrichment (fractionation-phospho-peptide enrichment) or general proteomic data (phospho-peptide enrichment from the total lysate) as described in the general proteomic section of the Materials and Methods. For the phosphopeptides only quantified in one experiment, the ratios were used to represent the final fold change at each time point, while for the peptides quantified more than twice, the average of the ratios from all replicates was used to represent the final fold change. The phosphopeptides with a fold change ≥1.5 or ≤0.66 were considered significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin system is crucial for the development and fitness of higher plants. De-etiolation, during which green plants initiate photomorphogenesis and establish autotrophy, is a dramatic and complicated process that is tightly regulated by a massive number of ubiquitylation/de-ubiquitylation events. Here we present site-specific quantitative proteomic data for the ubiquitylomes of de-etiolating seedling leaves of Zea mays L. (exposed to light for 1, 6, or 12&#x202f;h) achieved through immunoprecipitation-based high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). Through the integrated analysis of multiple ubiquitylomes, we identified and quantified 1926 unique ubiquitylation sites corresponding to 1053 proteins. We analyzed these sites and found five potential ubiquitylation motifs, KA, AXK, KXG, AK, and TK. Time-course studies revealed that the ubiquitylation levels of 214 sites corresponding to 173 proteins were highly correlated across two replicate MS experiments, and significant alterations in the ubiquitylation levels of 78 sites (fold change &gt;1.5) were detected after de-etiolation for 12&#x202f;h. The majority of the ubiquitylated sites we identified corresponded to substrates involved in protein and DNA metabolism, such as ribosomes and histones. Meanwhile, multiple ubiquitylation sites were detected in proteins whose functions reflect the major physiological changes that occur during plant de-etiolation, such as hormone synthesis/signaling proteins, key C4 photosynthetic enzymes, and light signaling proteins. This study on the ubiquitylome of the maize seedling leaf is the first attempt ever to study the ubiquitylome of a C4 plant and provides the proteomic basis for elucidating the role of ubiquitylation during plant de-etiolation.

### Keywords
Maize seedling leaves; de-etiolation; proteome; phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, CAS  Add: No.20 Nanxincun, Xiangshan, Beijing 100093, China
ProteinWorld

### Submitter
Tiancong Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Baichen Wang
Institute of Botany, CAS  Add: No.20 Nanxincun, Xiangshan, Beijing 100093, China


