### Accession
PXD005852

### Title
Striatal and hippocampal astrocyte proteomes

### Description
We quantitavely compared striatal and hippocampal astrocyte proteomes using stable-isotopic dimethyl labeling.

### Sample Protocol
To be able to quantitatively compare the protein expression in striatal and hippocampal astrocytes, we labeled the tryptic peptides produced from proteins originating in each brain region with two isotopically different dimethyl tags, mixed the samples and ran them together in the same LC-MS/MS session. A total of four LC-MS/MS experiments were performed with different protein samples. For one LC-MS/MS experiment, protein from hippocampal or striatal eGFP-positive cells from three cell sorting sessions (12 mice total) were combined. A total of 11-14 ug of protein were used per replicate and per region. stable-isotopic dimethyl labeling was performed. “Light” (+28.0313 Da) or “Medium” (+32.0564 Da), and in one case "Medium-heavy" (+34.063 Da) labels, that are added to the N-terminus and the ε-amino group of Lysine residues via reductive amination, were used to tag either striatal or hippocampal samples (Boersema 2009, Nat Protoc 4, 484-494). The label-brain region combination was shuffled between different LC-MS/MS experiments. Labeled peptides were combined 1:1 (Str:Hip) and fractionated into 10 fractions by strong cationic exchange. The fractionated samples were analyzed with and Eksigent 2D nanoLC attached to a Thermo Orbitrap LTQ XL (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a laser-pulled nanobore 20 cm x 75 m C18 column (Acutech Scientific) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and resolved using a 2 hour gradient: from 0-9% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 20% H2O with 0.1% formic acid) in 5 min, from 9% to 27% in 90 min, from 27% to 33% in 5 min and from 33% to 50% in 10 min. The Orbitrap XL was operated in data-dependent mode with 60,000 resolution and target autogain control at 5e6 for parent scan. The top 12 ions above a charge of +1 were subjected to collision-induced dissociation set to a value of 35 with target autogain control of 5,000. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed and quantified using Sequest and Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v1.4). The 10 fractions were analyzed together and the Uniprot mouse database was searched with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, N-terminus dimethyl (+28.0313 Da, +32.0564 Da or +34.063 Da) and lysine dimethyl (+28.0313 Da, +32.0564 Da or +34.063 Da). Two missed cleavages by trypsin, and 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass error were allowed on the full MS and tandem MS (MS/MS), respectively. Peptides and proteins were filtered using Percolator with a 1% false discovery rate and maximum delta Cn of 0.05. Ratios between light and intermediate dimethyl labels were calculated per protein and normalized to the ratio of the total protein median.

### Publication Abstract
Astrocytes are ubiquitous in the brain and are widely held to be largely identical. However, this view has not been fully tested, and the possibility that astrocytes are neural circuit specialized remains largely unexplored. Here, we used multiple integrated approaches, including RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), mass spectrometry, electrophysiology, immunohistochemistry, serial block-face-scanning electron microscopy, morphological reconstructions, pharmacogenetics, and diffusible dye, calcium, and glutamate imaging, to directly compare adult striatal and hippocampal astrocytes under identical conditions. We found significant differences in electrophysiological properties, Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling, morphology, and astrocyte-synapse proximity between striatal and hippocampal astrocytes. Unbiased evaluation of actively translated RNA and proteomic data confirmed significant astrocyte diversity between hippocampal and striatal circuits. We thus report core astrocyte properties, reveal evidence for specialized astrocytes within neural circuits, and provide new, integrated database resources and approaches to explore astrocyte diversity and function throughout the adult brain. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Striatum, Quantitative, Astrocyte, Hippocampus, Isotope labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology and Department of Neurobiology. David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles. Los Angeles, CA 90095-1751, USA
Department of Physiology. David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles. Los Angeles, CA 90095-1751, USA

### Submitter
Blanca Diaz Castro

### Lab Head
Dr Baljit S. Khakh
Department of Physiology and Department of Neurobiology. David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles. Los Angeles, CA 90095-1751, USA


