### Accession
PXD022419

### Title
Dissecting the molecular diversity and commonality of bovine and human treponemes identifies key survival and adhesion mechanisms

### Description
Here, we report the first complete genomes of three cultivable treponeme species from bovine digital dermatitis (DD) skin lesions, two comparative human treponemes and a bovine gastrointestinal (GI) isolate. Key genomic differences between bovine and human treponemes implicate microbial mechanisms that enhance knowledge of how DD, a severe disease of ruminants, has emerged into a prolific and endemic disease in countries worldwide. Bovine DD treponemes have additional oxidative stress genes compared to nearest human-isolated relatives, suggesting better toleration of oxidative stress, and thus potentially explaining the ability of bovine strains to colonize skin surfaces. Comparison of bovine DD and GI treponemes as well as bovine pathogenic and human non-pathogenic saprophyte Treponema phagedenis strains indicates genes encoding a five-enzyme biosynthetic pathway for the production of 2,3-diacetamido-2,3-dideoxy-d-mannuronic acid, a rare di-N-acetylated mannuronic acid sugar with potential immunomodulatory activity, as important for pathogenesis. The bovine T. phagedenis strains further differed from human strains by having a larger number of unique genetic features including components of a type IV secretion system and a phosphate utilisation system including phoU, a gene associated with enhanced osmotic stress survival. Proteomic analyses confirmed bovine derived T. phagedenis exhibits expression of PhoU but not the putative secretion system whilst the novel mannuronic acid pathway was expressed in near entirety across the DD treponemes. Analysis of osmotic stress response in water identified a difference between bovine and human T. phagedenis with bovine strains surviving better. This novel mechanism could enable a selective advantage, allowing environmental persistence and transmission of bovine T. phagedenis. Finally, we investigated a range of treponeme genes encoding ortholog families across the DD treponemes representing putative outer membrane proteins (OMPs) and identified several families as multi-specific adhesins capable of binding extra cellular matrix (ECM) components. Human saprophytic T. phagedenis could not be differentiated from bovine pathogenic strains by these adhesins and only two of ten characterised ortholog OMP families were absent from commensal bovine treponemes. One of these bovine pathogen specific adhesin ortholog families showed considerable diagnostic potential with the Treponema medium representative demonstrating the greatest disease specificity (91.6%). This work has shed light on treponeme host adaptation and has identified candidate molecules for future diagnostics, vaccination and therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were lysed in 4% (w/v) SDS detergent, 100mM DTT in 100mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.6. and heated at 95°C for 10 minutes. This was followed by 3 cycles of sonication on ice (Vibra-cell 130PB sonicator, 20Hz, with microprobe, 20 seconds sonication alternating with 30 seconds incubation on ice). Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed and retained. Protein concentrations of the samples were determined using a detergent compatible Bradford protein assay (ThermoFisher, UK). Proteins were digested using the FASP method described by Wiśniewski et al 2009.  All samples were normalized to 100 µg total protein in 200µl 8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.6 in a Vivacon 500 10 MWCO filter unit (Sartorius). Proteins were alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at RT for 30 min in the dark.  Several washes of 8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.6, followed by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate were passed through the filter unit to remove SDS. Proteins were digested with proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) added at a protein: trypsin ratio of 50:1 and incubated at 37°C overnight. Eluted peptides were acidified by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Peptide samples were desalted using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (ThermoFisher) and evaporated to dryness with a centrifugal evaporator (Eppendorf). Each sample was reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) methanol and stored at -80°C until analysis.  Nano LC MS/MS analysis LC MS/MS analysis was essentially performed as described in Bricio-Moreno et al 2018. Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) before separation by the analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  The column was operated at a constant temperature of 30°C and the LC system was coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 50 ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were analysed using PEAKS studio 10 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Tandem MS data were searched against the predicted protein sequences for each Treponeme strain. Search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 15ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. A protein score (-10lgP) of greater than 20 was required for identification. The false discovery rate was set at 1%. Results were filtered to include only proteins present in two or more replicates and with greater than 2 unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bovine digital dermatitis, Treponemes, Shotgun lc msms

### Affiliations
Senior Lecturer  Department of Infection Biology and Microbiomes, Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Evans
Senior Lecturer  Department of Infection Biology and Microbiomes, Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of Liverpool,


