### Accession
PXD019499

### Title
CRYPTOCHROMES promote daily proteome homeostasis

### Description
The daily organisation of most mammalian cellular functions is attributed to circadian regulation of clock-controlled protein expression, driven by daily cycles of CRYPTOCHROME-dependent transcriptional feedback repression. To test this, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to compare wild type and CRY-deficient fibroblasts under constant conditions. In CRY-deficient cells, we found that temporal variation in protein, phosphopeptide, and K+ abundance was at least as great as wild type controls. Most strikingly. the extent of temporal variation within either genotype was much smaller than overall differences in proteome composition between WT and CRY-deficient cells. This proteome imbalance in CRY-deficient cells and tissues was associated with increased susceptibility to proteotoxic stress, which impairs circadian robustness, and may contribute to the wide-ranging phenotypes of CRY-deficient mice. Rather than generating largescale daily variation in proteome composition, we suggest it is plausible that the various transcriptional and post-translational functions of CRY proteins ultimately act to promote protein and osmotic homeostasis against daily perturbation.

### Sample Protocol
A timecourse was carried out, with three technical replicates per genotype (i.e. 3 wells in a 6-well plate) at each timepoint. At each timepoint cells were washed twice in ice cold PBS and then lysed at room temperature in 100 µL lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM Tris, pH 8) for 20 minutes. At each timepoint, one aliquot was defrosted at room temperature (23°C) whilst shaking at 700 rpm for 5 minutes. After lysis, the cells were scraped and technical replicates were combined, thus creating 1 sample per genotype at each time point. These samples were flash frozen and stored at -80°C. After the time course was completed, all the samples were simultaneously defrosted and sonicated for 2 minutes. The protein concentration was then measured using a BCA assay (Pierce). 12 pooled samples were created by combining a portion of each experimental sample such that each sample/pool contained an equal mass of protein. All samples were then flash frozen and stored at -80oC. Each sample (256 µg) was reduced with 5 mM DTT and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. They were digested with Lys-C (Promega) for 4 hours at 25°C. Next, the samples were diluted to 1.5 M urea using 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested at 30°C overnight with trypsin (Promega). Digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. The supernatants were desalted using homemade C18 stage tips containing 3M Empore extraction disks (Sigma) and 5 mg of Poros R3 resin (Applied Biosystems). Bound peptides were eluted with 30-80% acetonitrile (MeCN) in 0.1% TFA and lyophilized.   The lyophilized peptides from each sample were resuspended in 100 µl of 2.5% MeCN, 250 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. According to manufacturer’s instructions, 0.8 mg of each TMT 10plex reagent (Thermo) was reconstituted in 41 µl of anhydrous MeCN. The peptides from each time point and pooled sample were labelled with a distinct TMT tag for 75 minutes at room temperature. The labelling reaction was quenched by incubation with 8 µl 5% hydroxylamine for 30 min. For each set of 10-plex TMT reagent, the labelled peptides from 8 time point samples + 2 pools were combined into a single sample and partially dried to remove MeCN in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). After this, the sample was desalted as before and the eluted peptides were lyophilized. The TMT labelled peptides were subjected to off-line High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) fractionation, using an XBridge BEH130 C18, 3.5 μm, 4.6 mm x 250 mm column with an XBridge BEH C18 3.5 μm Van Guard cartridge (Waters), connected to an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). A total of 60 fractions were collected. They were combined into 20 fractions and lyophilized and desalted as before. 5% of the total eluate from each fraction was taken out for proteome LC-MS/MS analysis and the rest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. 20 fractions of peptide mixture were enriched first using PHOS-Select iron affinity gel, an Iron (III) Immobilised Metal Chelate Affinity Chromatography (IMAC) resin (Sigma). Desalted peptides were resuspended in 30% MeCN, 0.25 M acetic acid (loading solution) and 30 µl of IMAC beads, was added. After 60 minutes incubation, beads were transferred to a homemade C8 (3M Empore) stage tip and washed with loading solution. Phosphopeptides were eluted sequentially with 0.4 M NH3, 30% MeCN, 0.4 M NH3 and 20 µl of 50% MeCN, 0.1% TFA. The flow-through from the C8 stage tips was collected and combined into 10 fractions and used for titanium dioxide (TiO2) phosphopeptide enrichment. The IMAC and the TiO2 enriched phosphopeptides were combined, making a total of 15 fractions for phosphoproteomics analysis. Phosphopeptide solution from these fractions were acidified, partially dried, and desalted with a C18 Stage tip that contained 1.5 µl of Poros R3 resin. These were then partially dried again and thus ready for mass spectrometry analysis. The fractionated peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo) fitted with a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75 μm × 25 cm reverse phase C18 nano column (Aclaim PepMap, Thermo). Samples were separated using an acetonitrile gradient. The outlet of the nano column was directly interfaced via a nanospray ion source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data-dependent mode, performing a MS full-scan in the m/z range of 350-1600, with a resolution of 70000. This was followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35000 and Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 33%. MS target values of 3e6 and MS2 target values of 1e5 were used. The isolation window of precursor ion was set at 0.7 Da and sequenced peptides were excluded for 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files from LC-MS/MS were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann) with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v1.6.3.3). MS/MS spectra were quantified with reporter ion MS2 from TMT 10plex experiments and searched against the Mus musculus UniProt Fasta database (Dec 2016). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (STY) (for phosphoproteomics group only) were set as variable modifications. Protein quantification requirements were set at 1 unique and razor peptide. In the identification tab, second peptides and match between runs were not selected. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.  The MaxQuant output file was then processed with Perseus (v1.6.2.3). Reporter ion intensities were uploaded to Perseus. The data was filtered: identifications from the reverse database were removed, only identified by site, potential contaminants were removed, and we only considered proteins with ≥1 unique and razor peptide. Then all columns with an intensity “less or equal to zero” were converted to “NAN” and exported. The MaxQuant output file with phosphor (STY) sites table was also processed with Perseus software (v1.6.2.3). The data was filtered: identifications from the reverse database were removed, only identified by site, potential contaminants were removed and we only considered phosphopeptides with localization probability ≥ 0.75. Then all columns with intensity “less or equal to zero” were converted to “NAN” and exported.  Bioinformatics All data handling was done using R v3.6.3. Since the sample for timepoint 12 was missing for CRY1-/-; CRY2-/-, abundance values were inferred for each protein by taking the mean of the two neighbouring timepoints. WT and CKO datasets were analysed either combined or independently. The combined analysis was used to directly compare protein and phosphopeptide abundances between genotypes, since the internal reference scaling normalisation accounts for batch effects. The independent method was used for all other analysis that did not require comparison of abundance, thus allowing the detection of proteins that were present in one genotype but not the other.  Proteins and phosphopeptides were only accepted for further analysis if present in all timepoints and pooled samples. Hence in the combined analysis, proteins/phosphopeptides had to be present in all timepoints for both genotypes, as well as all pooled samples. In the independent analysis, proteins/phosphopeptides had to be present in all timepoints and pools for one genotype only. Sample loading normalisation was carried out by taking the sum of all intensities for each time point and normalising to the mean of these, since an equal amount of protein was used for each TMT labelling reaction. This was followed by internal reference scaling (IRS) to allow for comparisons between TMT experiments (Plubell et al, 2017): for each TMT 10plex set the mean abundance for each protein in both pools was calculated. Then the mean of these means was calculated and used to normalise the values for each protein for all the samples.  Rhythmicity was tested using the RAIN (Rhythmicity Analysis Incorporating Non-parametric methods) algorithm (Thaben & Westermark, 2014), and multiple testing was corrected for using the adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins with a corrected p ≤ 0.05 were deemed significant. Relative amplitude of rhythmic proteins was calculated by detrending the data using a 24-hour moving average and dividing the resultant range by the average normalised protein abundance. To include only proteins with a biologically relevant level of oscillation, only those with relative amplitude ≥ 10% were taken for further analysis (see text for details). Phosphoproteomics data were handled in the same way, except that normalised phosphopeptide abundances were adjusted according to the changes in abundance of the corresponding protein from the normalised total proteome data, and no threshold for relative amplitude was used.  Gene ontology analysis was performed using the GOrilla online tool (Eden et al, 2009, 2007). Analysis was performed either as a single ranked list of gene names, or as a target dataset compared to background (all proteins detected in the experiment). Kinase recognition motifs were screened using a custom script written in Python v2.7, which used the PHOSIDA database (Gnad et al, 2007, 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biological clock, Clock-controlled protein, Circadian rhythm, Protein homeostasis, Cryptochrome

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology Cell Biology Division

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr John O'Neill
MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology Cell Biology Division


