### Accession
PXD021977

### Title
Examining the genes and enzymes responsible for flavonoid level modification during fruit maturation in Chinese raspberry “Rubus chingii Hu”

### Description
Rubus chingii Hu, indigenous to China, is very rich in flavonoids. With the exception of anthocyanin, fruit flavonoids were much higher than most berries including other raspberry species, which partly contributed to its high phenolics and antioxidant capability. In contrast to other raspberries, anthocyanin and other flavonoids decreased as fruit matured. We investigated four typical phases of fruit maturation using transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics. The results indicate that the down-regulation of phenylpropanoid, flavonoid and anthocyanin biosynthesis are responsible for the metabolic decrease. The down-regulation of RcCHS (CL6140.Contig5) and RcCHI (Unigene14858 and Unigene22344) at gene and protein levels were associated with decreases of naringenin/naringenin chalcone respectively. Down-regulation of RcLAR (CL9527.Contig3) at gene and protein levels was consistent with decreases of afzelechin/epiafzelechin, catechin/epicatechin, and gallocatechin/epigallocatechin. However, multiple genes/proteins involved in the enzymatic pathways were divergent and differently regulated, e.g. Rc4CL genes/proteins were down-regulated while Rc4CL-like was maintained at constantly low levels.

### Sample Protocol
R. chingii Hu fruits were collected from five to six plants at varying maturation phases i.e. mature green (MG), green yellow (GY), Yellow orange (YO) and Red (RE) during the growing season (May, 2019) at LINHAI, Zhejiang, China (Fig. 1A). Fruits were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored in a -70℃ freezer. Three biological replicates for each phase were designed and the tissues were derived from the whole fruit for transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Fruit proteins were extracted by the method as described by Li et al. (Xiaobai Li et al., 2019; Xiaobai Li, Li, Sun, & Jackson, 2020). The concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (TermoFisher). The extracted proteins were reduced, and then digested by trypsin. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted and processed as TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent (TermoFisher). The labeled peptides were fractionated by HPLC, and the peptides were divided into 18 fractions. The peptides were loaded into tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (ThermoFisher). These processes were conducted as described by Li et al. (Xiaobai Li et al., 2019; Xiaobai Li et al., 2020). Compared to the expression profile at the MG phase, differential expressed proteins (DEPs) were defined by threshold change (change fold>1.5 or <0.67 and P <0.05). The resulting shotgun MS/MS data were processed using a Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8), and searched against the transcriptomic data concatenated with a reverse decoy database (Xiaobai Li et al., 2019). KEGG enrichment of DEPs was conducted by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. The significant threshold was set up (p-value < 0.05) for KEGG enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antioxidants; anthocyanin; flavonoid; enzyme; chinese raspberry

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xiaobai Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaobai Li
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


