### Accession
PXD000265

### Title
Oryza sativa egg, sperm, callus, pollen and seedling proteome

### Description
In angiosperms, female gamete differentiation, fertilization, and subsequent zygotic development occur in embryo sacs deeply embedded in the ovaries. Despite their importance in plant reproduction and development, how the egg cell is specialized, fuses with the sperm cell, and converts into an active zygote for early embryogenesis remains unclear. This lack of knowledge is partly attributable to the difficulty of direct analyses of gametes in angiosperms. In this study, proteins from egg and sperm cells obtained from Oryza sativa flowers were separated by one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and globally identified by highly sensitive liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy. Proteome analyses were also conducted for seedlings, callus, and pollen grains to compare their protein expression profiles to those of gametes. Database was searched using Mascot software (ver.2.2.1, Matrix Science, MA, USA) with the following parameters. The fixed modification was propionasmide (Cys) and variable modification parameters were pyro-Glu, acetylation (protein N-terminus), and oxidation (Met). The maximum missed cleavage was set at 3 with a peptide mass tolerance of +/– 15 ppm. Peptide charges from +2 to +4 states and MS/MS tolerances of +/– 0.8 Da were allowed.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In angiosperms, female gamete differentiation, fertilization, and subsequent zygotic development occur in embryo sacs deeply embedded in the ovaries. Despite their importance in plant reproduction and development, how the egg cell is specialized, fuses with the sperm cell, and converts into an active zygote for early embryogenesis remains unclear. This lack of knowledge is partly attributable to the difficulty of direct analyses of gametes in angiosperms. In the present study, proteins from egg and sperm cells obtained from rice flowers were separated by one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and globally identified by highly sensitive liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy. Proteome analyses were also conducted for seedlings, callus, and pollen grains to compare their protein expression profiles to those of gametes. The proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000265. A total of 2,138 and 2,179 expressed proteins were detected in egg and sperm cells, respectively, and 102 and 77 proteins were identified as preferentially expressed in egg and sperm cells, respectively. Moreover, several rice or Arabidopsis lines with mutations in genes encoding the putative gamete-enriched proteins showed clear phenotypic defects in seed set or seed development. These results suggested that the proteomic data presented in this study are foundational information toward understanding the mechanisms of reproduction and early development in angiosperms.

### Keywords
Callus, Egg, Sperm, O. sativa, Pollen, Seedling lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Graduate School of Science and Engineering

### Submitter
Masato Taoka

### Lab Head


