### Accession
PXD035395

### Title
Integrated proteomics analysis of the utilization of glucose by Synechococcus BL107

### Description
We compared changes, induced by the addition of 100 nM and 5 mM glucose in the proteome ofseveral strains of Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus, growing either under standard light conditions or darkness. Our results demonstrate that glucose is being metabolized by thesecyanobacteria, using mainly the oxidative pentoses pathway, while no evidence was found for the involvement of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway in this process. We observed differences in the metabolic strategies for glucose utilization, both between genera, and between Prochlorococcus MED4 and SS120 strains, which might be related to their specific adaptations to the environment. Our results also suggest that marine cyanobacteria can detect nanomolar glucose concentrations in the environment and that glucose might be used to sustain metabolism under darkness.

### Sample Protocol
Prochlorococcus cells were grown in PCR-S11 medium (15), in a culture room at 24 ºC. When cultures reached A674 of 0.05 units, they were divided into 6 aliquots and subjected to the different experimental conditions. For experiments requiring darkness, culture bottles were covered with several layers of aluminum foil. After 24 h, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 22,000 x g for 8 min at 4 ºC. Later, the supernatant was carefully removed with pipette, and the cell pellets were resuspended in the corresponding buffer volume. For proteomic analysis pellets were resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Synechococcus cells were grown in ASW media, in a large culture room at 24 ºC. When cultures reached 0.1 units of absorbance (A550 for strain WH7803 and WH8102, and A495 for BL107), they were divided into 6 aliquots and subjected to the experimental conditions described above. After 24 h, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 22,000 x g for 8 min at 4 ºC. After thawing the cell suspensions. Total protein concentration was measured using the Bradford assay. Samples containing 25 μg of protein were incubated with RapiGest (Waters Corporation) at a final concentration of 0.05 % (w/v) for 10 min at 80 °C. Samples were then reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 min at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 9 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Finally, trypsin was added (ratio 50:1) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. To stop the proteolytic reaction and to precipitate the detergent, TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) was added at a final concentration 0.5 % (v/v), followed by incubation for 45 min at 37 °C. To remove all insoluble material, samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Mass spectrometry analyses were carried out at the Proteomics Core Facility of  the Universidad de Córdoba (Servicio Central de Apoyo a la Investigación, SCAI). Samples were analyzed as tryptic peptides, resolved by high-resolution liquid chromatography in a UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) prior to tandem mass spectrometry in an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures (500 ng) were trapped onto an Acclaim PepMap RSCL precolumn (300 μm id, 5 mm long, 5 μm particles, Thermo Scientific) over 3 min, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile /0.05% (v/v) TFA. Bound peptides were resolved on a C18 nanocolumn Acclaim PepMap RSCL (75 μm id, 50 cm long, 2 μm particles, Thermo Scientific) at 300 nL/min over a 60 min linear gradient from 4 to 40% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  The Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The mass range acquisition in full scan mode was 400-1500 m/z in Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 K, 4 x 105 AGC ion count target and 50 ms of maximum injection time. Tandem MS was performed by quadrupole isolation at 1.2 Th. The 50 most intense 2 to 5 charged ions were isolated and sequentially fragmented, allowing a 10 ppm tolerance for selected precursor. Precursors selected were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Fragmentation was performed by CID at normalized collision energy of 35 and  fragments generated were analyzed in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was also carried out using Progenesis QI (Waters). Peak lists obtained were searched against the individual reference proteomes downloaded from UniProt database (June 2021). Reference proteomes contained 2520 entries for Synechococcus sp. strain WH8102, 2541 entries for Synechococcus sp. strain WH7803, 2501 entries for Synechococcus sp. strain BL107, 1942 entries Prochlorococcus strain MED4 and 1881 entries for Prochlorococcus strain SS120). Sequest HT was used as search engine to obtain protein identifications, imported to Progenesis QI (Waters). Search parameters were set as follows: methionine oxidation as variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, one trypsin missed cleavage allowed and an error mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database. The abundance of individual proteins was calculated as the ratio of their abundance, as calculated by label free, to the sum of the total protein intensity in the sample. Then, a paired t-test was calculated to assay differences in protein abundance between groups with a threshold value of 0.05. LC-MS/MS data were also processed using Peaks X+ (BioInformatic Solutions Inc) to estimate the proportional abundance of different bacteria population in the cultures. To identify and categorize as many proteins as possible in the samples, we searched our data against an extensive database containing 4,565,004 entries from marine organisms (MarRef v6 database). Search parameters were set as follows: methionine oxidation as variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, one trypsin missed cleavage allowed and an error mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database. Total protein intensity per genera was calculated as the percentage of the sum of the abundance of all proteins belonging to the same genera to total protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prochlorococcus, Glucose metabolism, Synechococcus, Picocyanobacteria

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular. Edificio Severo Ochoa, planta 1, ala Este. Campus de Rabanales. Universidad de Córdoba. 14071-Córdoba. Spain.
Universidad de Cordoba

### Submitter
Guadalupe Gomez-Baena

### Lab Head
Dr José Manuel García Fernández
Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular. Edificio Severo Ochoa, planta 1, ala Este. Campus de Rabanales. Universidad de Córdoba. 14071-Córdoba. Spain.


