### Accession
PXD016276

### Title
Cell density-dependent ferroptosis in breast cancer is induced by accumulation of polyunsaturated fatty acid-enriched triacylglycerides

### Description
Ferroptosis is a regulated form of necrotic cell death caused by iron-dependent phospholipid peroxidation. It can be induced by inhibiting glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), the key enzyme for efficiently reducing peroxides within phospholipid bilayers. Recent data suggest that cancer cells undergoing EMT (dedifferentiation) and those resistant to standard therapy expose a high vulnerability toward ferroptosis. Although recent studies have begun to identify and characterize the metabolic and genetic determinants underlying ferroptosis, many mechanisms that dictate ferroptosis sensitivity remain unknown. Here, we show that low cell density sensitizes primary mammary epithelial and breast cancer cells to ferroptosis induced by GPX4 inhibition, whereas high cell density confers resistance. These effects occur irrespective of oncogenic signaling, cellular phenotype and expression of the fatty acid ligase acyl-CoA synthetase long chain family member 4 (ACSL4). By contrast, we show that a massive accumulation of neutral triacylglycerides (TAG) enriched with polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) is induced at low cell density. In addition, de novo lipogenesis and desaturation pathways were found to be reduced at low cell density, indicative of increased fatty acid uptake. Our study suggests that PUFA-mediated toxicity is limited by the enrichment in TAGs that in turn might pose a vulnerability towards ferroptosis. Conclusively, cell density regulates lipid metabolism of breast epithelial and cancer cells, which results in a ferroptosis-sensitive cell state with the potential to be exploited therapeutically during metastatic dissemination.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of cells seeded in cell density 516000, 172000 and 57000 cells (high, med and low) were seeded on 10-cm dishes, corresponding to 3000, 1000 and 333 cells in 96-wells. Proteins of cells were isolated 48h after seeding. Protein isolation and concentration measurement was performed as described in immunoblotting section. MS sample preparation 10 µg of sample were enzymatically digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Peptides were stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
MS measurement Mass spectrometry (MS) measurements were performed in data dependent (DDA) mode. MS data were acquired on a Q Exactive (QE) high field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Approximately 0.5 μg per sample were automatically loaded to the online coupled RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) HPLC system. A nano trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75µm ID x 250mm, 1.8µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. Peptides were eluted from column at 250 nl/min using increasing acetonitrile (ACN) concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 41 % over a 105 minutes gradient. The high-resolution (60 000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3 x 106 and a maximum of 50 ms injection time. From the MS prescan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (MSMS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MSMS spectra were recorded at 15 000 resolution with automatic gain control target set to 1 x 105 and a maximum of 100 ms injection time. Normalized collision energy was set to 28 and all spectra were recorded in profile type.  Progenesis QI for label-free quantification Spectra were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for label-free quantification as previously described with the following changes: spectra were searched against the Swissprot human database (Release 2017.02, 553473 sequences). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was allowed as variable modifications, allowing only one missed cleavage site. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. Analysis of proteomic study For each cell line, fold regulation of proteins between high and low cell density was calculated. Only significantly regulated proteins with a p-value below 0.05 (unpaired, two-tailed T-test with Welch’s correction on log2 expression data) that were shared by both cell lines were submitted to GO term enrichment analysis using DAVID.  Potential hits were further analyzed by functional assays.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pufa, Ferroptosis, Breast cancer, Triacylglycerides, Cell density

### Affiliations
Institute of Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany and  Clinic for Dermatology, St. Josef Hospital Bochum, University of Bochum, Gudrunstrasse 56, 44791 Bochum, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Scheel
Institute of Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany and  Clinic for Dermatology, St. Josef Hospital Bochum, University of Bochum, Gudrunstrasse 56, 44791 Bochum, Germany


