### Accession
PXD014030

### Title
ChIP-MS of GR and in mouse liver

### Description
The Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) is a potent metabolic regulator and a major drug target. While GR was shown to play various important roles in circadian biology, its rhythmic genomic actions have never been studied. Here we mapped GR’s genome-wide chromatin occupancy in mouse livers throughout the day/night cycle. We show how GR partitions metabolic processes during fasting (cellular maintenance, gluconeogenesis) and feeding (lipid and amino acid metabolism) by time-dependent binding and target gene regulation. Highlighting the dominant role GR plays in synchronizing circadian pathways, we find that the majority of oscillating genes harbor GR binding sites and depend on GR for amplitude stability . Surprisingly, this rhythmic pattern is altered by exposure to high fat diet in a ligand-independent manner. We show how the remodeling of oscillatory gene expression and GR binding result from a concomitant increase with Stat5 co-occupancy in obese mice, and that loss of GR reduces circulating glucose and triglycerides differentially during feeding and fasting. Altogether, our findings highlight GR’s fundamental role in the rhythmic orchestration of hepatic metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Each ChIP-MS was performed from 100mg of mouse liver. Tissue was homogenized and crosslinked for 10min with 1% formaldehyde. Nuclei were isolated and chromatin sonicated to an average size of 250bp. After overnight immunoprecipitation with rabbit anti-GR (#24050-1-AP, Proteintech) antibody, or rabbit IgG (#2729, Cell Signaling), antibody-bait complexes were captured by Protein A coupled Sepharose beads (CL-4B, GE healthcare), washed three times with wash buffer A (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140mM NaCl, 1% Triton), once with wash buffer B (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 1% Triton), and twice with TBS. Beads were incubated for 30min with elution buffer 1 (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2mM DTT, 20µg/ml trypsin) followed by a second elution with elution buffer 2 (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10mM Chloroacetamide) for 5min. Both eluates were combined and further incubated at room temperature over night. Tryptic peptide mixtures were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted with Stage Tips containing three layers of C18 reverse phase material and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated on 50cm columns packed with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY‐nLC 1200 ultra‐high‐pressure system coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated applying a non-linear gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 100min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan (60K resolution, 20ms max. injection time, AGC target 3e6) and 10 data‐dependent MS/MS scans (15K resolution, 60ms max. injection time, AGC target 1e5). Isolation window was set to 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 27. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.3.54). Peak lists were searched against the mouse UniprotFASTA database (2015_08 release) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) with a maximum time difference of 0.7 min was enabled. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hormone, Steroid receptor, Chromatin, Coregulator

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany


