### Accession
PXD027259

### Title
Proteomic characterization of primary and brain metastatic lung adenocarcinomas in a well-defined patient cohort

### Description
Lung adenocarcinoma (LADC) is the most common subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). One major feature of disease progression is the metastatic spread to the central nervous system (CNS). Treatment regimens for brain metastases are limited, thus distant metastases remain the leading cause of tumour-associated deaths globally. The central aim of this paper was to investigate the differences of LADC and brain metastases with reference to fast and slowly progressing patients. Additionally, we elucidated the differences between patients with single versus multiple brain metastases.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 20 patients pathologically diagnosed with LADC who developed intracranial metastases during the course of their disease were included in this study. Histopathological parameters and patient characteristics were assessed and included in further analysis. Sample processing steps included deparaffinization, protein extraction and digestion using S-Trap. Proteomic profiling was conducted via nLC-MS/MS analysis, followed by statistical evaluation and database research.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo) and statistical analyses were performed on Perseus, GraphPad Prism v.9 and R v.4.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain metastasis, Cancer progression, Lung adenocarcinoma, Clinical proteomics, Ffpe samples

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Clinical Protein Science and Imaging, Lund University, Sweden
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)

### Submitter
Nicole Woldmar

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Clinical Protein Science and Imaging, Lund University, Sweden


